


Network Working Group                                          JM. Valin
Internet-Draft                                              Octasic Inc.
Intended status: Standards Track                          P. Saint-Andre
Expires: March 8, 2010                                             Cisco
                                                              S. Borilin
                                                              SPIRIT DSP
                                                                  K. Vos
                                                                   Skype
                                                           C. Montgomery
                                                     Xiph.Org Foundation
                                                                 R. Chen
                                                    Broadcom Corporation
                                                       September 4, 2009


              Guidelines for proposed CODEC working group
                    draft-valin-codec-guidelines-00

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on March 8, 2010.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2009 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents in effect on the date of



Valin, et al.             Expires March 8, 2010                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft              Codec Guidelines              September 2009


   publication of this document (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info).
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.
















































Valin, et al.             Expires March 8, 2010                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft              Codec Guidelines              September 2009


Abstract

   This document provides general guidelines for specifying audio codecs
   within the IETF.  These guidelines cover the development process, as
   well as the evaluation and intellectual property issues.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.  Development Process  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   3.  Evaluation, Testing, and Characterization  . . . . . . . . . .  7
   4.  Requirements Conformance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   5.  Intellectual Property  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   6.  Relationship with other SDOs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   7.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   8.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   9.  Acknowledgments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   10. References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
     10.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
     10.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17





























Valin, et al.             Expires March 8, 2010                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft              Codec Guidelines              September 2009


1.  Introduction

   This document describes a suggested process for the specification of
   freely available audio codecs within the Internet Standards Process
   [RFC2026].  Although several freely available audio codecs have been
   developed "in the wild" outside the IETF or any other standards
   development organization (SDO), there are several reasons for
   pursuing such work within the IETF:

   o  The IETF has produced a large "stack" of open protocols and
      formats for use in a wide variety of Internet applications;
      however, the lack of a standardized and freely available audio
      codec (or codecs) has inhibited the development of interoperable
      Internet audio applications.

   o  Specification of such codecs within the Internet Standards Process
      would ensure more open and stringent change control, and enable
      the development and deployment of multiple interoperable
      implementations.

   o  In order to develop audio codecs that are optimized for use over
      the Internet, it is important to gain input from the entire
      Internet community and to incorporate cross-area review from the
      full range of technical experts who work within the IETF,
      including areas such as transport, routing, operations,
      architecture, applications, and security.

   o  The Internet Standards Process provides an unusually open and
      transparent process for the specification of Internet
      technologies.

   o  The IETF's policies toward Intellectual Property Rights (IPR), as
      codified in BCP 79 [RFC3979], facilitate the development of
      Internet audio codecs that will be freely available to all parties
      that might want to implement or deploy such codecs.

   This document does not assume that specification of audio codecs for
   the Internet will necessarily occur in the context of an IETF working
   group.  The authors of this document consider formation of a working
   group to be the most productive path forward because of the
   consensus-building mechanisms inherent to working groups.  However,
   work could also be pursued through independent submissions, to which
   the same process considerations would apply.

   Note: To simplify the wording, this document sometimes speaks of
   "codec" in the singular.  Nothing in this document should be taken to
   imply that IETF participants would necessarily develop only one codec
   at a time.



Valin, et al.             Expires March 8, 2010                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft              Codec Guidelines              September 2009


2.  Development Process

   The process outlined here is intended to maximize the transparency of
   the work on codecs within the IETF.  Such work might involve
   development of one or more completely new codecs, adaptation of an
   existing codec to meet the requirements specified in the accompanying
   requirements document, or integration between two or more existing
   codecs that results in an improved codec combining the best aspects
   of each codec.  To enable such process transparency, the contributor
   of an existing codec must be willing to cede change control to the
   IETF and should have sufficient knowledge of the codec to assist in
   the work of adapting it or applying some of its technology to other
   codecs.  Furthermore, contributors need to be aware that any codec
   that results from work within the IETF is likely to be different from
   any existing codec that was contributed to the Internet Standards
   Process.

   Work on codec development is expected to proceed as follows:

   1.  One or more IETF participants will identify the requirements to
       be met by Internet codecs, in the form of an Internet-Draft.

   2.  Interested parties will actively solicit the contribution of
       existing or proposed new codecs to the Internet Standards
       Process, preferably in the form of Internet-Drafts that define
       the codec algorithms and that are accompanied by appropriate IPR
       disclosures if necessary (IPR issues are described in more detail
       under Section 5).

   3.  As proposals are received, the Internet community should gain a
       clearer understanding of what is achievable and the authors of
       the requirements document should modify their document to reflect
       that understanding.  In parallel, interested parties should
       evaluate the proposals at a higher level to see which
       requirements might be met by each codec.

   4.  Once a sufficient number of proposals has been received, the
       interested parties will identify the strengths, weaknesses, and
       innovative aspects of the contributed codecs.  This step will
       consider not only the codecs as a whole, but also key features of
       the individual algorithms (predictors, quantizers, transforms,
       etc.).

   5.  It is expected that none of the contributed codecs will meet all
       of the defined requirements.  Therefore, it is expected that IETF
       participants will choose a _starting point_ for the reference
       implementation to facilitate the development process.  This codec
       will meet as many of the requirements as possible, but probably



Valin, et al.             Expires March 8, 2010                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft              Codec Guidelines              September 2009


       will need to be adjusted in an iterative development process in
       order to meet all of the requirements.  The starting point codec
       might be one of the contributed codecs (especially if it is the
       only codec that meets most of the requirements), a combination of
       two or more of the contributed codecs, or an entirely new codec.
       None of the decisions taken at this step will be definitive.  In
       particular, IETF participants will not provide a "rubber stamp"
       for any contributed codec.

   6.  IETF participants will attempt to iteratively improve each
       component of the starting point reference implementation, where
       by "component" we mean individual algorithms such as predictors,
       transforms, quantizers, and entropy coders.  The participants
       will proceed by trying new designs, applying ideas from the
       contributed codecs, evaluating "proof of concept" ideas, and
       using their expertise in codec development to improve the
       starting point codec.  Any aspect of the starting point codec
       might be changed (even the fundamental principles of the codec)
       or the participants might start over entirely by scrapping the
       starting point codec and designing a completely new one.  The
       overriding goal shall be to design a codec that will meet the
       requirements defined in the requirements document.  Given the
       IETF's open standards process, any interested party will be able
       to contribute to this work, whether or not they submitted an
       Internet-Draft for one of the contributed codecs.  The codec
       itself will be normatively specified with code in an Internet-
       Draft.

   7.  In parallel with work on the codec reference implementation,
       developers and other interested parties should perform evaluation
       of the codec as described under Section 3, IETF participants
       should define the codec's payload format for use with the Real-
       time Transport Protocol [RTP] (most likely in close collaboration
       with members of the AVT Working Group), and application
       developers should start testing the codec by implementing it in
       code and deploying it in actual Internet audio applications to
       identify any potential problems.

   8.  Once IETF participants agree that the codec being developed meets
       the requirements (e.g., through consensus calls on the relevant
       discussion list or via a working group last call if a working
       group is formed, IETF participants can begin the task of
       characterizating the codec.  The characterization process is
       described under Section 3.







Valin, et al.             Expires March 8, 2010                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft              Codec Guidelines              September 2009


3.  Evaluation, Testing, and Characterization

   Lab evaluation of the codecs should happen throughout the development
   process because it will help ensure that progress is being made.
   There are many ways in which continuous evaluation can be performed.
   For minor, uncontroversial changes to the codec it should usually be
   sufficient to use objective measurements (e.g.  PESQ, PEAQ, SegSNR )
   validated by listening to a few samples.  For more complex changes
   (e.g. when psychoacoustic aspects are involved) or for controversial
   issues, internal testing should be performed.  An example of internal
   testing would be to have individual participants rate audio samples
   using one of the established testing methodologies, such as ITU-R
   BS.1534 (MUSHRA).

   Throughout the process, it will be important to make use of the
   Internet community at large for real-world distributed testing.  This
   will enable many different people with different equipment and use
   cases to test the codec and report any problems they experience.  In
   the same way, third-party software developers will be encouraged to
   integrate the codec (with a warning about the bit-stream not being
   final) and provide feedback on the performance in real-world use
   cases.

   Characterization of the final codec must be based on the reference
   implementation only (and not on any "private implementation").  This
   can be performed by independent testing labs or, if this is not
   possible, using the testing labs of the organizations that contribute
   to the Internet Standards Process.  Packet loss robustness should be
   evaluated using actual loss patterns collected from use over the
   Internet, rather than theoretical models.  The goals of the
   characterization phase are to:

   o  ensure that the requirements are met

   o  guide the IESG in its evaluation of the resulting work

   o  assist application developers in understanding whether the codecs
      are suitable for a particular application.













Valin, et al.             Expires March 8, 2010                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft              Codec Guidelines              September 2009


4.  Requirements Conformance

   Any codec specified by the IETF should include source code for a
   normative reference implementation as part of an Internet draft.  It
   is best to use the minimum amount of the normative requirements that
   will ensures complete interoperability between implementations.  In
   practice this generally means that only the decoder needs to be
   normative, so that the encoder can improve over time.  This also
   enables different tradeoffs between quality and complexity.
   Furthermore, to reduce the risk of bias towards certain CPU/DSP
   architectures, the decoder specification should not have a "bit-
   exact" definition.  The output of a decoder implementation should
   only be "close enough" to the output of the reference decoder.  A
   comparison tool should be used to verify objectively that the output
   of a decoder is likely to be perceptually indistinguishable from that
   of the reference decoder.  The packet loss concealment (PLC)
   algorithm need not be normative.  However, if any part of the PLC
   requires specific information (in the bit-stream) transmitted by the
   encoder, than the corresponding aspect of the reference encoder must
   be normative.

   An encoder implementation is not required to be able to generate all
   the "features" in the bit-stream definition.  However, it may be
   required (by the codec specification) to be able to generate any
   possible bit-rates.  Unless any "profile" is defined in the
   specification, the decoder must be able to decode all features of the
   bit-stream.  The decoder must also be able to handle any combination
   of bits, even if that combination cannot be generated by the
   reference encoder.  It is recommended that the decoder specification
   defines exactly how the decoder should react to "impossible" packets.

   Compressed test vectors should be provided as a means to verify
   conformance with the decoder specification.  These test vectors
   should exercise all paths in the decoder (100% code coverage).

   While the exact encoder will not be specified, it is recommended to
   specify objective measurement targets for an encoder, below which use
   of a particular encoder implementation is not recommended.  For
   example, one such specification could be: "the use of an encoder
   whose PESQ MOS is less than 0.1 below the reference encoder in the
   following conditions is not recommended".










Valin, et al.             Expires March 8, 2010                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft              Codec Guidelines              September 2009


5.  Intellectual Property

   The codec should be widely distributable and implementable, with as
   few restrictions as possible.  This can be achieved by handling IPR
   issues in accordance with BCP 78 [RFC5378] and BCP 79 [RFC3979].  IPR
   is a very important issue for the following reasons:

   o  The IETF already provides a comprehensive "stack" of open
      protocols for communication over the Internet.  However, there is
      a conspicuous gap in this stack for media codecs.

   o  Many market segments are moving from selling hard-coded hardware
      devices to freely-distributed end-user software, including large
      application providers and even telcos themselves.

   o  It is beneficial to have low-cost options whenever possible
      because standalone voice services are being commoditized and
      small, innovative development teams often cannot afford to pay
      per-channel royalties.

   o  Most applications provider in the Internet space will benefit from
      free codecs.

   In accordance with BCP 78 [RFC5378], the source code for the
   reference implementation should be available under the BSD license.
   Also, in accordance with BCP 79 [RFC3979], the codecs should
   preferably use technologies with no known IPR claims or technologies
   with an offer of royalty-free (RF) licensing.  Compatibility with the
   licensing of typical open source applications requires the avoidance
   of restrictive IPR claims.

   There are several ways to maximize the odds that the codec will be
   royalty-free.  First, when a technology under consideration is known
   to be covered by a patent, the patent holder should be contacted and
   asked to license the patent under acceptable RF terms.  If the patent
   holder is also a contributor, the license may have already been
   specified in the IPR disclosure.  In cases where no RF license can be
   obtained regarding a patent, then alternative algorithms or methods
   should be considered, even if they result in lower quality, higher
   complexity, or otherwise less desirable characteristics.  In most
   cases, the degradation will likely be small once the best alternative
   has been identified.

   IETF participants should be aware that, given the way patents work in
   most countries, the resulting codecs can never be guaranteed to be
   free of patent claims because:





Valin, et al.             Expires March 8, 2010                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft              Codec Guidelines              September 2009


   o  Some patents may not be known to the contributors.

   o  Some patents applications may not be disclosed at the time the
      codec is developed.

   o  Only the courts can determine the validity and breadth of patent
      claims.

   However, these observations are no different than they are for
   standardization of codecs within other SDOs (or development of codecs
   outside the context of any SDO) and are no different than for other
   technologies worked on within the IETF.  In all these cases, the best
   approach is to minimize the risk of unknowingly infringing on
   patents.

   To minimize the risk of unknowingly infringing on patents, technology
   which has been published more than 20 years in the past should be
   preferred over more recent technology, at least when the two are
   mostly equivalent.  Similarly, technology which is perceived to be
   safer by participants should be used whenever possible.































Valin, et al.             Expires March 8, 2010                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft              Codec Guidelines              September 2009


6.  Relationship with other SDOs

   It is understood that other SDOs are also involved in the development
   and standardization of media codecs, including:

   o  The Telecommunication Standardization Sector (ITU-T) of the
      Internatioal Telecommunication Union (ITU), in particular Study
      Group 16

   o  The Moving Picture Experts Group (MPEG)

   o  The European Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI)

   o  The 3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP)

   By defining a process for working on media codecs within the Internet
   Standards Process, the IETF is not attempting to duplicate work being
   performed by other SDOs.  Clearly, there is no "natural monopoly"
   over codec work, since SDOs such as ITU-T, MPEG, ETSI and 3GPP have
   defined codecs in parallel.

   With regard to Study Group 16 of the ITU-T, the work envisioned
   within the Internet Standards Process differs as follows:

   o  The codec(s) produced by the IETF will specifically address
      problems related to transmission on the Internet:

      *  The codec(s) will be optimized for transport using the Real-
         time Transport Protocol [RTP], including secure transport as
         described in [SRTP]

      *  The codec(s) will take into account end-to-end parameter
         negotiation using Internet signalling technologies such as
         Session Initiation Protocol [SIP], Session Description Protocol
         [SDP], and the Extensible Messaging and Presence Protocol
         [XMPP] extensions for media negotiation as specified in
         [Jingle]

      *  Robustness to packet loss will be a very important aspect to
         consider

      *  Purely wireless applications will not be considered

      *  Issues with circuit-switched networks will not be considered

   o  IPR issues will be handled in accordance with the IETF IPR
      policies, with the goal of developing royalty-free codecs




Valin, et al.             Expires March 8, 2010                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft              Codec Guidelines              September 2009


   With regard to MPEG, the work envisioned within the Internet
   Standards Process differs as follows:

   o  The focus will be on interactive audio transmission rather than
      storage

   o  IPR issues will be handled in accordance with the IETF IPR
      policies, with the goal of developing royalty-free codecs

   o  The emphasis will be on the quality of the reference
      implementations (encoder and decoder), which will be the basis for
      characterization

   Although there is already sufficient expertise available among
   participants who are active within the IETF, additional contributions
   are welcome.  Because IETF work happens through the efforts of
   individuals, individuals who contribute to the work of other SDOs are
   also welcome to contribute to the work of the IETF.  Furthermore,
   other SDOs can be involved in the IETF process in the following ways:

   o  Contributors to other SDOs can still participate in to the
      Internet Standards Process, as can any other interested parties

   o  The ITU-T can contribute its existing characterization and
      evaluation techniques, methods, experience and expertise, and thus
      facilitate the testing process

   o  Any other SDO can provide input to the process through liaison
      statements.

   However, it is important to note that final responsibility for the
   development process and the resulting codecs will remain with the
   IETF as governed by BCP 9 [RFC2026].


















Valin, et al.             Expires March 8, 2010                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft              Codec Guidelines              September 2009


7.  Security Considerations

   The procedural guidelines for codec development do not have security
   considerations.  However, the resulting codec needs to take
   appropriate security considerations into account, for example as
   outlined in [DOS] and [SECGUIDE].













































Valin, et al.             Expires March 8, 2010                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft              Codec Guidelines              September 2009


8.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no actions for IANA.
















































Valin, et al.             Expires March 8, 2010                [Page 14]

Internet-Draft              Codec Guidelines              September 2009


9.  Acknowledgments

   We would like to thank all the other people who contributed directly
   or indirectly to this document, including Jason Fischl, Gregory
   Maxwell, Alan Duric, Jonathan Christensen, Julian Spittka, and Henry
   Sinnreich.  We also like to thank Cullen Jennings and Gregory
   Lebovitz for their advice.












































Valin, et al.             Expires March 8, 2010                [Page 15]

Internet-Draft              Codec Guidelines              September 2009


10.  References

10.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2026]  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision
              3", BCP 9, RFC 2026, October 1996.

   [RFC3979]  Bradner, S., "Intellectual Property Rights in IETF
              Technology", BCP 79, RFC 3979, March 2005.

   [RFC5378]  Bradner, S. and J. Contreras, "Rights Contributors Provide
              to the IETF Trust", BCP 78, RFC 5378, November 2008.

10.2.  Informative References

   [DOS]      Handley, M., Rescorla, E., and IAB, "Internet Denial-of-
              Service Considerations", RFC 4732, December 2006.

   [Jingle]   Ludwig, S., Saint-Andre, P., Egan, S., McQueen, R., and D.
              Cionoiu, "Jingle RTP Sessions", XSF XEP 0167, June 2009.

   [RTP]      Schulzrinne, H., Casner, S., Frederick, R., and V.
              Jacobson, "RTP: A Transport Protocol for Real-Time
              Applications", STD 64, RFC 3550, July 2003.

   [SDP]      Handley, M., Jacobson, V., and C. Perkins, "SDP: Session
              Description Protocol", RFC 4566, July 2006.

   [SECGUIDE]
              Rescorla, E. and B. Korver, "Guidelines for Writing RFC
              Text on Security Considerations", BCP 72, RFC 3552,
              July 2003.

   [SIP]      Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., Camarillo, G., Johnston,
              A., Peterson, J., Sparks, R., Handley, M., and E.
              Schooler, "SIP: Session Initiation Protocol", RFC 3261,
              June 2002.

   [SRTP]     Baugher, M., McGrew, D., Naslund, M., Carrara, E., and K.
              Norrman, "The Secure Real-time Transport Protocol (SRTP)",
              RFC 3711, March 2004.

   [XMPP]     Saint-Andre, P., Ed., "Extensible Messaging and Presence
              Protocol (XMPP): Core", RFC 3920, October 2004.







Valin, et al.             Expires March 8, 2010                [Page 16]

Internet-Draft              Codec Guidelines              September 2009


Authors' Addresses

   Jean-Marc Valin
   Octasic Inc.
   4101, Molson Street
   Montreal, Quebec
   Canada

   Email: jean-marc.valin@octasic.com


   Peter Saint-Andre
   Cisco


   Email: psaintanr@cisco.com


   Slava Borilin
   SPIRIT DSP


   Email: borilin@spiritdsp.net


   Koen Vos
   Skype


   Email: koen.vos@skype.net


   Christopher Montgomery
   Xiph.Org Foundation


   Email: xiphmont@xiph.org


   Raymond (Juin-Hwey) Chen
   Broadcom Corporation


   Email: rchen@broadcom.com







Valin, et al.             Expires March 8, 2010                [Page 17]

