


Network Working Group                                            T. Polk
Internet-Draft                           National Institute of Standards
Intended status: Informational                            and Technology
Expires: October 7, 2012                                  P. Saint-Andre
                                                     Cisco Systems, Inc.
                                                           April 5, 2012


Promoting Compliance with Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) Disclosure
                                 Rules
                      draft-polk-ipr-disclosure-02

Abstract

   The disclosure process for intellectual property rights (IPR) in IETF
   stream documents is essential to the accurate development of
   community consensus.  However, this process is not always followed by
   participants during IETF standardization.  Regardless of the cause or
   motivation, noncompliance with IPR disclosure rules can derail or
   delay completion of standards documents.  This document describes
   strategies for promoting compliance with the IPR disclosure rules.
   The strategies are primarily intended for area directors, working
   group chairs, and working group secretaries.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on October 7, 2012.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2012 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents



Polk & Saint-Andre       Expires October 7, 2012                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft               IPR Disclosure                   April 2012


   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.1.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.  Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Strategies for Working Group Documents . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     3.1.  Presenting an Internet-Draft at an IETF Meeting  . . . . .  5
     3.2.  Requesting WG Adoption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     3.3.  Requesting WG Last Call  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     3.4.  AD Review  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.5.  IETF Last Call . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   4.  Strategies for Individual Submissions  . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     4.1.  Presenting an Internet-Draft at an IETF Meeting  . . . . .  7
     4.2.  AD Review  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     4.3.  IETF Last Call . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   5.  Conclusions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   6.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   7.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   8.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     8.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     8.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   Appendix A.  Sample Messages . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     A.1.  General WG Reminder  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     A.2.  Reminder before WG Adoption of an Individual
           Internet-Draft . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     A.3.  Reminder before Working Group Last Call  . . . . . . . . . 11
     A.4.  Reminder to Meeting Presenter  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     A.5.  Reminder to Author of an Individual Submission before
           IETF Last Call . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   Appendix B.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13











Polk & Saint-Andre       Expires October 7, 2012                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft               IPR Disclosure                   April 2012


1.  Introduction

   The disclosure process for intellectual property rights (IPR) in IETF
   stream documents is essential to the accurate and efficient
   development of consensus by the community.  Ensuring that IETF
   working groups and participants have as much information as possible
   regarding IPR constraints, as early as possible in the process,
   enables the community to develop an informed consensus regarding
   technical proposals.  Statements to that effect appear in [RFC1602],
   Section 5.5 Clause (B), and [RFC2026], Section 10.4 Clause (B).

   However, IPR disclosures often do not occur at the earliest possible
   stage in the IETF process.  Individuals might delay disclosure
   through an oversight, to subvert the consensus process, or to
   introduce delay.  Regardless of the cause or motivation,
   noncompliance with IPR disclosure rules can derail or delay
   completion of standards documents.  Disclosure of IPR after
   significant decisions, such as Working Group Last Call (WGLC), might
   lead to reconsideration of those actions.  For example, a working
   group (WG) might change course and use a previously rejected
   technical proposal with less onerous limitations.  Such "course
   corrections" produce unnecessary delays in the standardization
   process.

   This document suggests strategies for promoting compliance with the
   IPR disclosure rules and thereby avoiding such delays.  The
   strategies are primarily intended for area directors (ADs), WG
   chairs, and WG secretaries.

   The strategies are focused on promoting early disclosure by document
   authors, since late disclosure involving authors has historically
   caused significant delays in the standardization process.  Many of
   the strategies also promote early disclosure by other contributors.

   Naturally, even if ADs, WG chairs, and WG secretaries do not apply
   the strategies described in this document, IETF contributors are
   still bound by the rules defined in BCP 79 (see [RFC3979] and
   [RFC4879]).  This document does not modify those rules, nor does it
   normatively extend those rules; it merely provides suggestions
   intended to aid ADs, WG chairs, and WG secretaries.

   In addition, this document does not consider the parallel, but
   important, issue of potential actions that can be taken by the IETF
   itself for lack of conformance with the IETF's IPR policy.  That
   topic is discussed in [Sanctions].






Polk & Saint-Andre       Expires October 7, 2012                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft               IPR Disclosure                   April 2012


1.1.  Terminology

   This document relies on the definitions provided in section 1 of
   [RFC3979].

   By intent, this document does not use the conformance language
   described in [RFC2119].


2.  Background

   The responsibilities of contributors and IETF participants regarding
   IPR disclosure are documented in [RFC3979] and [RFC4879].  These
   documents do not assign any further responsibilities to ADs, WG
   chairs, and WG secretatires, other than those imposed by their roles
   as contributors or participants.  However, late disclosure of IPR has
   a direct impact on the effectiveness of working groups, WG chairs,
   and ADs.

   According to [RFC2418], WG chairs are responsible for "making forward
   progress through a fair and open process" and area directors are
   responsible for "ensuring that working groups in their area produce
   ... timely output"; in addition, because WG chairs can appoint one or
   more WG secretaries to help them with the day-to-day business of
   running the WG (see [RFC2418]), some of the actions suggested in this
   document might fall to WG secretaries.

   IPR disclosure at the earliest possible time is an essential feature
   of a "fair and open process", and late disclosure impedes timely
   output through recycling and appeals.  To better fulfill their
   responsibilities in the IETF standards process, ADs, WG chairs, and
   WG secretaries might wish to adopt strategies to encourage early
   disclosure consistent with the responsibilities established in
   [RFC3979] and [RFC4879], such as the strategies described in this
   document.


3.  Strategies for Working Group Documents

   Building upon the framework provided in [RFC3669], this section
   identifies opportunities to promote IPR disclosure within the
   document lifecycle for IETF working group documents.  In general,
   these opportunities are encountered during socialization, working
   group adoption, Working Group Last Call (WGLC), and IETF Last Call.
   The strategies described in this section are primarily implemented by
   WG chairs.  (The exceptions are strategies for IETF Last Call, which
   would be implemented by ADs.)  In cases where the WG secretary
   creates meeting agendas or initiates consensus calls, the secretary



Polk & Saint-Andre       Expires October 7, 2012                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft               IPR Disclosure                   April 2012


   might also implement these strategies.

3.1.  Presenting an Internet-Draft at an IETF Meeting

   The first opportunity to encourage early IPR disclosure might occur
   even before a technical proposal becomes a working group document.

   When IETF participants wish to socialize a personal draft, in hopes
   of future adoption by a working group, one common strategy is to
   request a slot on the agenda at an upcoming face-to-face meeting.
   Before the community commits resources to reviewing and considering
   the draft, it is very reasonable for the WG chairs to confirm (often
   via email) that all IPR disclosures have been submitted.  The chairs
   ought to request confirmation from each of the authors, especially if
   authors are from multiple organizations.

   If necessary disclosures have not been submitted, the chairs have a
   choice: insist on an informal disclosure in the presentation, or deny
   the agenda slot unless the IPR disclosure is submitted.  One factor
   in this decision could be the number of revisions that have occurred:
   the chairs might wish to permit presentation of a -00 draft with a
   verbal disclosure, but not after a draft has gone through multiple
   cycles.

   In some cases, an IETF participant has not developed an Internet-
   Draft but might still request a slot on the agenda to discuss a
   proposal for a new draft, or a new feature for an existing working
   group document.  Again, it is very reasonable for the WG chairs to
   confirm that all IPR disclosures have been submitted before approving
   the agenda slot, so that the community does not commit resources to
   analyzing the proposal without knowledge of IPR limitations.

3.2.  Requesting WG Adoption

   When a technical proposal is considered for adoption by a working
   group, the chairs have an opportunity to confirm (or reconfirm) IPR
   compliance with authors and listed contributors.  In addition, the
   chairs might wish to explicitly ask the WG participants if anyone is
   aware of IPR that is associated with this proposal.  While requiring
   confirmation from each working group participant is clearly
   impossible, silence might be interpreted as a weak "No".

3.3.  Requesting WG Last Call

   Working Group Last Call is a particularly significant milestone for a
   working group document, measuring consensus within the working group
   one final time.  If IPR disclosure statements have not been
   submitted, the judgement of consensus by the chairs would be less



Polk & Saint-Andre       Expires October 7, 2012                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft               IPR Disclosure                   April 2012


   than reliable.  Even if the procedures such as those described above
   have been implemented to promote IPR disclosure during socialization
   and adoption, features might have evolved in a way that introduces
   new IPR concerns.  In addition, new participants with knowledge of
   IPR claims might have joined the working group.  Therefore chairs
   might wish to reconfirm with each of the authors that appropriate IPR
   disclosure statements have been filed, even if the authors all work
   for the same organization.  Chairs might also wish to include a
   reminder about the importance of IPR disclosures in any WGLC message
   to the working group.  (Note: If IPR disclosure statements have been
   filed, the chairs might wish to include a link in the WGLC message to
   ensure that the consensus call reflects this information.)

3.4.  AD Review

   After successfully completing WGLC, a working group document is
   forwarded to the appropriate Area Director for AD review, with a
   request that the AD process the document for publication as an RFC.
   Such a publication request is accompanied by a Document Shepherd
   Write-up as required by [RFC4858] using the template found at
   <http://www.ietf.org/iesg/template/doc-writeup.html>.  The current
   version of the template asks the document shepherd to answer the
   following question:

      (7) Has each author confirmed that any and all appropriate IPR
      disclosures required for full conformance with the provisions of
      BCP 78 and BCP 79 have already been filed.  If not, explain why.

   Additionally, the AD can ask the chairs whether they took explicit
   action to promote disclosure of IPR.  If the answer to the write-up
   question is not favorable, or if the chairs did not take any of the
   actions listed above, the AD might choose to contact the authors and
   other key contributors (e.g., those listed in the acknowledgements)
   to confirm that the appropriate IPR disclosure statements have been
   filed before advancing the document through the publication process.

3.5.  IETF Last Call

   IETF Last Call is the AD's vehicle for gauging IETF-wide consensus.
   It is critical that the community have easy access to all related IPR
   statements when considering an Internet-Draft.  The current tools
   automatically include the URL for each IPR statement explicitly
   linked to the draft when the default Last Call message is generated.
   If the AD edits this message, the links to IPR disclosure statements
   ought to be preserved.






Polk & Saint-Andre       Expires October 7, 2012                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft               IPR Disclosure                   April 2012


4.  Strategies for Individual Submissions

   This section identifies opportunities to promote IPR disclosure
   within the IETF document lifecycle for documents that are processed
   outside the context of a working group (so-called "individual
   submissions").  In general, these opportunities are encountered
   during socialization, area director review, and IETF Last Call.

4.1.  Presenting an Internet-Draft at an IETF Meeting

   When IETF participants wish to socialize a personal draft not
   intended for a working group, it is still common to request a slot on
   the agenda at an upcoming face-to-face meeting.  These requests might
   be made to related working groups or area meetings, or even during
   plenary time.  Before the community commits resources to reviewing
   and considering the draft, it is very reasonable for the chairs of
   that meeting (WG chair, AD, IESG chair, or IAB chair) to confirm that
   all IPR disclosures have been submitted.

   The meeting chairs ought to request confirmation from each of the
   authors, especially if authors are from multiple organizations.
   Where the presentation covers a concept that has not been documented
   as an Internet-Draft, the chairs ought to request confirmation from
   any co-authors and from contributors acknowledged in the presentation
   materials.

4.2.  AD Review

   When considering the possibility of sponsoring an individual
   submission, an AD ought to also confirm that all IPR disclosures have
   been submitted.  The AD ought to require confirmation from each of
   the authors, even if authors are from the same organization.  As with
   WG documents, a Document Shepherd Write-up is also required for AD
   sponsored documents, and this must follow the template at
   <http://www.ietf.org/iesg/template/individual-doc-writeup.html>.  The
   current version of the template asks the document shepherd to answer
   the following question:

      (7) Has each author confirmed that any and all appropriate IPR
      disclosures required for full conformance with the provisions of
      BCP 78 and BCP 79 have already been filed.  If not, explain why.

4.3.  IETF Last Call

   As with working group documents, IETF Last Call is the AD's vehicle
   for gauging IETF-wide consensus.  It is critical that the community
   have easy access to all related IPR statements when considering an
   Internet-Draft.  The current tools automatically include the URL for



Polk & Saint-Andre       Expires October 7, 2012                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft               IPR Disclosure                   April 2012


   each IPR statement explicitly linked to the draft when the default
   Last Call message is generated.  If the AD edits this message, the
   links to IPR disclosure statements ought to be preserved.


5.  Conclusions

   WG chairs and ADs are not expected to enforce IPR disclosure rules,
   and this document does suggest that they take on such a role.
   However, lack of compliance with IPR disclosure policies can have a
   significant impact on the standardization process.  To support the
   efficient development of IETF standards and avoid unnecessary delays,
   WG chairs and ADs are encouraged to look for opportunities to promote
   awareness and compliance with the IETF's IPR policies.  The
   strategies in this document promote compliance by raising the
   question of IPR disclosure at critical junctures in the
   standardization process.


6.  Security Considerations

   This document suggests strategies for promoting compliance with IPR
   disclosure rules during the IETF standards process.  These procedures
   do not have a direct impact on the security of the Internet.


7.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no actions for IANA.


8.  References

8.1.  Normative References

   [RFC3979]  Bradner, S., "Intellectual Property Rights in IETF
              Technology", BCP 79, RFC 3979, March 2005.

   [RFC4879]  Narten, T., "Clarification of the Third Party Disclosure
              Procedure in RFC 3979", BCP 79, RFC 4879, April 2007.

8.2.  Informative References

   [RFC1602]  Huitema, C. and P. Gross, "The Internet Standards Process
              -- Revision 2", RFC 1602, March 1994.

   [RFC2026]  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision
              3", BCP 9, RFC 2026, October 1996.



Polk & Saint-Andre       Expires October 7, 2012                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft               IPR Disclosure                   April 2012


   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC2418]  Bradner, S., "IETF Working Group Guidelines and
              Procedures", BCP 25, RFC 2418, September 1998.

   [RFC3669]  Brim, S., "Guidelines for Working Groups on Intellectual
              Property Issues", RFC 3669, February 2004.

   [RFC4858]  Levkowetz, H., Meyer, D., Eggert, L., and A. Mankin,
              "Document Shepherding from Working Group Last Call to
              Publication", RFC 4858, May 2007.

   [Sanctions]
              Farrel, A. and P. Resnick, "Sanctions Available for
              Application to Violators of IETF IPR Policy",
              draft-farrresnickel-ipr-sanctions-04 (work in progress),
              March 2012.


Appendix A.  Sample Messages

   This section provides sample messages of the kind that ADs, WG
   chairs, and WG secretaries can send to meeting presenters, document
   authors, document editors, and contributors during various stages of
   the Internet Standards Process.  The messages use a hypothetical
   working group called the "FOO WG", hypothetical WG chairs named
   "Alice" and "Bob", a hypothetical author named "Nigel Throckmorton",
   a hypothetical AD named "Christopher", and hypothetical documents
   about a hypothetical technology called "wiffle"; any resemblance to
   actual working groups, WG chairs, ADs, or documents is strictly
   coincidental.  The last two messages might be appropriate for sending
   to individuals who have requested a slot on the agenda during an IETF
   meeting or who have requested AD sponsorship of an individual
   submission.

A.1.  General WG Reminder

   Subject: Reminder about IETF IPR Policy

   Dear FOO WG:

   Everyone who participates in the Internet Standards Process (whether
   by posting to IETF mailing lists, authoring documents, attending IETF
   meetings, or in other ways) needs to be aware of the IETF rules with
   regard to Intellectual Property Rights (IPR).  These rules are
   described in BCP79 and can be referenced through
   <http://www.ietf.org/ipr/policy.html>.



Polk & Saint-Andre       Expires October 7, 2012                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft               IPR Disclosure                   April 2012


   Please note that these are personal requirements applying to all IETF
   participants as individuals, and that these requirements also apply
   to all participants in the FOO WG.

   As FOO WG chairs, we would like to minimize or hopefully even
   eliminate late disclosures relating to documents under consideration
   within the FOO WG.  Therefore you might see us send "reminder"
   messages in the future to authors or to the FOO WG email list as a
   whole, asking people whether they know of IPR relating to specific
   documents.  In order to comply with IETF processes while avoiding
   unnecessary delays, document authors and contributors to our
   discussions in the FOO WG are asked to take these messages seriously,
   and to reply in a timely fashion.  However, these messages are only
   reminders of existing IETF policy, and we are all bound by that
   policy even in the absence of such reminder messages.

   Thanks,

   Alice and Bob

   (as FOO WG co-chairs)

A.2.  Reminder before WG Adoption of an Individual Internet-Draft

   Subject: Reminder about IPR relating to draft-throckmorton-wiffle-foo

   Dear FOO WG:

   As you can see from the consensus call the WG chairs have sent out,
   the authors have asked for draft-throckmorton-wiffle-foo to be
   considered for adoption as a WG document.  We would like to check
   whether there are claims of Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) on the
   document that need to be disclosed.  We will weigh this information
   when we judge the consensus on the call for adoption.

   Are you personally aware of any IPR that applies to
   draft-throckmorton-wiffle-foo?  If so, has this IPR been disclosed in
   compliance with IETF IPR rules?  (See RFCs 3979, 4879, 3669 and 5378
   for more details.)

   If you are a document author or listed contributor on this document,
   please reply to this email message regardless of whether or not you
   are personally aware of any relevant IPR.  We will not be able to
   advance this document to the next stage until we have received a
   reply from each author and listed contributor.

   If you are on the FOO WG email list but are not an author or listed
   contributor to this document, then please reply only if you are



Polk & Saint-Andre       Expires October 7, 2012               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft               IPR Disclosure                   April 2012


   personally aware of IPR that has not yet been disclosed in
   conformance with IETF rules.

   Alice

   (as FOO WG co-chair)

A.3.  Reminder before Working Group Last Call

   Subject: Reminder about IPR relating to draft-ietf-foo-wiffle

   Dear FOO WG:

   The authors of draft-ietf-foo-wiffle have asked for a Working Group
   Last Call.  Before issuing the Last Call, we would like to check
   whether any claims of Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) on the
   document have not yet been disclosed.

   Are you personally aware of any IPR that applies to
   draft-ietf-foo-wiffle?  If so, has this IPR been disclosed in
   compliance with IETF IPR rules?  (See RFCs 3979, 4879, 3669 and 5378
   for more details.)

   If you are a document author or listed contributor on this document,
   please reply to this email regardless of whether or not you are
   personally aware of any relevant IPR.  We will not be able to advance
   this document to the next stage until we have received a reply from
   each author and listed contributor.

   If you are on the FOO WG email list but are not an author or listed
   contributor, then please reply only if you are personally aware of
   any IPR that has not yet been disclosed in conformance with IETF
   rules.

   Thanks,

   Bob

   (as FOO WG co-chair)

A.4.  Reminder to Meeting Presenter

   Subject: IPR about draft-throckmorton-wiffle-bar

   Dear Nigel,

   I have received your request to give a talk about
   draft-throckmorton-wiffle-bar at the next IETF meeting.  Before



Polk & Saint-Andre       Expires October 7, 2012               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft               IPR Disclosure                   April 2012


   approving this request, I would like to check whether there are any
   claims of Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) on this document.

   Are you aware of any IPR that applies to
   draft-throckmorton-wiffle-bar?  If so, has this IPR been disclosed in
   compliance with IETF IPR rules?  (See RFCs 3979, 4879, 3669 and 5378
   for more details.)

   Please reply to this email regardless of whether or not you are
   personally aware of any relevant IPR.  I will not be able to approve
   your request for a slot on the agenda until I have received a reply
   from you and any listed contributor.

   Thanks,

   Christopher

   (as AD)

A.5.  Reminder to Author of an Individual Submission before IETF Last
      Call

   Subject: Reminder about IPR relating to draft-throckmorton-wiffle-bar

   Dear Nigel,

   Before proceeding with your request for AD sponsoring of
   draft-throckmorton-wiffle-bar, I would like to check whether there
   are any claims of Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) on the document.

   Are you personally aware of any IPR that applies to
   draft-throckmorton-wiffle-bar?  If so, has this IPR been disclosed in
   compliance with IETF IPR rules?  (See RFCs 3979, 4879, 3669 and 5378
   for more details.)

   Please reply to this email regardless of whether or not you are
   personally aware of any relevant IPR.  I will not be able to advance
   this document to the next stage until I have received a reply from
   you and any listed contributor.

   Thanks,

   Christopher

   (as AD)






Polk & Saint-Andre       Expires October 7, 2012               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft               IPR Disclosure                   April 2012


Appendix B.  Acknowledgements

   Thanks to Adrian Farrel for his detailed comments and suggestions; to
   Stephen Farrell and Pete Resnick for their feedback; and to Loa
   Andersson, Ross Callon, and George Swallow for drafts of some of the
   sample email messages.


Authors' Addresses

   Tim Polk
   National Institute of Standards and Technology
   100 Bureau Drive, MS 8930
   Gaithersburg, MD  20899-8930
   USA

   Email: tim.polk@nist.gov


   Peter Saint-Andre
   Cisco Systems, Inc.
   1899 Wynkoop Street, Suite 600
   Denver, CO  80202
   USA

   Phone: +1-303-308-3282
   Email: psaintan@cisco.com
























Polk & Saint-Andre       Expires October 7, 2012               [Page 13]

