
Network WG                                                   James Polk
Internet-Draft                                           Subha Dhesikan
Expires: January 5, 2011                                  Cisco Systems
Intended Status: Standards Track (PS)                      July 5, 2010




      The Session Description Protocol (SDP) 'servclass' Attribute
               draft-polk-mmusic-service-class-for-sdp-00


Abstract

   This document proposes a simple Session Description Protocol (SDP) 
   attribute line to identify the application a session is requesting 
   in its offer/answer exchange.  This document uses previously defined
   service class strings for consistency between IETF documents.

Legal

   This documents and the information contained therein are provided on
   an "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE
   REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE
   IETF TRUST AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL
   WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY
   WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION THEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE
   ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS
   FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with 
   the provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents
   at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as 
   reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 5, 2011.



Polk                   Expires January 5, 2011                 [Page 1]
Internet-Draft         SDP servclass Attribute                July 2010

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with 
   respect to this document.  Code Components extracted from this 
   document must include Simplified BSD License text as described in 
   Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without 
   warranty as described in the BSD License.



Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  2
   2.  SDP Attribute Definition  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
       2.1 Are Tags Required?  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   3.  Offer/Answer Behavior . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
       3.1 Offer Behavior  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
       3.2 Answer Behavior . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   4.  Security considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   5.  IANA considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   6.  Acknowledgments   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   7.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
       7.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
       7.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
       Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8



   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].


1.  Introduction

   The Session Description Protocol (SDP) [RFC4566] provides a means 
   for an offerer to describe the specifics of a session to an 
   answerer.  These specifics include offering the codec or codecs to 
   choose from, the specific IP address and port number the offerer 
   wants to receive the RTP stream(s) on/at, the particulars about the 
   codecs the offerer wants considered or mandated, and so on.  

   There are many facets within SDP to determine the Real-time 
   Transport Protocol (RTP) [RFC3550] specifics established between one
   or more endpoints, but identifying how the underlying network should


Polk                   Expires January 5, 2011                 [Page 2]
Internet-Draft         SDP servclass Attribute                July 2010

   process each stream still remains under-defined. 

   RFC 4594 [RFC4594] established a guideline for classifying the 
   various flows in the network and the Differentiated Services 
   Codepoints (DSCP) that apply to these traffic types. It also defines
   the per hop network behavior that is required for each of these 
   application traffic types. 

   When looking at RTP from a voice and video standpoint, merely 
   separating RTP into either voice or video is not as granular as is 
   needed, as demonstrated by Differentiated Services Codepoint 
   guidelines in RFC 4594 [RFC4594]. Within that document, there are 4 
   distinct video classifications of RTP:

   - The Broadcast video (CS5) 
   - The Real-time Interactive (CS4) 
   - The Multimedia Conferencing (AF4x)
   - The Multimedia Streaming (AF3x)

   In addition, there are 2 voice classes:
   - The VOIP class (EF). 
   - the Voice-Admit (Voice-Admit) from RFC 5865 [RFC5865]

   Each of the media type classifications may require different quality
   of service handling in the network. However, the network does not 
   currently have sufficient information to perform the above 
   classification since such information is not available in the SDP 
   signaling.

   The idea of service identification is not new; it has been defined 
   in [RFC5897]. If that RFC is used as a guideline, identification 
   that leads to stream differentiation can be quite useful.  One of 
   the points within RFC 5897 is that users cannot be allowed to assign
   any identification (fraud is but one reason given). In addition, 
   RFC 5897 recommends that service identification should be done in 
   signaling, rather than guessing or deep packet inspection. The 
   network will have to currently guess or perform deep packet 
   inspection to classify and offer the service as per RFC 4594 since 
   such service identification information is currently not available 
   in SDP and therefore to the network elements. Since SDP understands 
   how each stream is created (i.e., the particulars of the RTP 
   stream), this is the right place to have this service 
   differentiated. Such service differentiation can then be 
   communicated to and leveraged by the network. 

   This document proposes how SDP [RFC4566] uniquely identifies which 
   Application class a stream is for network handling and policy 
   purposes. This can also be leveraged for call signaling policies 
   such as acceptance or rejection, authorization of a certain type of 
   application by call controlling entities, and synchronization with 
   lower layers for network handling.



Polk                   Expires January 5, 2011                 [Page 3]
Internet-Draft         SDP servclass Attribute                July 2010

   This document proposes a simple attribute line to identify the 
   application a session is requesting in its offer/answer exchange.  
   This document uses previously defined service class strings for 
   consistency between IETF documents.


2. SDP Attribute Definition

   This document proposes the 'servclass' session and media-level SDP 
   [RFC4566] attribute.  The following is their Augmented Backus-Naur 
   Form (ABNF) [RFC5234] syntax, which is based on the SDP [RFC4566] 
   grammar:

      attribute               =/ service-classification

      service-classification  = "servclass" ":" [SP] app-type 

      app-type                = "Broadcast video" / 
                                "Real-time Interactive" / 
                                "Multimedia Conferencing" / 
                                "Multimedia Streaming" / 
                                "VoIP" /  "Voice-Admit" / 
                                 extension-mech

      extension-mech          = token


   The attribute is named "servclass", for service classification, 
   identifying, which one of the six service classes listed 
   above applies to the media stream.

   The service classes defined in this document for SDP align with 
   the application labels introduced by table 3 of RFC 4594.  RFC 5685 
   updates the guidelines set forth in RFC 4594 by creating a new voice
   classification where call admission control (CAC) has been applied. 
   So, there are four video classifications and two voice 
   classifications

   - Broadcast video
   - Real-time Interactive
   - Multimedia Conferencing
   - Multimedia Streaming
   - VoIP
   - Voice-Admit

   [Editor's Note: should Voice-admit (i.e., what is defined in RSVP 
                   5865) be included in this list?]

   The attribute is named "servclass", for service classification. 


   The following is an example of an 'm' line with a 'servclass' 


Polk                   Expires January 5, 2011                 [Page 4]
Internet-Draft         SDP servclass Attribute                July 2010

   attribute:

      m=audio 50000 RTP/AVP 0
      a=servclass real-time interactive

   The above signals a telepresence type of session.


2.1 Are Tags Required?

   The authors are considering two tags to this "a=servclass" line, 

   - whether this "a=" line is optional or mandatory in the answer

   and 

   - whether there should be a direction tag

   If the WG believes either is necessary, this proposal will define a 
   default value for either (or both).


2.1.1  Is the "servclass" 'Optional' or 'Mandatory'?

   There can be an optional or mandatory tag within the "a=servclass" 
   line for whether the offerer wants the answerer to include this 
   "a=servclass" in the answer.  

   a=servclass (optional/mandatory) real-time interactive

   [Editor's Note: The authors are currently leaning away from 
                   including this parameter. We would like feedback on 
                   scenarios in which this should be included.]


2.1.2 Is a "servclass" Direction Tag Necessary?

   Additionally, there can be a direction tag included in this 
   "a=servclass" proposal. 

   a=servclass Voice-Admit (sendonly/recvonly/sendrecv)

   [Editor's Note: The authors believe that the direction of the 
                   service class will be picked up by the direction of 
                   the flow that the m-line(s) indicate. Since this is 
                   an attribute of the flow, the flow's direction 
                   determines the direction of the attribute. 
                   Therefore, we are currently leaning away 
                   from including this parameter. We would like 
                   feedback on scenarios in which this should be 
                   included.]



Polk                   Expires January 5, 2011                 [Page 5]
Internet-Draft         SDP servclass Attribute                July 2010

3.0 Offer/Answer Behavior

   Through the inclusion of the 'servclass' attribute, an offer/answer 
   exchange identifies the application type for use by endpoints within
   a session.  Policy elements can use this attribute to determine the 
   acceptability and/or treatment of that session through lower layers.
   One specific use-case is for setting of the DSCP specific for that 
   application type (say Broadcast Video instead of Real-time 
   Interactive video), decided on a per domain basis - instead of 
   exclusively by the offering domain.  


3.1 Offer Behavior

   Offerers include the 'servclass' attribute with a single well known 
   token (from list in Section 2) to obtain predictable treatment. It 
   can also instead include a private token within a single domain 
   (e.g., enterprise networks).  

   Offerers of this 'servclass' attribute MUST NOT change the token in 
   transit (e.g., wrt to SBCs).

   Offers containing a 'servclass' token not understood are ignored 
  (i.e., as if there was no 'servclass' attribute in the Offer).


3.2 Answer Behavior

   Upon receiving an offer containing a 'servclass' attribute, the 
   answerer binds this session or media (level) attribute with the RTP 
   traffic received at the session or media level.  

   Offer 'servclass' attribute tokens SHOULD match what is in the 
   Answer, if the offer is accepted.  An Answer MAY have a 'servclass' 
   attribute where one was not in the offer.  This will at least aid 
   the local domain, and perhaps each domain the session transits, to 
   categorize the application type of this RTP session.

   Answerers that are middleboxes can use the 'servclass' attribute to 
   classify the RTP traffic within this session however local policy 
   determines.  In other words, this attribute can help in deciding 
   which DSCP an RTP stream is assigned within a domain, if the 
   answerer were an inbound SBC to a domain.


4.  Security considerations

   RFC 5897 [RFC5897] discusses many of the pitfalls of service 
   classification.  That document highly recommends the user not being 
   able to set any classification.  Barring a hack within an endpoint 
   (i.e., to intentionally miss-classifying (i.e., lying) about which 
   classification an RTP stream is), this document's solution makes the


Polk                   Expires January 5, 2011                 [Page 6]
Internet-Draft         SDP servclass Attribute                July 2010

   classification part of the signaling between endpoints, which is 
   recommended by RFC 5897.


5.  IANA considerations

5.1 Registration of the SDP 'servclass' Attribute

   This document requests IANA to register the following SDP att-field 
   under the Session Description Protocol (SDP) Parameters registry:

   Contact name:   jmpolk@cisco.com

   Attribute name:   servclass

   Long-form attribute name:   Service Classification

   Type of attribute:   Session and Media levels

   Subject to charset:   No

   Purpose of attribute:   To indicate the Service Classification 
                           application for this session

   Allowed attribute values:   IANA Registered Tokens

   Registration Procedures: Specification Required              

   Type            SDP Name                     Reference
   ----            ------------------           ---------
   att-field (both session and media level)

                   servclass                    [this document]

7.2 The Service Classification Application Registration

   This document requests IANA to create a new registry for the 
   application service classes similar to the following table within 
   the Session Description Protocol (SDP) Parameters registry:

   Registry Name: "servclass" SDP Attribute Values
   Reference: [this document]
   Registration Procedures: Specification Required              

   Attribute Values              Reference
   ----------------              ---------
   Broadcast video               [this document]  
   Real-time Interactive         [this document]  
   Multimedia Conferencing       [this document]  
   Multimedia Streaming          [this document]  
   VoIP                          [this document]  
   Voice-Admit                   [this document]  


Polk                   Expires January 5, 2011                 [Page 7]
Internet-Draft         SDP servclass Attribute                July 2010

6.  Acknowledgments

   Your name here...


7.  References

7.1.  Normative References

 [RFC2119] S. Bradner, "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
           Requirement Levels", RFC 2119, March 1997

 [RFC4566] M. Handley, V. Jacobson, C. Perkins, "SDP: Session 
           Description Protocol", RFC 4566, July 2006

 [RFC3550] Schulzrinne, H., Casner, S., Frederick, R., and V.
           Jacobson, "RTP: A Transport Protocol for Real-Time
           Applications", STD 64, RFC 3550, July 2003.

 [RFC5865] F. Baker, J. Polk, M. Dolly, "A Differentiated Services Code
           Point (DSCP) for Capacity-Admitted Traffic", RFC 5865, 
           May 2010

 [RFC5897] J. Rosenberg, "Identification of Communications Services in 
           the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)", RFC 5897, June 2010


7.2.  Informative References

 [RFC4594] J. Babiarz, K. Chan, F Baker, "Configuration Guidelines for 
           Diffserv Service Classes", RFC 4594, August 2006



Authors' Addresses

   James Polk
   3913 Treemont Circle
   Colleyville, Texas, USA
   +1.817.271.3552

   mailto: jmpolk@cisco.com


   Subha Dhesikan
   170 W Tasman St
   San Jose, CA, USA
   +1.408-902-3351

   mailto: sdhesika@cisco.com




Polk                   Expires January 5, 2011                 [Page 8]
