
Network WG                                                   James Polk
Internet-Draft                                           Subha Dhesikan
Expires: April 18, 2011                                   Cisco Systems
Intended Status: Standards Track (PS)                  October 18, 2010




      The Session Description Protocol (SDP) 'servclass' Attribute
               draft-polk-mmusic-traffic-class-for-sdp-00


Abstract

   This document proposes a new Session Description Protocol (SDP) 
   attribute line to identify the traffic class a session is requesting
   in its offer/answer exchange.  This document uses previously defined
   traffic class strings for consistency between IETF documents.

Legal

   This documents and the information contained therein are provided on
   an "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE
   REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE
   IETF TRUST AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL
   WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY
   WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION THEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE
   ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS
   FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with 
   the provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents
   at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as 
   reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 18, 2011.



Polk & Dhesikan        Expires April 18, 2011                  [Page 1]
Internet-Draft         SDP servclass Attribute                 Oct 2010

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with 
   respect to this document.  Code Components extracted from this 
   document must include Simplified BSD License text as described in 
   Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without 
   warranty as described in the BSD License.



Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  2
   2.  SDP Attribute Definition  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   3.  Offer/Answer Behavior . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
       3.1 Offer Behavior  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
       3.2 Answer Behavior . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   4.  Are Additional Tags Required? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   5.  Security considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   6.  IANA considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   7.  Acknowledgments   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   8.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
       8.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
       8.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
       Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9



   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].


1.  Introduction

   The Session Description Protocol (SDP) [RFC4566] provides a means 
   for an offerer to describe the specifics of a session to an 
   answerer, and for the answerer to respond back to the offerer.  
   These specifics include offering the codec or codecs to choose from,
   the specific IP address and port number the offerer wants to receive
   the RTP stream(s) on/at, the particulars about the codecs the 
   offerer wants considered or mandated, and so on.  

   There are many facets within SDP to determine the Real-time 
   Transport Protocol (RTP) [RFC3550] specifics established between one


Polk & Dhesikan        Expires April 18, 2011                  [Page 2]
Internet-Draft         SDP servclass Attribute                 Oct 2010

   or more endpoints, but identifying how the underlying network should
   process each stream still remains under-defined. 

   RFC 4594 [RFC4594] established a guideline for classifying the 
   various flows in the network and the Differentiated Services 
   Codepoints (DSCP) that apply to many traffic types, including RTP 
   based voice and video traffic sessions. It also defines the per hop 
   network behavior that is strongly suggested for each of these 
   application traffic types. 

   When looking at RTP from a voice and video standpoint, merely 
   separating RTP into either voice or video is not as granular as is 
   needed, as demonstrated by Differentiated Services Codepoint 
   guidelines in RFC 4594 [RFC4594]. Within that document, there are 4 
   distinct video traffic classifications of RTP:

   - The Broadcast video (which is to use the CS5 per hop marking) 
   - The Real-time Interactive (which is to use the CS4 per hop 
                                marking) 
   - The Multimedia Conferencing (per hop marking AF4x per hop marking)
   - The Multimedia Streaming (per hop marking AF3x per hop marking)

   In addition, there are 2 voice classes:

   - The VOIP class (per hop marking EF per hop marking). 
   - the Voice-Admit (per hop marking Voice-Admit per hop marking) from
                      RFC 5865 [RFC5865]

   The DSCP recommendations from RFC 4594 create a traffic 
   classification, i.e., a Class of Service (COS) for each different 
   type of traffic type, at least for those that are specified within 
   that RFC.  

   Looking at those traffic types carried in RTP, as sessions 
   established by SDP, an indication is necessary within the 
   offer/answer exchange to identify which type of traffic is being 
   offered. This is especially true if more than one traffic type can 
   be offered by the same offerer.  Why is this needed? For several 
   reasons listed here

   - to aid in the proper classification into the network, so network 
     nodes (i.e., switches and routers) treat each RTP packet as 
     desired/expected.

   - to synchronize with call control entities (i.e., middleboxes) 
     which type of traffic is in both the offer and answer, allowing 
     policy decisions to occur when needed.

   To the first point, some are looking into allocating different 
   amounts of available capacity within routers and switches based on 
   the type of traffic that is being sent.  For example, unadmitted 
   voice gets X% of the available interface's capacity (i.e., router or


Polk & Dhesikan        Expires April 18, 2011                  [Page 3]
Internet-Draft         SDP servclass Attribute                 Oct 2010

   switch port), desktop video (what RFC 4594 calls 'multimedia 
   conferencing') can get up to Y% of an interface's capacity and 
   Telepresence video (what RFC 4594 calls Real-time Interactive) can 
   have Z% of an interface's capacity.  The offerer and answerer, with 
   or without middleboxes, coordinate how to mark each traffic type. 
   Network configuration determines how much of each traffic type get 
   access to what percentage of each interface.

   Networks that do not wish to allocate bandwidth availability to one 
   traffic type verses another can always us best effort markings. 
   Those that want to differentiate traffic types, and make sure one 
   traffic type does not starve out another (or all other) traffic 
   type(s) use (at least) differentiated services as the indication to 
   accomplish this. Within a network core, where only MPLS is used, 
   Diffserv obviously does not apply. That said, Diffserv can be used 
   to mark traffic into MPLS tunnels [RFC4124].

   The idea of traffic - or service - identification is not new; it has
   been defined in [RFC5897]. If that RFC is used as a guideline, 
   identification that leads to stream differentiation can be quite 
   useful.  One of the points within RFC 5897 is that users cannot be 
   allowed to assign any identification (fraud is but one reason 
   given). In addition, RFC 5897 recommends that service identification
   should be done in signaling, rather than guessing or deep packet 
   inspection. The network will have to currently guess or perform deep
   packet inspection to classify and offer the service as per RFC 4594 
   since such service identification information is currently not 
   available in SDP and therefore to the network elements. Since SDP 
   understands how each stream is created (i.e., the particulars of the
   RTP stream), this is the right place to have this service 
   differentiated. Such service differentiation can then be 
   communicated to and leveraged by the network. 

   [Editor's Note: the words "traffic" and "service" are similar enough
                   that the above paragraph talks about RFC 5897's 
                   "service identification", but this document is only 
                   wanting to discuss and propose traffic indications 
                   in SDP.]

   This document proposes how SDP [RFC4566] uniquely identifies which 
   Application class - as a traffic type -  a stream is for network 
   handling and policy purposes. This can also be leveraged for call 
   signaling policies such as acceptance or rejection, authorization of
   a certain type of application by call controlling entities, and 
   synchronization with lower layers for network handling.

   This document proposes a simple attribute line to identify the 
   application a session is requesting in its offer/answer exchange.  
   This document uses previously defined service class strings for 
   consistency between IETF documents.




Polk & Dhesikan        Expires April 18, 2011                  [Page 4]
Internet-Draft         SDP servclass Attribute                 Oct 2010

2. SDP Attribute Definition

   This document proposes the 'trafficclass' session and media-level 
   SDP [RFC4566] attribute.  The following is their Augmented 
   Backus-Naur Form (ABNF) [RFC5234] syntax, which is based on the SDP 
   [RFC4566] grammar:

      attribute               =/ traffic-classification

      traffic-classification  = "trafficclass" ":" [SP] app-type 

      app-type                = "Broadcast video" / 
                                "Real-time Interactive" / 
                                "Multimedia Conferencing" / 
                                "Multimedia Streaming" / 
                                "VoIP" /  "Voice-Admit" / 
                                 extension-mech

      extension-mech          = token


   The attribute is named "trafficclass", for traffic classification, 
   identifying which one of the six traffic classes listed above 
   applies to the media stream.

   The traffic classes defined in this document for SDP align with 
   the application labels introduced by table 3 of RFC 4594.  RFC 5685 
   updates the guidelines set forth in RFC 4594 by creating a new voice
   classification where call admission control (CAC) has been applied. 
   So, there are four video classifications and two voice 
   classifications

   - Broadcast video
   - Real-time Interactive
   - Multimedia Conferencing
   - Multimedia Streaming
   - VoIP
   - Voice-Admit

   The attribute is named "trafficclass", for traffic classification. 

   The following is an example of an 'm' line with a 'trafficclass' 
   attribute:

      m=audio 50000 RTP/AVP 0
      a=trafficclass multimedia conferencing

   The above indicates a desktop video type of session.


3.0 Offer/Answer Behavior



Polk & Dhesikan        Expires April 18, 2011                  [Page 5]
Internet-Draft         SDP servclass Attribute                 Oct 2010

   Through the inclusion of the 'trafficclass' attribute, an 
   offer/answer exchange identifies the application type for use by 
   endpoints within a session.  Policy elements can use this attribute 
   to determine the acceptability and/or treatment of that session 
   through lower layers. One specific use-case is for setting of the 
   DSCP specific for that application type (say Broadcast Video instead
   of Real-time Interactive video), decided on a per domain basis - 
   instead of exclusively by the offering domain.  


3.1 Offer Behavior

   Offerers include the 'trafficclass' attribute with a single well 
   known token (from list in Section 2) to obtain configurable and 
   predictable treatment between the answerer and the offerer. It can 
   also instead include a private token within a single domain  (e.g., 
   enterprise networks).  

   Offerers of this 'trafficclass' attribute MUST NOT change the token 
   in transit (e.g., wrt to B2BUAs).  SBCs at domain boundaries can 
   change this attribute through local policy. 

   Offers containing a 'trafficclass' token not understood are ignored 
   by default (i.e., as if there was no 'trafficclass' attribute in the
   Offer).


3.2 Answer Behavior

   Upon receiving an offer containing a 'trafficclass' attribute, if 
   the offer is accepted, the answerer will use this attribute to set 
   the session or media (level) traffic accordingly towards the 
   offerer. 

   The answerer will answer the offer with its own 'trafficclass' 
   attribute, which will likely be the same value, although this is not
   mandatory (at this time).

   The answerer should expect to receive RTP packets marked as 
   indicated by its 'trafficclass' attribute in the answer itself.

   An Answer MAY have a 'trafficclass' attribute when one was not in 
   the offer.  This will at least aid the local domain, and perhaps 
   each domain the session transits, to categorize the application type
   of this RTP session.

   Answerers that are middleboxes can use the 'trafficclass' attribute 
   to classify the RTP traffic within this session however local policy
   determines.  In other words, this attribute can help in deciding 
   which DSCP an RTP stream is assigned within a domain, if the 
   answerer were an inbound SBC to a domain.



Polk & Dhesikan        Expires April 18, 2011                  [Page 6]
Internet-Draft         SDP servclass Attribute                 Oct 2010


4.  Are Additional Tags Required?

   The authors have already discounted (or dropped) two tags to this 
   "a=trafficclass" line (the optional/mandatory tag and the 
   sendonly/recvonly/sendrecv tag), but are considering another tag for
   'desired bidirectional or symmetric'.


4.1  Is the "trafficclass" 'desired bidirectional or symmetric'?

   Should the offerer be able to indicate that it believes the 
   session's traffic classification be the same in both directions?

   a=servclass real-time interactive des-bidirectional (or symmetric)

   [Editor's Note: The authors are not sure if this parameter works in 
                   all (or most) situations.  We would like feedback on
                   scenarios in which this should be included.]


5.  Security considerations

   RFC 5897 [RFC5897] discusses many of the pitfalls of service 
   classification, which is similar enough to this idea of traffic 
   classification to apply here as well.  That document highly 
   recommends the user not being able to set any classification.  
   Barring a hack within an endpoint  (i.e., to intentionally 
   mis-classifying (i.e., lying) about which classification an RTP 
   stream is), this document's solution makes the classification part 
   of the signaling between endpoints, which is recommended by RFC 
   5897.


6.  IANA considerations

6.1 Registration of the SDP 'trafficclass' Attribute

   This document requests IANA to register the following SDP att-field 
   under the Session Description Protocol (SDP) Parameters registry:

   Contact name:   jmpolk@cisco.com

   Attribute name:   trafficclass

   Long-form attribute name:   Traffic Classification

   Type of attribute:   Session and Media levels

   Subject to charset:   No

   Purpose of attribute:   To indicate the Traffic Classification 


Polk & Dhesikan        Expires April 18, 2011                  [Page 7]
Internet-Draft         SDP servclass Attribute                 Oct 2010

                           application for this session

   Allowed attribute values:   IANA Registered Tokens

   Registration Procedures: Specification Required              

   Type            SDP Name                     Reference
   ----            ------------------           ---------
   att-field (both session and media level)

                   trafficclass                [this document]

6.2 The Service Classification Application Registration

   This document requests IANA to create a new registry for the 
   application service classes similar to the following table within 
   the Session Description Protocol (SDP) Parameters registry:

   Registry Name: "trafficclass" SDP Attribute Values
   Reference: [this document]
   Registration Procedures: Specification Required              

   Attribute Values              Reference
   ----------------              ---------
   Broadcast video               [this document]  
   Real-time Interactive         [this document]  
   Multimedia Conferencing       [this document]  
   Multimedia Streaming          [this document]  
   VoIP                          [this document]  
   Voice-Admit                   [this document]  


7.  Acknowledgments

   To Dave Oran for his comments and suggestions.


8.  References

8.1.  Normative References

 [RFC2119] S. Bradner, "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
           Requirement Levels", RFC 2119, March 1997

 [RFC4566] M. Handley, V. Jacobson, C. Perkins, "SDP: Session 
           Description Protocol", RFC 4566, July 2006

 [RFC3550] Schulzrinne, H., Casner, S., Frederick, R., and V.
           Jacobson, "RTP: A Transport Protocol for Real-Time
           Applications", STD 64, RFC 3550, July 2003.

 [RFC5865] F. Baker, J. Polk, M. Dolly, "A Differentiated Services Code


Polk & Dhesikan        Expires April 18, 2011                  [Page 8]
Internet-Draft         SDP servclass Attribute                 Oct 2010

           Point (DSCP) for Capacity-Admitted Traffic", RFC 5865, 
           May 2010

 [RFC5897] J. Rosenberg, "Identification of Communications Services in 
           the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)", RFC 5897, June 2010

 [RFC4124] F. Le Faucheur, Ed., " Protocol Extensions for Support of 
           Diffserv-aware MPLS Traffic Engineering ", RFC 4124, 
           June 2005


8.2.  Informative References

 [RFC4594] J. Babiarz, K. Chan, F Baker, "Configuration Guidelines for 
           Diffserv Service Classes", RFC 4594, August 2006



Authors' Addresses

   James Polk
   3913 Treemont Circle
   Colleyville, Texas, USA
   +1.817.271.3552

   mailto: jmpolk@cisco.com


   Subha Dhesikan
   170 W Tasman St
   San Jose, CA, USA
   +1.408-902-3351

   mailto: sdhesika@cisco.com




















Polk & Dhesikan        Expires April 18, 2011                  [Page 9]