A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3503

        Title:      Message Disposition Notification (MDN) profile for
                    Internet Message Access Protocol (IMAP)
        Author(s):  A. Melnikov
        Status:     Standards Track
        Date:       March 2003
        Mailbox:    mel@messagingdirect.com
        Pages:      9
        Characters: 16937
        Updates/Obsoletes/SeeAlso:  None

        I-D Tag:    draft-melnikov-imap-mdn-05.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3503.txt


The Message Disposition Notification (MDN) facility defined in RFC
2298 provides a means by which a message can request that message
processing by the recipient be acknowledged as well as a format to be
used for such acknowledgements.  However, it doesn't describe how
multiple Mail User Agents (MUAs) should handle the generation of MDNs
in an Internet Message Access Protocol (IMAP4) environment.

This document describes how to handle MDNs in such an environment and
provides guidelines for implementers of IMAP4 that want to add MDN
support to their products.

This is now a Proposed Standard Protocol.

This document specifies an Internet standards track protocol for
the Internet community, and requests discussion and suggestions
for improvements.  Please refer to the current edition of the
"Internet Official Protocol Standards" (STD 1) for the
standardization state and status of this protocol.  Distribution
of this memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.

