


Network Working Group                                        A. Melnikov
Internet-Draft                                               D. Cridland
Intended status: Standards Track                           Isode Limited
Expires: June 10, 2010                                  December 7, 2009


                         IMAP4 Keyword Registry
                    draft-melnikov-imap-keywords-09

Abstract

   The aim of this document is to establishe a new IANA registry for
   IMAP keywords and to define a procedure for keyword registration, in
   order to improve interoperability between different IMAP clients.

Note

   A revised version of this draft document will be submitted to the RFC
   editor as a Proposed Standard for the Internet Community.  Discussion
   and suggestions for improvement are requested, and should be sent to
   morg@ietf.org.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on June 10, 2010.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2009 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the



Melnikov & Cridland       Expires June 10, 2010                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft           IMAP4 Keyword Registry            December 2009


   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.      Conventions used in this document  . . . . . . . . . . . .  3

   2.      Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3

   3.      IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   3.1.    Comments on IMAP Keywords' Registrations . . . . . . . . .  6
   3.2.    Change Control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   3.3.    Initial registrations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   3.3.1.  $MDNSent IMAP keyword registration . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   3.3.2.  $Forwarded IMAP keyword registration . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   3.3.3.  $SubmitPending IMAP keyword registration . . . . . . . . .  9
   3.3.4.  $Submitted IMAP keyword registration . . . . . . . . . . . 10

   4.      Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12

   5.      Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12

   6.      References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   6.1.    Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   6.2.    Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13

           Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13














Melnikov & Cridland       Expires June 10, 2010                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft           IMAP4 Keyword Registry            December 2009


1.  Conventions used in this document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [Kwds].


2.  Introduction

   IMAP Keywords [RFC3501] are boolean named flags that can be used by
   clients to annotate messages in an IMAP mailbox.  Although IMAP
   keywords is an optional feature of IMAP, the majority of IMAP servers
   can store arbitrary keywords.  Many mainstream IMAP clients use a
   limited set of specific keywords, and some can manage (create, edit,
   display) arbitrary IMAP keywords.

   Over years some IMAP keywords have become de-facto standard, with
   some specific semantics associated with them.  In some cases
   different client implementors decided to define and use keywords with
   different names, but the same semantics.  Some server implementors
   decided to map such keywords automatically in order to improve cross
   client interoperability.

   In other cases, the same keywords have been used with different
   semantics, thus causing interoperability problems.

   This document attempts to prevent further incompatible uses of IMAP
   keywords by establishing an IMAP Keyword registry, and allocating a
   special prefix for standardized keywords.


3.  IANA Considerations

   IANA is requested to establish a new registry for IMAP keywords.

   Registration of an IMAP keyword is requested by filling in the
   following template and following the instructions on the IANA pages
   for the registry for submitting it to IANA:

   Subject:    Registration of IMAP keyword X


   IMAP keyword name:








Melnikov & Cridland       Expires June 10, 2010                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft           IMAP4 Keyword Registry            December 2009


   Purpose (description):


   Private or Shared on a server:  (One of PRIVATE, SHARED or BOTH.
               PRIVATE means that each different user has a distinct
               copy of the keyword.  SHARED means that all different
               users see the same value of the keyword.  BOTH means that
               an IMAP server can have the keyword as either private or
               shared.)


   Is it an advisory keyword or may it cause an automatic action:


   When/by whom the keyword is set/cleared:


   Related keywords:  (for example "mutually exclusive with keywords Y
               and Z")


   Related IMAP capabilities:


   Security considerations:


   Published specification (recommended):


   Person & email address to contact for further information:


   Intended usage:  (One of COMMON, LIMITED USE or OBSOLETE (i.e. not
               recommended for use))


   Owner/Change controller:  (MUST be "IESG" for any "common use"
               keyword registration specified in an IETF Review
               document.  See definition of "common use" below in this
               section.)


   Note:       (Any other information that the author deems interesting
               may be added here, for example if the keyword(s) is
               supported by existing clients.)





Melnikov & Cridland       Expires June 10, 2010                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft           IMAP4 Keyword Registry            December 2009


   There are two types of IMAP keywords in the "IMAP Keywords" registry:
   intended for common use and vendor (organization) specific. ////
   Naming conventions and registration policy is different for two
   types.  An IMAP keyword is said to be for "common use" if it is
   reasonably expected to be implemented in at least 2 independent
   client implementations.

   Keywords intended for common use SHOULD start with the "$" prefix.
   (Note that this is a SHOULD because some of the commonly used IMAP
   keywords in widespread use don't follow this convention.)  Vendor
   specific keywords MUST start with the "vnd." prefix, which is
   followed by the vendor name from the "Vendor Subtrees Registry"
   [I-D.cridland-acap-vendor-registry] and another ".".

   Registration of any IMAP keyword is initiated by posting a
   registration request to the Message Organization WG mailing list
   <morg@ietf.org> (or its replacement as chosen by the responsible
   Application Area Director) and CCing IANA (<iana@iana.org>).  After
   allowing for at least two weeks for community input on the designated
   mailing list, the keyword is registered by IANA (if it is a vendor
   specific IMAP keyword), or reviewed by one of Designated Experts (if
   the keyword is intended for common use).

   Registration of an IMAP keyword intended for common use (whether or
   not they use the "$" prefix) requires Expert Review [RFC5226].  After
   allowing for at least two weeks for community input on the designated
   mailing list (as described above), the expert will determine the
   appropriateness of the registration request and either approve or
   disapprove the request with notice to the requestor, the mailing
   list, and IANA.  Any refusal must come with a clear explanation.

   IMAP keywords intended for common use SHOULD be standardized in IETF
   Review [RFC5226] documents.  (Note that IETF Review documents still
   require Expert Review.)

   The IESG appoints one or more Expert Reviewer.

   Expert Reviewer should strive for timely reviews.  Expert Reviewer
   should take no longer than 6 weeks to make and announce the decision,
   or notify the mailing list that more time is required.

   Decisions (or lack of) made by an Expert Reviewer can be appealed to
   the IESG.

   Expert Reviewers should focus on the following requirements.  Values
   in the "IMAP Keywords" IANA registry intended for common use must be
   clearly documented and likely to ensure interoperability.  They must
   be useful, not harmful to the Internet.  In cases when an IMAP



Melnikov & Cridland       Expires June 10, 2010                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft           IMAP4 Keyword Registry            December 2009


   Keyword being registered is already deployed, Expert Reviewers should
   favour registering it over requiring perfect documentation.

   Registration of vendor specific IMAP keywords is done on First Come
   First Served [RFC5226] basis and doesn't require the Expert Review.
   However the applicant for a vendor specific registration is
   encouraged to request such review.  If the review is requested by
   applicant or at IANA's sole discretion, the Expert Reviewer should
   encourage vendors to avoid defining similar but incompatible values
   and instead agree on a single IMAP keyword for common use.  Note that
   results of a review requested by the keyword owner are advisory in
   nature.

3.1.  Comments on IMAP Keywords' Registrations

   Comments on registered IMAP Keywords should be sent to both the
   "owner" of the mechanism and to the mailing list designated to IMAP
   keyword review (see Section 3).  This improves chances of getting a
   timely response.

   Submitters of comments may, after a reasonable attempt to contact the
   owner and after soliciting comments on the IMAP mailing list, request
   the Designated Expert to attach their comment to the IMAP keyword
   registration itself.  The procedure is similar to requesting an
   expert review for the affected keyword.

3.2.  Change Control

   Once an IMAP keyword registration has been published by IANA, the
   owner may request a change to its definition.  The change request
   follows the same procedure as the registration request, with the
   exception of changes to the "Person & email address to contact for
   further information" and "Owner/Change controller" fields.  The
   latter can be changed by the owner by informing IANA; this can be
   done without discussion or review.

   The IESG may reassign responsibility for an IMAP keyword.  The most
   common case of this will be to enable clarifications to be made to
   keywords where the owner of the registration has died, moved out of
   contact or is otherwise unable to make changes that are important to
   the community.

   IMAP keyword registrations may not be deleted; keywords which are no
   longer believed appropriate for use can be declared OBSOLETE by a
   change to their "intended usage" field.

   The IESG is considered to be the owner of all "common use" IMAP
   keywords that are published in an IETF Review document.



Melnikov & Cridland       Expires June 10, 2010                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft           IMAP4 Keyword Registry            December 2009


3.3.  Initial registrations

   IANA is requested to register IMAP Keywords specified in subsections
   of this section in the registry established in this document.

3.3.1.  $MDNSent IMAP keyword registration

   Subject:    Registration of IMAP keyword $MDNSent


   IMAP keyword name:  $MDNSent


   Purpose (description):  Specifies that a Message Disposition
               Notification (MDN) must not be sent for any message
               annotated with the $MDNSent IMAP keyword.


   Private or Shared on a server:  SHARED


   Is it an advisory keyword or may it cause an automatic action:  This
               keyword can cause automatic action by the client.  See
               [RFC3503] for more details.


   When/by whom the keyword is set/cleared:  This keyword is set by an
               IMAP client when it decides to act on a MDN request, or
               when uploading a sent or draft message.  It can also be
               set by a delivery agent.  Once set the flag SHOULD NOT be
               cleared.


   Related keywords:  None


   Related IMAP capabilities:  None


   Security considerations:  See section 6 of [RFC3503]


   Published specification (recommended):  [RFC3503]








Melnikov & Cridland       Expires June 10, 2010                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft           IMAP4 Keyword Registry            December 2009


   Person & email address to contact for further information:  Alexey
               Melnikov <alexey.melnikov@isode.com>


   Intended usage:  COMMON


   Owner/Change controller:  IESG


   Note:


3.3.2.  $Forwarded IMAP keyword registration

   Subject:    Registration of the IMAP keyword $Forwarded


   IMAP keyword name:  $Forwarded


   Purpose (description):  $Forwarded is used by several IMAP clients to
               specify that the message was resent to another email
               address, embedded within or attached to a new message.
               This keyword is set by the mail client when it
               successfully forwards the message to another email
               address.  Typical usage of this keyword is to show a
               different (or additional) icon for a message that has
               been forwarded.


   Private or Shared on a server:  BOTH


   Is it an advisory keyword or may it cause an automatic action:
               advisory


   When/by whom the keyword is set/cleared:  This keyword can be set
               either by a delivery agent or by a mail client.  Once set
               the flag SHOULD NOT be cleared.  Notes: There is no way
               to tell if a message with $Forwarded keyword set was
               forwarded more than once.








Melnikov & Cridland       Expires June 10, 2010                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft           IMAP4 Keyword Registry            December 2009


   Related keywords:  None


   Related IMAP capabilities:  None


   Security considerations:  A server implementing this keyword as a
               shared keyword, may disclose that a confidential message
               was forwarded.


   Published specification (recommended):  [RFC5550]


   Person & email address to contact for further information:  Alexey
               Melnikov <alexey.melnikov@isode.com>


   Intended usage:  COMMON


   Owner/Change controller:  IESG


   Note:


3.3.3.  $SubmitPending IMAP keyword registration

   Subject:    Registration of IMAP keyword $SubmitPending


   IMAP keyword name:  $SubmitPending


   Purpose (description):  The $SubmitPending IMAP keyword designates
               the message as awaiting to be submitted.  This keyword
               allows storing messages waiting to be submitted in the
               same mailbox where messages that were already submitted
               and/or are being edited are stored.

               A message that has both $Submitted and $SubmitPending
               IMAP keywords set is a message being actively submitted.








Melnikov & Cridland       Expires June 10, 2010                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft           IMAP4 Keyword Registry            December 2009


   Private or Shared on a server:  SHARED


   Is it an advisory keyword or may it cause an automatic action:  This
               keyword can cause automatic action by the client.  See
               Section 5.10 of [RFC5550] for more details.


   When/by whom the keyword is set/cleared:  This keyword is set by a
               mail client when it decides that the message needs to be
               sent out.


   Related keywords:  $Submitted


   Related IMAP capabilities:  None


   Security considerations:  A server implementing this keyword as a
               shared keyword, may disclose that a confidential message
               is sheduled to be sent out or is being actively sent out.


   Published specification (recommended):  [RFC5550]


   Person & email address to contact for further information:  Alexey
               Melnikov <alexey.melnikov@isode.com>


   Intended usage:  COMMON


   Owner/Change controller:  IESG


   Note:


3.3.4.  $Submitted IMAP keyword registration

   Subject:    Registration of IMAP keyword $Submitted








Melnikov & Cridland       Expires June 10, 2010                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft           IMAP4 Keyword Registry            December 2009


   IMAP keyword name:  $Submitted


   Purpose (description):  The $Submitted IMAP keyword designates the
               message as being sent out.

               A message that has both $Submitted and $SubmitPending
               IMAP keywords set is a message being actively submitted.


   Private or Shared on a server:  SHARED


   Is it an advisory keyword or may it cause an automatic action:  This
               keyword can cause automatic action by the client.  See
               Section 5.10 of [RFC5550] for more details.


   When/by whom the keyword is set/cleared:  This keyword is set by a
               mail client when it decides to start sending it.


   Related keywords:  $SubmitPending


   Related IMAP capabilities:  None


   Security considerations:  A server implementing this keyword as a
               shared keyword, may disclose that a confidential message
               was sent or is being actively sent out.


   Published specification (recommended):  [RFC5550]


   Person & email address to contact for further information:  Alexey
               Melnikov <alexey.melnikov@isode.com>


   Intended usage:  COMMON


   Owner/Change controller:  IESG







Melnikov & Cridland       Expires June 10, 2010                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft           IMAP4 Keyword Registry            December 2009


   Note:



4.  Security Considerations

   IMAP Keywords are one of the base IMAP features [RFC3501].  This
   document doesn't change their behaviour, so it is not adding new
   security issues.

   A particular IMAP keyword might have specific security
   considerations, which are documented in IMAP keyword registration
   template standardized by this document.


5.  Acknowledgements

   The creation of this document was prompted by one of many discussions
   on the IMAP mailing list.

   John Neystadt co-authored the first revision of this document.

   Special thanks to Chris Newman, David Harris, Lyndon Nerenberg, Mark
   Crispin, Samuel Weiler and Alfred Hoenes for reviewing different
   versions of this document.  However all errors or omissions must be
   attributed to the authors of this document.

   The author would also like to thank the developers of Mozilla mail
   clients for providing food for thoughts.


6.  References

6.1.  Normative References

   [I-D.cridland-acap-vendor-registry]
              Cridland, D., "The Internet Assigned Number Authority
              (IANA) Application Configurations Access Protocol (ACAP)
              Vendor Subtrees Registry",
              draft-cridland-acap-vendor-registry-00 (work in progress),
              July 2009.

   [Kwds]     Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC3501]  Crispin, M., "INTERNET MESSAGE ACCESS PROTOCOL - VERSION
              4rev1", RFC 3501, March 2003.




Melnikov & Cridland       Expires June 10, 2010                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft           IMAP4 Keyword Registry            December 2009


   [RFC5226]  Narten, T. and H. Alvestrand, "Guidelines for Writing an
              IANA Considerations Section in RFCs", BCP 26, RFC 5226,
              May 2008.

6.2.  Informative References

   [RFC3503]  Melnikov, A., "Message Disposition Notification (MDN)
              profile for Internet Message Access Protocol (IMAP)",
              RFC 3503, March 2003.

   [RFC5550]  Cridland, D., Melnikov, A., and S. Maes, "The Internet
              Email to Support Diverse Service Environments (Lemonade)
              Profile", RFC 5550, August 2009.


Authors' Addresses

   Alexey Melnikov
   Isode Limited
   5 Castle Business Village
   36 Station Road
   Hampton, Middlesex  TW12 2BX
   UK

   Email: Alexey.Melnikov@isode.com
   URI:   http://www.melnikov.ca/


   Dave Cridland
   Isode Limited
   5 Castle Business Village
   36 Station Road
   Hampton, Middlesex  TW12 2BX
   UK

   Email: dave.cridland@isode.com















Melnikov & Cridland       Expires June 10, 2010                [Page 13]


