


Network Working Group                                            A. Kern
Internet-Draft                                                 A. Takacs
Intended status: Informational                                  Ericsson
Expires: September 2, 2010                                 March 1, 2010


  Use cases and alternatives for configuring intermediate nodes using
                                RSVP-TE
              draft-kern-ccamp-intermediate-node-config-00

Abstract

   Lately, a few use-cases have been identified where, besides path
   setup, specific configuration of intermediate nodes is required for
   the establishment of an LSP with its associated functions.  Today,
   RSVP-TE is not supporting the selective configuration of intermediate
   nodes; hence extensions are required to equip RSVP-TE with such a
   capability.  In this document we summarize the use-cases and their
   requirements and sketch alternative solutions to configure
   intermediate nodes.  Since one of the main issues with intermediate
   node configuration is the introduction of potential scaling problems,
   we included scalability in our analysis.  This document does not
   specify any extensions; its sole purpose is to foster discussion on
   the subject.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 2, 2010.




Kern & Takacs           Expires September 2, 2010               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft    Configuring middle nodes with RSVP-TE       March 2010


Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Amount of configuration data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     2.1.  WSON Regeneration  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     2.2.  OAM Configuration of Non-Intrusive Monitoring Entities . .  4
     2.3.  OAM Configuration of Tandem Connection Monitoring
           Entities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  RSVP-TE signaling alternatives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.1.  Using the LSP_ATTRIBUTES Object  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.2.  Using the HOP_ATTRIBUTES Sub-Object in ERO . . . . . . . .  6
     3.3.  Combination of LSP_ATTRIBUTES and ERO  . . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.4.  Using multiple messages  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
       3.4.1.  Multiple messages with semantic fragmentation  . . . .  7
       3.4.2.  Using other signaling messages/procedures  . . . . . .  7
   4.  Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   5.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10

















Kern & Takacs           Expires September 2, 2010               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft    Configuring middle nodes with RSVP-TE       March 2010


1.  Introduction

   Lately, a few use-cases have been identified where, besides path
   setup, specific configuration of intermediate nodes is required for
   the establishment of an LSP with its associated functions.

   GMPLS is being extended to support Wavelength Switched Optical
   Networks (WSON) [WSON-FWK].  In the context of WSON, in
   [WSON-SIGNAL], it has been identified that in addition to setup the
   path and configure endpoints of an LSP to input and output a signal
   with specific attributes, it may be need to signal particular
   intermediate NEs to perform specific processing, such as 3R
   regeneration, on the signal.  Three types of processing are named
   which may need configuration at particular intermediate nodes of an
   LSP: 1) regeneration, 2) fault and performance monitoring and 3)
   signal attribute conversion.

   [GMPLS-OAM-FWK] describes GMPLS RSVP-TE signaling extension to
   configure Operations and Management (OAM) functions associated to a
   connection.  Two OAM entities are differentiated: Maintenance
   Endpoints (MEPs) that are deployed at connection endpoints and
   Maintenance Intermediate Points (MIPs) that can be deployed at
   intermediate nodes.  The procedures described in [GMPLS-OAM-FWK]
   support the detailed configuration of MEPs while for MIPs only the
   instantiation at every or none of the intermediate nodes is
   supported.

   However, transport technologies, such as SDH and OTN provide a rich
   set of monitoring functions which would require besides detailed MEP
   configuration, the selective configuration of MIPs as well.  For
   instance, a part of an end-to-end connection can be monitored with
   the help of tandem connection monitoring (TCM) running between two
   intermediate nodes, or the end-to-end data flow can be monitored in a
   non-intrusive fashion at particular intermediate NEs.

















Kern & Takacs           Expires September 2, 2010               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft    Configuring middle nodes with RSVP-TE       March 2010


2.  Amount of configuration data

2.1.  WSON Regeneration

   In [WSON-SIGNAL] only the first type of processing, the regeneration,
   is discussed further.  The information that needs to be passed to
   intermediate nodes consists of the type of regeneration, i.e., no
   regeneration at this node or 1R, 2R or 3R Regeneration.  In addition
   the particular node may be a fixed or an optional regeneration point.
   All in all, for regeneration at most an octet of information is
   needed per intermediate node of an LSP.  Assuming that this info is
   carried in a TLV with reserved bits for extensibility we may
   calculate with 8 octets.  Due to the nature of regeneration, the
   worst case is when all intermediate nodes are configured with
   regeneration information.

2.2.  OAM Configuration of Non-Intrusive Monitoring Entities

   A Non-Intrusive Monitoring Entity (NIME) snoops the end-to-end
   monitoring flow and may trigger consequent actions and invoke alarms.
   To deploy a NIME, the end-to-end OAM configuration information must
   be available and some NIME specific attributes may be set as well,
   such as monitored signals and trigger thresholds.

   Assuming that the end-to-end OAM configuration information is
   available using the procedures described in [GMPLS-OAM-FWK], for a
   specific NIME it is enough to encode the entity identifiers and
   threshold parameters using TLVs based on [GMPLS-OAM-FWK] and the
   appropriate technology specific drafts.  For instance, in case of SDH
   and OTN connection we may calculate with roughly 20 octets per NIME.
   In worst case all intermediate nodes of an LSP can be configured as
   NIMEs.

2.3.  OAM Configuration of Tandem Connection Monitoring Entities

   The Tandem Connection Monitoring Entity (TCME) is basically a pair of
   MEPs running on a tandem connection, which is associated to the end-
   to-end connection.  Depending on the technology overlapping or
   nesting TCMEs are allowed.

   TCM is independent of the end-to-end monitoring flow, it multiplexes
   its own monitoring flow on the connection.  Hence the configuration
   of TCM is basically similar to the configuration of end-to-end
   monitoring, hence requiring the full configuration described in
   [GMPLS-OAM-FWK], including MEP identifiers, message rates etc.
   Therefore, specifying a TCME requires the same amount of
   configuration data as the end-to-end OAM flow, plus the location
   information of the two endpoints.  Hence, we may calculate with



Kern & Takacs           Expires September 2, 2010               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft    Configuring middle nodes with RSVP-TE       March 2010


   roughly 100 octets per entity.


















































Kern & Takacs           Expires September 2, 2010               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft    Configuring middle nodes with RSVP-TE       March 2010


3.  RSVP-TE signaling alternatives

   Two aspects need to be considered for each of the alternatives.
   First, how a particular intermediate node is identified.  Second, how
   the configuration information is carried and used.

3.1.  Using the LSP_ATTRIBUTES Object

   The LSP_ATTRIBUTES Object [RFC5420] can accommodate TLVs to carry
   configuration information for intermediate nodes as well.  In order
   to identify the nodes to which a specific configuration should be
   applied the node identifiers must be explicitly listed.  A crucial
   problem here is that the list of nodes in the LSP_ATTRIBUTES Object,
   the ERO and as a result of any distributed computation must be
   synchronized.  To this end, procedures that modify the path of the
   LSP and/or the ERO must also revise TLVs in the LSP_ATTRIBUTES
   Object.

3.2.  Using the HOP_ATTRIBUTES Sub-Object in ERO

   The ERO originally was designed to specify the route for a
   connection, however over time this has been relaxed and the ERO now
   carries resource configuration as well.  For instance, one can
   specify the downstream and upstream labels and declare a set of
   unwanted/non-preferred resource parameters.  These parameters are
   listed as additional ERO Sub-Objects after the Sub-Object defining
   the hop.  To encode general configuration information a new ERO Sub-
   Object can be defined (e.g., HOP_ATTRIBUTES [HOP-ATTR]), which would
   allow inclusion of TLVs that contain specific attributes of the
   intermediate hops of an LSP.

   Since the ERO may contain loose hops and abstract nodes procedures
   for intermediate node configuration must be prepared for the
   appropriate resolution.

   With this approach the binding of intermediate node configuration
   information to the actual identification of the hop is naturally
   solved.

3.3.  Combination of LSP_ATTRIBUTES and ERO

   The ERO could be used to identify that a specific hop has additional
   configuration information, which is carried in the LSP_ATTRIBUTES
   Object and point to that information element.  In this case the ERO
   would essentially contain an index to the contents of the
   LSP_ATTRIBUTES Object.  In this case the ERO is not overloaded with
   configuration data, and in scenarios where the same configuration is
   used at multiple intermediate hops the data that is carried in the



Kern & Takacs           Expires September 2, 2010               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft    Configuring middle nodes with RSVP-TE       March 2010


   path message is reduced.

3.4.  Using multiple messages

   Multiple message exchanges may be needed to remove scaling issues and
   support general intermediate node configuration.  However it must be
   noted that not all use-cases will allow for the use of multiple
   messages.  In some cases it is mandatory that particular intermediate
   nodes are configured together with path setup, hence configuration
   information must be carried in the first Path message.  This is
   likely the case with WSON regeneration configuration.  On the other
   hand, there will be cases which may benefit from joint signaling with
   the first Path message but where it may be also acceptable to use
   multiple messages.  This is likely the case with the setup of tandem
   connection monitoring entities.

3.4.1.  Multiple messages with semantic fragmentation

   The problem of too much data in a single RSVP-TE message has been
   faced with P2MP LSPs.  In [RFC4875] the sub-state concept has been
   introduced, where a PATH message may refer to a part of the signaling
   state only, while the whole state is signaled with multiple PATH
   messages.

   For intermediate node configuration the fragmentation of information
   could be considered.  For instance, contents of the LSP_ATTRIBUTES
   Object may be disseminated using several PATH messages.  This would
   allow stepwise configuration of functions, and so be a scalable way
   to convey intermediate node configuration.

3.4.2.  Using other signaling messages/procedures

   The LSP is setup with RSVP-TE PATH and RESV messages, while
   intermediate node configuration could be done with other RSVP
   messages.  This has been already applied to implement extra features
   like collecting RSVP state information [RFC2745] or sending direct
   notification to an intermediate node [RFC3473].  However, these
   extensions do not carry configuration information that is included
   into the RSVP state.  How these states are refreshed need further
   considerations.











Kern & Takacs           Expires September 2, 2010               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft    Configuring middle nodes with RSVP-TE       March 2010


4.  Discussion

   For intermediate node configuration it is likely that two methods
   will be needed.

   One mechanism would support cases where path setup and intermediate
   node configuration need to happen at the same time.  In this case
   only a very limited configuration of intermediate nodes would be
   supported, i.e., through a set of flags or indexes.  The simplest
   method is to use the ERO and provide a placeholder for the
   information.

   The other mechanism would support complex configurations and to scale
   may have to rely on multiple message exchanges.  A solution based on
   the semantic fragmentation described for P2MP LSPs may be a viable
   solution.



































Kern & Takacs           Expires September 2, 2010               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft    Configuring middle nodes with RSVP-TE       March 2010


5.  References

   [GMPLS-OAM-FWK]
              Takacs, A., Fedyk, D., and H. Jia, "OAM Configuration
              Framework and Requirements for GMPLS RSVP-TE",
              draft-ietf-ccamp-oam-configuration-fwk-03 (work in
              progress), January 2010.

   [HOP-ATTR]
              Kern, A. and A. Takacs, "Encoding of Attributes of LSP
              intermediate hops using RSVP-TE",
              draft-kern-ccamp-rsvpte-hop-attributes-00 (work in
              progress), October 2009.

   [RFC2745]  Terzis, A., Braden, B., Vincent, S., and L. Zhang, "RSVP
              Diagnostic Messages", RFC 2745, January 2000.

   [RFC3473]  Berger, L., "Generalized Multi-Protocol Label Switching
              (GMPLS) Signaling Resource ReserVation Protocol-Traffic
              Engineering (RSVP-TE) Extensions", RFC 3473, January 2003.

   [RFC4875]  Aggarwal, R., Papadimitriou, D., and S. Yasukawa,
              "Extensions to Resource Reservation Protocol - Traffic
              Engineering (RSVP-TE) for Point-to-Multipoint TE Label
              Switched Paths (LSPs)", RFC 4875, May 2007.

   [RFC5420]  Farrel, A., Papadimitriou, D., Vasseur, JP., and A.
              Ayyangarps, "Encoding of Attributes for MPLS LSP
              Establishment Using Resource Reservation Protocol Traffic
              Engineering (RSVP-TE)", RFC 5420, February 2009.

   [WSON-FWK]
              Bernstein, G., Lee, Y., and W. Imajuku, "Framework for
              GMPLS and PCE Control of Wavelength Switched Optical
              Networks (WSON)", draft-ietf-ccamp-rwa-wson-framework-05
              (work in progress), February 2010.

   [WSON-SIGNAL]
              Bernstein, G., "Signaling Extensions for Wavelength
              Switched Optical Networks",
              draft-bernstein-ccamp-wson-signaling-06 (work in
              progress), February 2010.









Kern & Takacs           Expires September 2, 2010               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft    Configuring middle nodes with RSVP-TE       March 2010


Authors' Addresses

   Andras Kern
   Ericsson
   Laborc u. 1.
   Budapest,   1037
   Hungary

   Email: andras.kern@ericsson.com


   Attila Takacs
   Ericsson
   Laborc u. 1.
   Budapest,   1037
   Hungary

   Email: attila.takacs@ericsson.com

































Kern & Takacs           Expires September 2, 2010              [Page 10]


