


nfsv4                                                          D. Noveck
Internet-Draft                                                       EMC
Expires: September 30, 2011                                   P. Erasani
                                                      L. Bairavasundaram
                                                                  NetApp
                                                                  P. Dai
                                                          C. Karamonolis
                                                                  Vmware
                                                          March 29, 2011


              Storage Control Extensions for NFS Version 4
                 draft-dnoveck-nfsv4-storage-control-01

Abstract

   Developments in storage systems have made it important for
   applications to have control over the characteristics of the storage
   that will be used for their particular files.  The development of
   pNFS has added to the usefulness of such control mechanisms as it has
   created the opportunity for the hierarchical organization of file
   names to be separated from the control of storage characteristics for
   individual files, including the assignment to storage locations to
   reflect the performance or other needs of those specific files.  This
   document proposes extensions to NFS version 4 to allow storage
   requirements to be communicated to the NFS version 4 server.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 30, 2011.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.



Noveck, et al.         Expires September 30, 2011               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                 storage_ctl                    March 2011


   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

   This document may contain material from IETF Documents or IETF
   Contributions published or made publicly available before November
   10, 2008.  The person(s) controlling the copyright in some of this
   material may not have granted the IETF Trust the right to allow
   modifications of such material outside the IETF Standards Process.
   Without obtaining an adequate license from the person(s) controlling
   the copyright in such materials, this document may not be modified
   outside the IETF Standards Process, and derivative works of it may
   not be created outside the IETF Standards Process, except to format
   it for publication as an RFC or to translate it into languages other
   than English.






























Noveck, et al.         Expires September 30, 2011               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                 storage_ctl                    March 2011


Table of Contents

   1.  Storage Control Issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.  Storage Choice and API Definition  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   3.  Modes of Storage Choice  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   4.  Assuring Extensability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     4.1.  Requirements for Extensability . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     4.2.  XDR Encoding for Extensability . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   5.  Storage Control  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     5.1.  Property Types . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
       5.1.1.  Informative Properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
       5.1.2.  Enforceable Properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     5.2.  Base Property Specifications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
       5.2.1.  Storage Size . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
       5.2.2.  Storage Use Duration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
       5.2.3.  Storage Device Failure Limit . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
       5.2.4.  Storage System Failure Limit . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
       5.2.5.  Storage System Failure RPO . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
       5.2.6.  Storage System Failure RTO Properties  . . . . . . . . 17
   6.  Uses of the Attribute storage_ctl  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
     6.1.  Use of storage_ctl when creating a file  . . . . . . . . . 19
     6.2.  Use of storage_ctl in SETATTR  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
     6.3.  Use of storage_ctl in GETATTR/READDIR  . . . . . . . . . . 21
     6.4.  Use of storage_ctl in VERIFY/NVERIFY . . . . . . . . . . . 21
   7.  The FETCH_SCNOTE Operation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
   8.  Attribute Extension  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
     8.1.  Experimental and Other Non-standardized Extensions . . . . 25
     8.2.  Standardized Extensions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
     8.3.  The storage_ext attribute  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
   9.  Summary  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
     9.1.  Errors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
     9.2.  Semantic constraints . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
   10. Possible Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
   11. Acknowledgments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
















Noveck, et al.         Expires September 30, 2011               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                 storage_ctl                    March 2011


1.  Storage Control Issues

   Storage to which files may be assigned can differ in a number of
   ways, raising the issue of how to control the choice of storage for
   specific files.  The range of such choices is not static but can be
   expected to increase as flash memory becomes an option whose use
   needs to be controlled, or various choices of types of local caching
   need to be made.  Although all files may well be helped by such
   approaches, the degree to which they will be helped will vary with
   the type of file and the typical application reference pattern for
   it.  In addition, the value of improved access will differ with quick
   access to certain files being of much greater value, thereby
   justifying the allocation of more expensive storage resources to such
   files.

   The traditional way that user decisions regarding assignment of
   storage resources have been effected is by assigning specific file
   systems to specific disks or sets of disks.  Files placed in that
   file system thereby get the storage characteristics assigned to that
   file system.  Where file systems contain storage of various types,
   various heuristics are used to assign files or pieces thereof, to
   storage of various types, generally without any external input about
   application needs.

   The creation of pNFS modifies this pattern in that data and metadata
   are separated.  Where pNFS is used, assigning a file to a specific
   file system now controls only where the metadata is located.
   Different files may have their data assigned to different sorts of
   storage, potentially located on different servers.  This gives rise
   to the need for a means by which the storage choice for a particular
   file may be made.

   NFS version 4.1 contains a layouthint attribute but this does not
   really address the problem.  The focus of the layouthint attribute is
   on the striping configuration, but there is a need to control storage
   characteristics other than this.  This is the case even when there is
   only a single stripe (that is, no striping).  Even though this is not
   "parallel NFS," using pNFS in this way to provide a separation of
   data and metadata, with the ability to choose locations for data
   based on its characteristics subject to later change in a user-
   transparent manner is very powerful, particularly if the storage
   location is subject to intelligent management.

   Additionally, more sophisticated storage management arrangements make
   it desirable to have a way to specify details for storage handling,
   even when pNFS is not used.  When a file system contains different
   sorts of storage, input regarding desired or necessary storage
   characteristics can be used to make storage assignment choices more



Noveck, et al.         Expires September 30, 2011               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                 storage_ctl                    March 2011


   in line with application needs.

   As a result, the ability to specify desired storage characteristics
   can provide benfits, both when pNFS is used and when it is not,
   although pNFS has the most immediate set of needs for means by which
   to control storage selection.













































Noveck, et al.         Expires September 30, 2011               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                 storage_ctl                    March 2011


2.  Storage Choice and API Definition

   It needs to be noted that existing API's may not provide means by
   which some of the storage characteristics described herein may be
   communicated to NFSv4 in-kernel clients and from there, to NFSv4
   servers.  Nevertheless, definition of a means by which these storage
   characteristics may be communicated to the NFSv4 server is still
   useful for a number of reasons:

      Embedded clients for particular applications may specify this
      information even without any API deinition.

      Client implementations may use various less-than-perfect ways of
      specifying storage characteristics, assigning storage
      chatcteristics based on file ownership or other nominally
      unrealated characteristics that that corelate well with customer
      intentions.

   Note that if the absence of a standard kernel API were sufficient to
   stop this work, it also probably be the case that the absence of a
   means to communicate the information to remote servers might make the
   definition of that API not worth the effort.  By defining some
   storage characteristics and a general means of communicating them and
   others (via an extension mechanism) we allow for either:

      The later development of API's to specify these storage
      characteristics.

      The developemt of API's to specify different sets of storage
      characteristics that can then be easily assimilated to this
      mechanism as extensions.




















Noveck, et al.         Expires September 30, 2011               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                 storage_ctl                    March 2011


3.  Modes of Storage Choice

   There are a number of different ways in which storage choices may be
   indicated:

   o  The specific file system location(s) might be specified.

   o  Specific types of storage might be specified with selection of
      such choices as SSD, SATA, or fiber channel SAN drives being made
      by the client and effected by the MDS.

   o  Desired characteristics of storage including speed (latency and/or
      throughput), amount of storage that will be needed, safety (raid-
      level).  Available storage would be selected to meet the required
      characteristics and would be subject to active management as the
      environment changes.

   These different modes of storage choice are all useful in different
   environments.  Specification of a specific file system imposes the
   least need for a storage management infrastructure but it requires
   user/application knowledge.

   The other modes imply a sequence of progressively greater
   infrastructure requirements to map specifications to specific storage
   systems and a correspondingly smaller need for user/application
   knowledge of the storage environment.  However, such modes of
   operation are very different from existing storage management
   paradigms and the precise ways in which applications and storage
   might communicate are not fully understood.






















Noveck, et al.         Expires September 30, 2011               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                 storage_ctl                    March 2011


4.  Assuring Extensability

4.1.  Requirements for Extensability

   As the examples of different modes of storage choice suggest, there
   are potentially a large number of specific items that might be
   specified in order to effect storage choice.  Further, in many cases,
   expected future developments in the area of storage can be expected
   to extend and otherwise modify the characteristics which might be
   specified.

   The need for extensibility is important as one might expect many
   ongoing developments, including those in the areas of storage
   hardware, and file systems, to create corresponding needs to specify
   relevant storage chatacteristics.

   For example, local caching, including writeback caching using flash,
   creates the opportunity for greatly improved performance, at the risk
   of greater complexity in dealing with network failures.  This raises
   the issue of allowing the user to make the choice of whether this
   greater performance is worth the risks and difficulties.

   Similarly, the development of distributed file systems raises many
   choices where performance will need to be balanced against various
   forms of safety issues, with specific choices reflecting the specific
   needs of applications dealing with the storage.

   These situations and others that we may not be able to predict,
   require that any attribute scheme in this area allow the
   specification of multiple storage characteristics with the ability to
   easily extend the specification so that it incorporates new
   characteristics to govern storage selection.  Further, the need for
   actual use testing before incorporation in an IETF standard, imposes
   new requirements as far as organizing specification of the
   characteristics.

   Having "working code" to effect characteristic selection is not
   sufficient to demonstrate usefulness.  The working code may be
   trivial while finding out whether this set of characteristics make
   sense for applications to use or requires extension or modification
   before assuming its final form is not trivial.  This may require
   significant trial use among a large set of users running different
   applications, before the details are ready to be standardized.

   These factors increase the need for flexibility, including non-
   private use of characteristics not yet standardized.  Accommodating
   this need for flexibility has the potential for unduly interfering
   with interoperability and the design of this feature will need to



Noveck, et al.         Expires September 30, 2011               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                 storage_ctl                    March 2011


   avoid that.

4.2.  XDR Encoding for Extensability

   While each storage property could conceivably be made its own
   attribute, the burden that this would place on the IETF process would
   be immense.  There would be necessary co-ordination (and almost
   certain confusion) as individual experimental properties needed
   temporary attribute numbers and then had to shift them to other more
   permanent numbers.  Further, and even more of an issue, storage
   property definition would seem to require a minor version, which
   seems too heavyweight.  This would slow down the process beyond what
   should be for something which was its own standard-track RFC.

   In order to address these issues, individual properties will be
   treated as sub-attributes within a single storage_ctl attribute.  To
   simplify assignment of sub-attribute numbers, mainly in support of
   experimental use, multiple sub-attribute spaces will be supported, to
   allow independent development of features each involving multiple
   storage properties.  Once such a feature is standardized, the
   definition of the specific sub-atribute space could simply be made
   the subject of a standards-track RFC, with no change to those using
   it.


   typedef uin32_t  spacenum_sc;    /* Individual property space id. */
   typedef uint32_t bitmap_sc<*>;   /* Bit map for the presence or
                                       absence of individual properties
                                       using bit numbers assigned for
                                       the space. Like bitmap4.      */
   typedef opaque   proplist_sc<*>; /* Data associated with each of the
                                       properties in the bitmap_sc.
                                       Like attrlist4.               */

   struct section_sc {
      spacenum_sc   SpaceSection;   /* Section number.                */
      bitmap_sc     WhichProperties;/* Bit map of properties present. */
      proplist_sc   PropertyData;   /* Data for each of the properties
                                       specified in this section.     */
   };

  typedef section_sc fattr4_storage_ctl<*>;
                                    /* The attribute may have one or
                                       more property sections. */


   This form of property encoding allows the property set to be extended
   without requiring a new minor version.  Also, by allowing property



Noveck, et al.         Expires September 30, 2011               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft                 storage_ctl                    March 2011


   space numbers to be assigned, property sets can be developed
   independently, and converted to a standard state without undue
   interruption to those using the earlier form.
















































Noveck, et al.         Expires September 30, 2011              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft                 storage_ctl                    March 2011


5.  Storage Control

   Storage, along with compute, memory, and network, is an integral part
   of an application's resources.  Much like the other types of
   resources consumed by an application, storage needs can be described
   using a set of properties.  These properties may serve to describe
   the characteristics of the storage, the intended usage both temporal
   and spatial, quality of service expectations, physical layout over
   available storage media, data access locations, geographical
   distribution, just to name a few.  The collection of such properties
   together define the control an application ultimately wants to have
   on storage; conversely, they enable the storage system to more
   effectively and dynamically meet the application's needs as
   specifically expressed, rather than inferred, based on fallible
   heuristics.  Henceforth, we will use the term control to refer to the
   property collection.

   It is not difficult to conceive various storage properties.  In fact,
   there are numerous of them, due to the diversity of applications and
   the corresponding workload characteristics, the ever increasing
   storage value-adds in the form of data services, and the fast
   changing business requirements.  It is an impossible task to capture
   all of them here.  Rather, the goal of this document is to define a
   framework in which new properties can be easily added and new
   semantics of the properties can be introduced as necessary without
   disruption.  It is desired that they be capable of being used in more
   limited situations, refined as necessary.

5.1.  Property Types

   There may be numerous storage properties as mentioned above.  We
   need, however, to distinguish at least two types, namely, informative
   properties and enforceable properties.  There may very well be other
   systems or criteria when it comes to the classification of storage
   properties; and extensibility shall apply in this case just as it
   does to adding new storage properties.  However, there is a need to
   explicitly capture the distinctions between informative and
   enforceable properties in the data model, due to the impact on the
   storage protocol semantics.

5.1.1.  Informative Properties

   An informative property, as the name suggests, provides some
   descriptive information about the storage in question.  Such
   information is furnished in a single direction from the application
   to the storage system with absolutely no "contractual" implications.
   The storage system may use the information captured in such a
   property for storage optimization.  But it is not obligated to do so.



Noveck, et al.         Expires September 30, 2011              [Page 11]

Internet-Draft                 storage_ctl                    March 2011


   More importantly, the application is not offered any transparency as
   to how the storage system may utilize this information.  As such, the
   information flow is strictly one-way without the prospect for any
   feedback.  Examples of informative properties are the access pattern
   of the storage in use, the expected capacity need, and the estimated
   growth rate.

5.1.2.  Enforceable Properties

   In contrast, an enforceable property may have embedded in it varying
   degrees of binding effect.  By that, it means the application
   specifying the property has expectations that the storage system not
   only acts upon but also conveys the action status back in some way.
   Unlike the case of an informative property, the information flow in
   this case is truly bi-directional, with the backward direction for
   monitoring property status, including information on whether a
   property has been satisfied or is in the process of being satisfied.
   In that sense, an enforceable property has a resemblance to an
   agreement, where one might monitor the performance of the other
   party.

   Applications seeking tighter control of the storage may resort to the
   enforceable properties.  Examples of enforceable properties could
   include the type and speed of sorage but could also include the
   availability, reliability, and average throughput and latency.

5.1.2.1.  Enforcement Level

   To allow varying degrees of control, an enforcement level may be
   associated with an enforceable property.  There are two levels of
   control possible, namely, advisory and mandatory.  Regardless of the
   level, the storage system should strive to fulfill an enforceable
   property.  The difference lies in the treatment of an inability to do
   so.  With an advisory enforcement level, the storage system shall
   continue to carry out the operation even if the property could not be
   fulfilled; whereas with mandatory, the storage shall fail the
   operation without making any modification.  In any case, the failure
   to fulfill an enforceable property can be communicated to the
   application.

5.1.2.2.  Compliance Status

   While control may suffice to describe the ultimate storage
   requirements, i.e., the intended behavior once it has been fully
   implemented, it does not by itself capture the dynamic aspects of the
   implementation process.  This is encompassed by the concept of
   "compliance" which indicates the extent to which requested storage
   properties have or have not been provided or whether they are still



Noveck, et al.         Expires September 30, 2011              [Page 12]

Internet-Draft                 storage_ctl                    March 2011


   in the process of being provided.  Note that the word "compliance" as
   used here has no connection with this word as used to describe issues
   conformance with a set of legal requirements for record-keeping,
   among other matters.

   Control implementation can be a fairly heavyweight process by nature
   due to the data intensity involved.  This may be true whether it is
   during the initial provisioning of storage, or the subsequent change
   management, or the remediation of compliance violation.  The data
   intensive nature of the control implementation process implies that
   the transition from non-compliance to compliance will not be
   instantaneous in the general case.  In other words, the
   implementation process remains asynchronous relative to the operation
   that triggers it.

   The asynchronous nature of the control implementation process may be
   captured by the compliance status.  The compliance status may have
   three different values, namely, Current, Complying, and Failed.  The
   value Current represents a fully compliant state.  The value
   Complying refers to a transient state in which the transition to
   current is in progress.

   The value Failed represents an indefinite state of non-compliance.
   In the last case, the storage system may have made the determination
   that it is unable to fulfill some or all of the storage properties
   given the physical resources available.  The application will work
   without, but its performance may not be what is desired.

   The compliance status describes the state of the control fulfillment
   as it pertains to each property.  It applies to an enforceable
   property only.  Its presence is not a syntactic requirement as
   defined by the XDR specification.  Depending on the operational
   context in which the enforceable property is specified, specification
   of compliance status may be either invalid, required, or optional
   with the specification of more that one such status values possible
   in some cases.

5.1.2.3.  XDR Encoding for Enforceable Properties

   Enforceable properties contain a word which is of type enforce_sc and
   allows the enforcement level and compliance status to be specified.
   To allow greatest flexibility, all enforcement statuses and
   compliance status values are specified as bit values, allowing sets
   of enforcement levels and complicance status, to be specified, as
   appropriate.






Noveck, et al.         Expires September 30, 2011              [Page 13]

Internet-Draft                 storage_ctl                    March 2011


      typedef uint32_t enforce_sc;

      const enforce_sc ENFORCE_MANDATORY = 0x1;
      const enforce_sc ENFORCE_ADVISORY = 0x2;
      const enforce_sc ENFORCE_CURENT = 0x10;
      const enforce_sc ENFORCE_COMPLYING = 0x20;
      const enforce_sc ENFORCE_FAILED = 0x40;

   For most purposes, enforcement words should have a single enforcement
   level, either ENFORCE_MANDATORY ENFORCE_ADVISORY.  Any enforcement
   word containing both bits will result in NFS4ERR_SCTL_BADENF being
   returned.  Specification of an enforcement word containing neither
   will generally result in in NFS4ERR_SCTL_BADENF being returned.
   However, it may be specified, when doing a SETATTR that specifies a
   reserved empty parameter value to remove a property specification.
   Also, it may be specified when doing an VERIFY or NVERIFY to specify
   a property without a defined enforcement level.

   When specifying a storage property as part of a OPEN, CREATE. or
   SETATTR, no enforcement level bits should be specified.  If they are,
   the error NFS4ERR_SCTL_BADENF is returned.  For values returned by
   the server in response to GETATTR, enforcement words, containing
   exactly one compliance status bit will be returned.  When using
   storage properties as part of VERIFY or NVERIFY compliance words
   containing no compliance bits or any subset of the valid compliance
   status bits may be specified.

5.2.  Base Property Specifications

   The goal for initial inclusion in an NFS version 4 minor version is
   to define a small set of property specifications that are generally
   useful and do not require a large management infrastructure to
   implement.  The following are the three property specifications that
   fit the description.

















Noveck, et al.         Expires September 30, 2011              [Page 14]

Internet-Draft                 storage_ctl                    March 2011


    const spacenum_sc SCNUM_BASE = 1;   /* Base property space id for
                                           all properties in this
                                           group. */

    const uint32_t SCBASE_SIZE = 0;     /* Informative property for
                                           size. */
    const uint32_t SCBASE_DURATION = 1; /* Informative property for
                                           duration. */
    const uint32_t SCBASE_DEVFAIL = 2;  /* Enforceable property for
                                           a device failure limit. */
    const uint32_t SCBASE_SYSFAIL = 3;  /* Enforceable property for
                                           a system failure limit. */
    const uint32_t SCBASE_FAIL_RPO = 4; /* Enforceable property for
                                           a recovery point objective
                                           in the event of failure. */
    const uint32_t SCBASE_SFAIL_RTO = 5;/* Enforceable property for
                                           a recovery time objective
                                           in the event of system
                                           failure. */
    const uint32_t SCBASE_DLOSS_RTO = 6;/* Enforceable property for
                                           a recovery time objective
                                           in the event of data loss. */
    const uint32_t SCBASE_DISASTER_RTO = 7;/* Enforceable property for a
                                              recovery time objective in
                                              the event of disaster. */


5.2.1.  Storage Size

   The storage size is an informative property that allows the
   specification of the expected amount of storage to be needed.  It may
   be used by the server in seeing if appropriate space is available and
   in reserving space.  It is specified as a 64-bit unsigned value
   giving a quantity of storage expressed in bytes.

      typedef uint64_t propbase_size;

   This value may be different from the expected file size.  Areas not
   allocated, because of holes for example, are not included.  This
   amount of storage may not be required immediately if the file starts
   small and grows.  Any derating of specified values is purely a matter
   of server implementation choice and will typically reflect the
   ability to move data to respond to storage overcommitment.

   A value of zero is invalid and would result in the error
   NFS4ERR_SCTL_BADPARM when used in an OPEN or CREATE.  When used in
   SETATTR, it causes deletion of a previous storage size specification.




Noveck, et al.         Expires September 30, 2011              [Page 15]

Internet-Draft                 storage_ctl                    March 2011


5.2.2.  Storage Use Duration

   The storage use duration is an informative property that allows the
   specification of the amount of time that the storage is expected to
   be needed.  It may be used in assigning files to storage so that
   space conflicts are reduced.  It is specified as a 64-bit unsigned
   value giving a duration in milliseconds.

      typedef uint64_t propbase_duration;

   This allows times from 1 millisecond up to approximately 500 million
   years to be specified.  A value of zero is invalid and would result
   in the error NFS4ERR_SCTL_BADPARM when used in an OPEN or CREATE.
   When used in SETATTR, it causes deletion of a previous storage
   duration specification.

5.2.3.  Storage Device Failure Limit

   The storage device failure limit is an enforceable property that
   allows the specification of a number of disk drives (or other
   devices) that can fail simultaneously with no data loss and that
   incurs zero recovery time.  It must be the case that any set of
   devices of the specified can fail without data loss and with zero
   recovery time.

   Even though there is no recovery time, there may be a significant
   recovery period of modestly reduced performance while adaptation to
   the failure is done and until the completion of which, additional
   device failures will be considered simultaneous.

   The limit is specified as a 32-bit unsigned value giving the minimum
   count of simultaneous failures that can result in data loss to
   clients accessing the file.  Storage is assigned which either matches
   this specification or provides a greater value.  When pNFS is
   involved the specification applies to storage for the MDS and each
   DS.

      typedef uint32_t prop_dev_fail_lim;

      struct propbase_device_failure_limit {
          enforce_sc        DflEnforce;
          prop_dev_fail_lim DflLimit;
      };

   This allows values from zero to approximately 4 billion to be
   specified.  A value of zero is valid and specifies that data loss is
   tolerable in the event of single device failure. (e.g.  RAID-0)




Noveck, et al.         Expires September 30, 2011              [Page 16]

Internet-Draft                 storage_ctl                    March 2011


5.2.4.  Storage System Failure Limit

   The storage system failure limit is an enforceable property that
   allows the specification of the number of storage systems that must
   be able to fail simultaneously without complete data loss.  Storage
   is assigned which either matches this specification or provides a
   greater value.  When pNFS is involved the specification applies to
   storage for the MDS and DS's as a unit.

      typedef uint32_t prop_sys_fail_lim;

      struct propbase_system_failure_limit {
          enforce_sc        SflEnforce;
          prop_sys_fail_lim SflLimit;
      };

   This allows values from zero to approximately four billion to be
   specified.  A value of zero is valid and specifies data loss in the
   event of a single storage system failure is tolerable.

5.2.5.  Storage System Failure RPO

   The recovery point objective (RPO) is the age of files that must be
   recovered from backup storage for normal operations to resume if a
   computer, system, device, or network failure results in data loss.
   The RPO is expressed backward in time (that is, into the past) from
   the instant at which the failure occurs, and can be specified in
   seconds.  It is an important consideration in disaster recovery
   planning.

      typedef uint64_t prop_sys_fail_RPO;

      struct propbase_system_failure_RPO {
          enforce_sc        SfrpoEnforce;
          prop_sys_fail_RPO SfrpoTime;
      };

   This allows values from zero seconds to a value far beyond the age of
   the universe to be specified.  A value of zero is valid and indiactes
   that a real-time backup that reflects changes immediately as made is
   required.

5.2.6.  Storage System Failure RTO Properties

   Recovery time objective (RTO) properties specify is the maximum
   tolerable length of time that storage assigned may be unavailable in
   the event of various classes of failures.  There are three associated
   properties, each of which specifies this value for a particular class



Noveck, et al.         Expires September 30, 2011              [Page 17]

Internet-Draft                 storage_ctl                    March 2011


   of failure:

      The system failure RTO property, with the property id
      SCBASE_SFAIL_RTO, defines the recovery time objective in the event
      of failures that do not not involve data loss or data corruption.

      The data loss RTO property, with the property id SCBASE_DLOSS_RTO,
      defines the recovery time objective in the event of failures that
      do not not involve the occurrence of a disaster, defined as a
      major environmental event such as a hurricane, earthquake, or
      flood, etc.

      The system failure RTO property, with the property id
      SCBASE_DISASTER_RTO, defines the recovery time objective in the
      event of any falure including disasters.

   The actual RTO is a function of the extent to which the interruption
   disrupts normal operations and the provisions made to ameliorate this
   situation.  The desired RTO is a function of the urgency to re-
   establish operations and the consequences of failure to promptly do
   so.  It is an important consideration in recovery planning.

     typedef uint64_t propbase_sys_fail_RTO;

      struct propbase_system_failure_RTO {
          enforce_sc        SfrtoEnforce;
          prop_sys_fail_RTO SfrtoTime;
      };

   RTO values for all of these properties is specified as a 64-bit
   integer which specifies a number of microseconds.  Although sub-
   second RTO values may be difficult, the specification allows small
   values which might be useful in the future.  The maximum value is
   approximately five-hundred thousand years.

















Noveck, et al.         Expires September 30, 2011              [Page 18]

Internet-Draft                 storage_ctl                    March 2011


6.  Uses of the Attribute storage_ctl

   There are four occasions in which the storage_ctl attribute is
   referred to as part of an fattr4 when the storage_ctl mask is
   present.

   o  As an attribute specified when creating a file or similar object
      by means of an OPEN or CREATE operation, in order to specify the
      specific storage properies to control the locations on which the
      data is to be put and other associated properties.

   o  As an attribute set in a SETATTR operation to change the requested
      location properties.  Servers may or may not have the ability to
      change locations on request, but the operation structure will
      indicate whether the server has or doesn't have this ability when
      it is requested.

   o  As an attribute read in a GETATTR or READDIR operation to
      determine the currently requested storage properties and the
      degree to which they are current being complied with.

   o  As an attribute specified in VERIFY or NVERIFY to test for current
      location property compliance status.

   In addition to the above, a fattr4_storage_ctl of the of the same
   structure as storage_ctl attribute (although not within an fattr)
   also appears within the response data in the following situations.

      For the OPEN, CREATE, and SETATTR operations, when the error
      returned is NFS4ERR_SCTL_FAIL.  (See Use of storage_ctl when
      creating a file and Use of storage_ctl in SETATTR for details).

      For the response to the FETCH_SCNOTE operation, when there is a
      pending storage control note to be reported.

   For most purposes, a fattr4_storage_ctl which appears in OPEN,
   CREATE, and SETATTR requests are handled the same and a
   fattr4_storage_ctl which appears in the responses for OPEN, CREATE,
   and SETATTR are handled similarly, while the VERIFY and NVERIFY
   requests form a third similarity group.

6.1.  Use of storage_ctl when creating a file

   When the storage_ctl attribute is specified when creating a file, it
   helps decide on the location selected for the file data.  If all
   enforceable properties can be immediately satisfied, then the
   operation proceeds normally.




Noveck, et al.         Expires September 30, 2011              [Page 19]

Internet-Draft                 storage_ctl                    March 2011


   If an enforceable property specified as with the manadatory
   enforcement level cannot be satisfied then the operation fails with
   the error NFS4ERR_SCTL_FAIL.  The response contains, for the case
   NFS4ERR_SCTL_FAIL, a fattr4_storage_ctl value which consists all such
   enforceable properties which could not be satisfied.

   If there is a situation which is not as serious as the failure above,
   but still of note, then information relevant to that situation is
   stored as a pending storage control note, where it can be fetched (in
   the same COMPOUND) by the FETCH_SCNOTE operation.

   The following three classes of items are included in situations
   leading to a pending storage control note being created.

   o  An enforceable property of the advisory enforcment level which
      could not be satisfied, i.e its compliance status is indicated as
      failed.

   o  An enforceable property of the advisory enforcement level which
      could not be immediately satisfied, i.e. its compliance status is
      indicated as Complying.

   o  An enforceable property of the mandatory enforcement level which
      could not be immediately satisfied, i.e. its compliance status is
      indicated as Complying.

6.2.  Use of storage_ctl in SETATTR

   A value of the storage_ctl attribute with a structure similar to the
   OPEN case is used to change properties for an existing file.
   Existing elements properties, not changed by the storage_ctl
   attribute remain in effect.

   An enforceable property type and the same enforcement level status is
   overridden by a corresponding one in the new attributes.  To delete
   such an enforceable property element without setting a new one, an
   enforceable property with no parameter values is used.  Similarly, an
   informative property will override an existing one of the same type
   and use of the that property specification with no parameters is used
   to delete an existing informative propety specification without
   replacing it.

   Failures and notifications are indicated via the error code
   NFS4ERR_SCTL_FAILED and creation of pending storage control notes,
   just as in the case of OPEN.






Noveck, et al.         Expires September 30, 2011              [Page 20]

Internet-Draft                 storage_ctl                    March 2011


6.3.  Use of storage_ctl in GETATTR/READDIR

   When the storage_ctl attribute is requested as part of GETATTR or
   READDIR, the fattr4_storage_ctl returned within the file attributes
   reflects the current informative properties together with the
   enforceable properties and together with its current compliance
   status.

   The order of the elements need not reflect that used when the
   attribute was first set.  When enforceable properties specify a range
   of multiple possible values, the one returned in the attribute will
   reflect the value actually assigned.

6.4.  Use of storage_ctl in VERIFY/NVERIFY

   The storage_ctl attribute presented to VERIFY or NVERIFY is
   interpreted as a series of properties each of which results in a
   truth value.  When the truth value for all properties presented is
   true, VERIFY succeeds and NVERIFY fails.  Conversely when not all
   properties have that truth value, VERIFY fails and NVERIFY succeeds.

   When informative properties are present they are compared to the
   value set at OPEN, CREATE, or the last SETATTR.  If no such value had
   been previously set, the result is treated as non-matching.

   Enforceable properties are classified according to three criteria:

   o  Whether they have parameters that indicate specific values
      (With-P) or are the special values defined for that purpose for
      each parameter, which are treated as without parameters (Non-P)
      where the parameter values taken are those specified in the
      corresponding property within the file's attributes.

   o  Whether they are, an enforcement level specified (With-Enf) or not
      (Non-Enf).

   o  Whether they are together with one or more compliance level levels
      specified (With-Comp) or not (Non-Comp).

   Given the above classifications, the following sets of
   characteristics for enforceable properties in the context of
   storage_ctl for VERIFY, NVERIFY are treated as errors and should
   cause the return of the error NFS4ERR_SCTL_BAD.

   o  Non-Comp/Non-Enf/Non-P

   o  Non-Comp/Non-Enf/With-P




Noveck, et al.         Expires September 30, 2011              [Page 21]

Internet-Draft                 storage_ctl                    March 2011


   o  With-Comp/non-Enf/Non-P

   o  With-Comp/With-Enf/With-P

   Given the above classifications, the following sets of
   characteristics for enforceable properties in the context of
   storage_ctl for VERIFY, NVERIFY are handled as discussed below.

   Non-Comp/With-Enf/Non-P:  is true iff there exists an enforceable
      property containing elements of the associated enforcement status
      as part of the storage_ctl attribute of the file.

   Non-Comp/With-Enf/With-P:  is true iff the enforceable proeprty
      specified is compatible with the corresponding enforceable
      property of the associated enforcement level, i.e. if it is
      possible to satisfy both at the same time, without reference to
      whether both or either actually is satisfied.

   With-Comp/Non-Enf/With-P:  is true iff the enforceable property
      (including a set of of property specifications of the same type)
      which appear in the storage_ctl attribute passed to the op is
      consistent with the set of compliance levels (often a single level
      but sometimes two) in the specification.  That is, the actual
      compliance level must be one of the ones that is specified.

   With-CompB/With-Enf/Non-P:  is true iff the enforceable property
      designated by this specification (i.e. that being of the same type
      of specification and the same enforcement level) is consistent
      with the set of compliance levels (often a single level but
      sometimes two) in this specification.  That is, the actual
      compliance level must be one of the ones that is specified.




















Noveck, et al.         Expires September 30, 2011              [Page 22]

Internet-Draft                 storage_ctl                    March 2011


7.  The FETCH_SCNOTE Operation

7.1.  SYNOPSIS

   (cfh) -> note_pres, note_fattr

7.2.  ARGUMENT

   /* CURRENT_FH: */
   void;

7.3.  RESULT

   enum SCFres_type {
           SCFres_ABSENT = 0,
           SCFres_PRESENT = 1
   };

   union SCFresok switch (SCFres_type note_pres) {
    case FETCH_PRES:
           fattr4_storage_ctl  note_attr;

    case FETCH_ABS:
           void;
   };

   union FETCHres switch (nfsstat4 status) {
    case NFS4_OK:
           /* CURRENT_FH: opened file */
           FETCH4resok      resok4;
    default:
           void;
   };


7.4.  DESCRIPTION

   The FETCH_SCNOTE operation is used to fetch a pending storage control
   note for a specified file handle (the current file handle).  Note
   that these notes are stored according to the current file handle when
   the operation which gave rise to them was executed.  Thus it will be
   the directory on (most) OPENs, and the specific file in the event of
   SETATTR.

   This operation uses the current filehandle value to identify the
   storage control note being sought.

   The operation returns an indication of whether the note is present



Noveck, et al.         Expires September 30, 2011              [Page 23]

Internet-Draft                 storage_ctl                    March 2011


   and if it is a fattr4_storage_ctl value which consists all
   enforceable properties where there is a lack of adequate compliance
   to be noted.  The use of the the enum scnote_respval rather than a
   boolean value allows later extension.

   If the note is present, it ceases to be so once the operation is
   executed.

7.5.  IMPLEMENTATION

   Storage control note items are maintained on a per-COMPOUND-request
   basis and cease to exist when a COMPOUND fails due to completion or
   an the occurrence of an error.  This makes it desirable to place the
   FETCH_SCNOTE operation close to, generally immediately after the
   operation capable of generating the storage control note.




































Noveck, et al.         Expires September 30, 2011              [Page 24]

Internet-Draft                 storage_ctl                    March 2011


8.  Attribute Extension

8.1.  Experimental and Other Non-standardized Extensions

   In order to support development of extensions to allow control of new
   file system support attributes, extensions may be defined, each with
   their own proper space id.  The goal is to allow quick deployment of
   new features, including those that are vendor-specific at the time
   with the definitions of extensions being publicly available.

   Each such extension set should be registered with IANA.  The
   registration will include

   o  A short name (a few words) by which the extension will be known.

   o  The name or corporate identity of the owner of the extension.

   o  Data for the first version of the namespace extension, as
      described below.

   IANA will assign a space id by which the extension will be known.

   Successive versions of spaceid properties should be registered by the
   owner of the extension.  The registration should include:

   o  The namespace name and number.

   o  The namespace version number.  The version number is in the form a
      series of small (< 256) integers.  The length of the series will
      probably be restricted to something between four and six.  The
      version numbers will not be checked for order but only that they
      are unique for a given extension.

   o  A document in the form of an internet draft with information on
      the namespace elements paralleling this one.  The document will
      contain definitions and property numbers with the space id for all
      of properties within the extension.

      Successive version may add properties but may not delete them,
      clarifications to the semantics of existing properties may be made
      but substantive changes in their semantics should not be made.

      Existing properties may not be defines as invalid or mandatory-to-
      not-implement but they may be defined as incompatible with some
      set of new properties.

   The definitional document should be subject to expert review but the
   purpose of the review is to ensure that the document describes the



Noveck, et al.         Expires September 30, 2011              [Page 25]

Internet-Draft                 storage_ctl                    March 2011


   extension adequately.  It should not be rejected simply because the
   expert would do things differently or believe the specified
   properties are useful.

8.2.  Standardized Extensions

   Storage properties may be extended via a standards-track document in
   a number of ways.  Such an extension may be part of a new minor
   version, but may also be done independent of in a standards-track
   document other than for a new NFSv4 minor version.  When the
   extension occurs in a new minor version the document should make
   clear whether the additional properties are recommended (as is
   normally the case) or mandatory.

   The following forms of extension are all valid options:

      Adding additional properties to existing standardized property set
      such as PROP_BASE.

      Creating a new property set its own property set id.

      Converting a previous experimental property set to standards-track
      status based on the publication of the RFC [Need to clarify any
      possible transfer of ownership issues.]

8.3.  The storage_ext attribute

   The storage_ext attribute is a per-fs attribute which contains
   information on the storage_ctl extensions suported by the server when
   used on the associated file system.  Servers will often report the
   same value of the storage_ext attribute for all file systems, but
   client should not assume that this is the case.

      struct section_se {
         spacenum_sc   SpaceSction;    /* Section number. */
         bitmap_sc     WhichProperties;/* Supported properties. */
      };

      typedef section_se fattr4_storage_ext&lt&#65533;>;

   The storage_ext attribute consists of section_se arrays, each of
   which specify the supported properties for a specific space_id.  The
   section_se arrays should be reported in ascending numeric order of
   spacenum_sc values.







Noveck, et al.         Expires September 30, 2011              [Page 26]

Internet-Draft                 storage_ctl                    March 2011


9.  Summary

   This chapter serves a reference guide to things discussed above.  For
   a more discursive treatment, with less attention due syntax details,
   see above.

9.1.  Errors

   This proposal would involve adding the following new errors to the
   NFS version 4 minor version in which it is included.

   NFS4ERR_SCTL_BADPROP  Returned when the storage_ctl attribute
      contains properties with a space id unknown to the server, or with
      property bits whose diplacement in the bitmap corresponds to
      property numbers not known to the server as being associated with
      the current space id.

      This error is returnable by OPEN, CREATE, SETATTR, VERIFY, and
      NVERIFY.

   NFS4ERR_SCTL_BADPARM  Returned when the storage_ctl attribute
      contains parameters defined as not valid in connection with the
      current property.  This includes situations in which multiple
      properties contain values that are defined as inconsistent (as
      opposed to not being satisfiable).

      This error is returnable by OPEN, CREATE, SETATTR, VERIFY, and
      NVERIFY.

   NFS4ERR_SCTL_BADENF  Returned when the the storage_ctl attribute
      contains a enforceable property whose enforce_sc is invalid, in
      that it contain multiple enforcement level bits, contains no
      enforcement level bits, in a context in which that is not allowed
      or contains a set of compliance specification bits that is not
      appropriate in the current context.

      This error is returnable by OPEN, CREATE, SETATTR, VERIFY, and
      NVERIFY.

   NFS4ERR_SCTL_BADDATA  Returned when the storage_ctl contains a
      section_sc whose PropertyData array does not match the length of
      the properties specified in the associated WhichProperties.

      This error is returnable by OPEN, CREATE, SETATTR, VERIFY, and
      NVERIFY.






Noveck, et al.         Expires September 30, 2011              [Page 27]

Internet-Draft                 storage_ctl                    March 2011


   NFS4ERR_SCTL_FAIL  Returned when a required storage_ctl element
      cannot be satisfied.  This is as opposed to the case in which it
      is not being able to be satisfied immediately but is in the
      process of being satisfied.

      This error is returnable by OPEN, CREATE, and SETATTR only.

9.2.  Semantic constraints

   This section lists the semantic contraints on property
   specifications.  We will have situations in which the attribute will
   fully match specified XDR specification but the specification will
   not be in line with appropriate contextual constraints.  This section
   will list those constraints, in order to complement the XDR
   definition above.

   There are four categories of constraints that need to be dealt with:

   o  Whether the properties have the associated parameters specified.

   o  Whether the properties have an associated enforcement level
      specified.

   o  Whether the properties have associated compliance level(s)
      specified.

   o  Constraints that involve the validity of combinations of what are
      otherwise allowed situations with regard to the above.

   Each property specifies a particuar value which is invalid and is to
   be treated as inicateing the absence of property parameters (zero
   values, zero-length arays, etc.).  Specification of the parameters
   associated with storage properties are generally required and so
   these special value result in NFS4ERR_SCTL_BADPARM being returned.
   The only exceptions are SETATTR, for which a storage property without
   parameters serves to delete the corresponding storage propery in the
   existing attribute, and VERIFY/NVERIFY where it is allowed under some
   circumstances, to be discussed below.

   Specification of the enforcement level is generally required for
   enforceable properties.  The only exception is VERIFY/NVERIFY where
   it is allowed under some circumstances, to be discussed below.

   Specification of the compliance status for enforceable properties
   depends on the context in which the properties appears.  For OPEN,
   CREATE, and SETATTR, specification of compliance status is not
   allowed.  VERIFY/NVERIFY specification of multiple compliance status
   values is allowed, subject to the specific combination constraints



Noveck, et al.         Expires September 30, 2011              [Page 28]

Internet-Draft                 storage_ctl                    March 2011


   appropriate to VERIFY and NVERIFY as listed below.  For all other
   contexts, whether in GETATTR, READDIR, the responses in the
   NFS4ERR_SCTL_FAIL case, or in the response to the FETCH_SCNOTE
   operation, specification of compliance status is required but only a
   single compliance status must appear.

   In addition to the constraints listed above, in the case of a
   storage_ctl attribute within VERIFY/NVERIFY, the properties within
   the attribute must meet the additional constraints described in the
   section Use of storage_ctl in VERIFY/NVERIFY

   When sending responses to GETATTR, READDIR, OPEN, CREATE, and
   SETATTR, the server MUST obey these constraints.  When receiving
   OPEN, SETATTR, VERIFY, and NVERIFY requests that contain the
   storage_ctl attribute, the server MUST return the error
   NFS4ERR_SCTL_BADENF if the attribute does not follow the specified
   constraints and is otherwise valid (matching the XDR property
   deinition).

   These constraints apply to properties introduced by extensions to the
   storage_ctl attirbute unless explicitly overridden in the document
   defining the extension.  Such a document may add other contextual
   constraints that apply to the properties defined by that extension.




























Noveck, et al.         Expires September 30, 2011              [Page 29]

Internet-Draft                 storage_ctl                    March 2011


10.  Possible Future Work

   This document describes a basic framework for storage control and a
   basic set of properties.  It is a base for development of this
   feature and could have considerable additions before incorporation in
   NFSv4 an minor version.  On the other hand, the feature is intended
   to be defined with sufficient flexibility that many of these
   additions to the feature might be done as subsequent extensions,
   after the basic feature is made part of an NFSv4 minor version.

   The question of which additions are required for an initial version
   of the feature, which are best deferred to later and which proposed
   extensions don't really belong is a complex one and will be a major
   subject of the development of the feature.

   The following list, illustrates some of the possible additions that
   have had some preliminary discussion.  It is not intended to be
   exhaustive, and the examination of other additions not yet thought of
   is definitely part of the work to be done:

      Addition of other properties to those in this document, that make
      sense as a basic set of properties, both informative and
      enforceable, for an initial set to be part of an NFSv4 minor
      version.

      Mechanisms to allow a set of properties to be applied to a large
      set of files, including those that are directory-based (with
      inheritance a possible part of the mix), by bulk attribute change
      on a client-specified set of files, or by allowing the client to
      store some set of properties as a persistent object in file
      system, and allowing subsequent storage control attributes to
      reference that persistent object.

      Mechanisms to enable the client to determine possible choices (or
      ranges) for some properties within the context of a given server.
      This would be to simplify and streamline property negotation.

      Mechanisms by which a server could advertise various possible sets
      of property choices to deal with environments where there only
      exists a small set of possible choices each effecting a particular
      choice for many properties, as opposed to a case where multiple
      independent property choices are possible.









Noveck, et al.         Expires September 30, 2011              [Page 30]

Internet-Draft                 storage_ctl                    March 2011


11.  Acknowledgments

   Mike Eisler reviewed early drafts of this work and made important
   contributions in helping define the direction of the effort.

   David Black reviewed many drafts of this work and made many helpful
   suggestions that improved the quality of the result.












































Noveck, et al.         Expires September 30, 2011              [Page 31]

Internet-Draft                 storage_ctl                    March 2011


Authors' Addresses

   David Noveck
   EMC
   228 South St.
   Hopkinton, MA  01748
   US

   Phone: +1 508 249 5748
   Email: david.noveck@emc.com


   Pranoop R. Erasani
   NetApp
   48980 Oat Grass Terrace
   Fremont, CA  94539
   US

   Phone: +1 408 822 3282
   Email: pranoop@netapp.com


   Lakshmi N. Bairavasundaram
   NetApp
   475 East Java Drive
   Sunnyvale, CA  94089
   US

   Phone: +1 408 419 5616
   Email: lakshmib@netapp.com


   Peng Dai
   Vmware
   5 Cambridge Center
   Cambridge, MA  02142
   US

   Phone: +1 617 528 7592
   Email: pdai@vmware.com











Noveck, et al.         Expires September 30, 2011              [Page 32]

Internet-Draft                 storage_ctl                    March 2011


   Christos Karamonolis
   Vmware
   3401 Hillview Ave.
   Palo Alto, CA  94304
   US

   Phone: +1 650 427 2329
   Email: ckaramonolis@vmware.com











































Noveck, et al.         Expires September 30, 2011              [Page 33]

