


Domain Name System Operations Working Group                   G. Barwood
Internet-Draft                                                          
Intended status: Standards Track                             22 May 2010


                            DNS Transport
                 draft-barwood-dnsop-ds-publish-00  

Abstract

   This document describes a new resource record type that allows a
   child zone to publish the DS RRset.

Status of this Memo
  
   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on October 7, 2010.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors. All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document. Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions
   with respect to this document.







Barwood                   Expires November 2010                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                DS Publication                    May 2010

1.  Introduction

  This document defines a new resource record that may be used to
  publish the DS RRset [RFC4034] in the child zone. A new resource
  record type is needed, because the DS RR appears only on the upper
  (parental) side of a delegation.

  The mnenomic for the new resource record type is "CDS", which is
  intended to stand for "Child DS".

  The DNSSEC DS RRset for a zone is defined by the child zone but
  stored in the parent zone. After creating a new key signing key, the
  child zone needs to update the parent zone.
  
  There is currently no DNS protocol mechanism for accomplishing this.
  It is assumed that the DS RRset is transferred by some out-of-band
  mechanism.

  In particular the CDS RR MAY be used to securely automate the rollover
  of the key signing key for a zone.

2.  Definitions

  The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
  "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
  document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].

3.  Resource Record Format

  The wire and presentation format is identical to the DS record.

  However no special processing is performed by servers or clients when
  serving or resolving.

  The CDS record MUST be signed with a Key Signing Key, that is a key
  for which there is a DS record.

3.  Usage

  The CDS RRset MAY be used by the parent zone to create or update the 
  DS RRset. The parent zone MAY periodically check the child zone to see
  if the CDS RRset has changed. No notification mechanism is defined in
  this document, although a notification mechanism might be useful.

  The parent zone SHOULD authenticate [RFC4033] the CDS RRset if
  possible, using the current DS RRset. If the authentication succeeds,
  or yields Insecure, extra security checks MAY be performed. If the 
  authentication fails (the result is Bogus), extra security checks MUST
  be performed. This corresponds to a situation where the child zone has
  lost the secret key(s) for the zone, and needs to reset the parent DS
  RRset.




Barwood                   Expires November 2010                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                DS Publication                    May 2010

  If the CDS RRset does not exist, the parent MUST take no action.
  Specifically it MUST NOT delete the existing DS RRset, unless
  stringent out-of-band security checks confirm that this is required.

  To mitigate situations where a key signing key has been compromised, 
  the parent zone MAY take extra security measures, for example 
  informing ( by email ) the zone administrator of the change, 
  and delaying the acceptance of the new DS RRset for some period of
  time. However the precise out-of-band measures that a parent zone
  SHOULD take are outside the scope of this document.

4.  IANA Considerations

  IANA is requested to assign the DNS Resource Record Type code for
  the CDS record.

5.  Security considerations

  This document is entirely concerned with security considerations.

6.  Acknowledgements

  This document was created following discussion on automation of KSK
  rollover on the DNS Extensions Working Group mailing list.

  The restriction on the signing key is due to Olafur Gudmundsson.
  
7.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC4033]  Arends, R., Austein, R., Larson, M., Massey, D., and S.
              Rose, "DNS Security Introduction and Requirements", RFC
              4033, March 2005.

   [RFC4034]  Arends, R., Austein, R., Larson, M., Massey, D., and S.
              Rose, "Resource Records for the DNS Security Extensions",
              RFC 4034, March 2005.

Author's Address

   George Barwood
   33 Sandpiper Close
   Gloucester
   GL2 4LZ
   United Kingdom

   EMail: george.barwood@blueyonder.co.uk






Barwood                      Expires November 2010              [Page 3]
