


Internet Engineering Task Force                              J.P.Wang
Internet-Draft                                                Y.P.Zhu
Intended status: Informational                                U.S.T.B
Expires: June 21, 2011                              December 21, 2010


       A Novel Inter-domain Routing Algorithm in Distributed 
                  Multi-Domain Optical Network
                draft-jpwang-ccamp-alg-dis-mul-00
Abstract

   The routing problem of multi-domain optical network includes 
   intra-domain routing and inter-domain routing.Although the 
   intra-domain routing algorithm has been well studied, the 
   inter-domain routing computation in distributed multi-domain optical 
   network still presents many problems and needs further research.
   Compared to single domain, the routing computation in multi-domain 
   network needs topology abstraction.In this paper, we first have 
   full-mesh topology abstraction improved, and then present a novel 
   algorithm to calculate the inter-domain routing. By computing the 
   shortest path based on the available wavelengths, the proposed 
   algorithm improves the performance of routing provision. Simulation 
   results show that the new algorithm achieves the satisfactory
   blocking performance.
   

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with 
   the provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents 
   at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as 
   reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.
   
   This Internet-Draft will expire on June 21,  2011.




Wang&Zhu            Expires - June 21, 2011                     [Page 1]

Internet-Draft      Inter-domain routing algorithm         December 2010


Copyright Notice 
  
   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors. All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal 
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the BSD License.

   This document may contain material from IETF Documents or IETF
   Contributions published or made publicly available before November
   10, 2008.  The person(s) controlling the copyright in some of this
   material may not have granted the IETF Trust the right to allow
   modifications of such material outside the IETF Standards Process.
   Without obtaining an adequate license from the person(s) controlling
   the copyright in such materials, this document may not be modified
   outside the IETF Standards Process, and derivative works of it may
   not be created outside the IETF Standards Process, except to format
   it for publication as an RFC or to translate it into languages other
   than English.

























Wang&Zhu             Expires - June 21, 2011                   [Page 2]

Internet-Draft      Inter-domain routing algorithm         December 2010


Table of Contents

   1. Introduction...................................................4
   2. Topology abstraction...........................................4
      2.1 The improved full-mesh abstraction.........................5
   3. The novel inter-domain routing algorithm.......................6
   3.1 The step of the new algorithm.................................7
   4. Analysis of the new algorithm..................................7
   5. IANA Considerations............................................8
   6. Security Considerations........................................8
   7. Acknowledgments................................................8
   Author's Addresses................................................8


  




































Wang&Zhu                 Expires - June 21, 2011               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft           Inter-domain routing algorithm    December 2010


1.  Introduction

   With the development of traditional optical network, the distributed 
   multi-domain optical network or ASON(automatically switched optical 
   network)is becoming the best choice of next generation optical 
   network. Routing issue is a core technology of the optical network, 
   so routing algorithm is a focus of current research. In the 
   distributed multi-domain optical network, routing problem includes 
   intra-domain routing and inter-domain routing.

   Inter-domain routing problem is divided into two sub-problems: 
   topology abstraction and inter-domain routing algorithm. Topology
   abstraction is to summarize intra-domain link state 
   information and intra-domain physical topology is transformed into
   virtual topology, while inter-domain routing algorithm is to 
   calculate a path  spanning multiple domains. The specific topology 
   of each domain is invisible to other domains. Nevertheless, the 
   topology abstraction information can be exchanged among different 
   domains, so topology abstraction is used to hide internal state from
   outside users. When the path is selected, we should allocate the 
   same wavelength for all the links in the path, which is considered 
   as wavelength continuity constraint.

   Previous works have focused on the inter-domain routing problem, but
   they all consider shortest path without available wavelengths. 
   Reference defines a hierarchical approach to routing an end-to-end 
   connection that is called Multi-domain Shortest Path First(MSPF), 
   however, available wavelength is not considered here. Meanwhile, in 
   Reference, full-mesh topology abstraction scheme is utilized and 
   the K-shortest path algorithm with no consideration of wavelength is 
   adopted to compute a path. It is evident that business requests 
   spanning several domains block frequently due to wavelength 
   continuity constraint, so the previous schemes are not favorable in 
   multi-domain optical network. More importantly, the improve and 
   extension of these schemes can be achieved by combining the shortest 
   path algorithm with the number of idle wavelengths. It focus on the 
   routing algorithm computing the shortest path based on the available 
   wavelengths.

1.1.  Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].

   This document uses terms from [RFC3261].
   
2. Topology abstraction

   


Wang&Zhu               Expires - June 21, 2011                  [Page 4]
Internet-Draft         Inter-domain routing algorithm      December 2010


   In multi-domain optical network, topology abstraction summarizes 
   intra-domain link state information and intra-domain physical 
   topology is transformed into virtual topology through topology 
   abstraction. Topology abstraction serves for inter-domain rooting 
   algorithm, so as more topology information as possible is good for 
   rooting computation, but if topology abstraction scheme supply too 
   much information, the abstraction scheme algorithm will be more 
   complicate and confidentiality will be destroyed. In order to reach 
   a balance among them, we should research the topology abstraction 
   scheme depthly.

   There are three basic topology abstraction schemes [6]: simple node 
   abstraction, full-mesh abstraction and star abstraction. Simple node 
   abstraction scheme is the simplest abstraction scheme, which 
   condenses a domain into a single node without any other information. 
   In full-mesh scheme, the whole domain is abstracted into an auxiliary 
   graph, with all of the border nodes reserved. The direct links 
   between any two border nodes are remain the same, furthermore, 
   virtual links are established to connect any two border nodes having 
   no direct link in practical topology. Compared to simple node 
   abstraction, the full-mesh scheme can provide more information, which 
   is favorable for computing path but is at the cost of excessive 
   routing load. In order to obtain the trade-off between both the above 
   schemes, star abstraction scheme is also adopted. In the star scheme, 
   all of the border nodes are reserved and a new virtual node is 
   introduced into the new topology graph, besides, there is only a 
   simple virtual link between every border node and the virtual node so 
   as to reduce the routing load.
   
2.1 The improved full-mesh abstraction

  First, we propose G(V,Q)denotes the physical topology graph of an
  domain, and V is the set of all nodes, besides, Q is the set of all 
  links. Consider that the number of border nodes is N, and G(V,Q)is 
  changed into H(V1,Q1) through full-mesh topology abstraction, so V1 
  is the set of border nodes in the topology abstraction graph and 
  there are N members in collection of V1. Q1 is the set of links 
  between border nodes which include physical links and virtual links. 
  L is defined to mark a link in abstraction graph. For any link L in 
  the topology abstraction graph, we define M(L) is the cost of 
  traversing link L, and W(L) represents the number of idle wavelengths 
  of link L. If two border nodes V1 and V2 in one domain have direct 
  link in physical topology graph, the cost of traversing between them 
  is 1, that is to say, the value of M(L) of the link   connecting node 
  V1 and node V2 is 1. In summary, we define that the cost of all of the 
  physical links in abstraction graph is 1. The value of W(L)is the same 
  as the number of link L connecting V1 and V2. If two border nodes V1 




Wang&Zhu             Expires - June 21, 2011                   [Page 5]

Internet-Draft       Inter-domain routing algorithm        December 2010


  and V2 do not have direct link, we should establish virtual link to 
  connect them in topology abstraction graph. In virtual link, M(L)is 
  determined by the shortest path with available wavelength between the 
  two given nodes. First, we adopt K shortest path algorithm to compute 
  all of the paths connecting V1 and V2, and then we search for the 
  shortest path, and decide if there is any idle wavelength in the 
  shortest path. If there is any available wavelength in the shortest 
  path, the value of M(L) is the hops of the shortest path and the value 
  of W(L) is in line with that of shortest path, or else we search for 
  the second shortest path and decide whether there is any idle 
  wavelength in the second shortest path. We search in accordance with 
  above until we find the shortest path with available wavelength. The 
  value of M(L) equals the hops of the selected path and the value of 
  W(L) is determined by the number of the idle wavelengths of the 
  selected path.
   
   
3. The novel inter-domain routing algorithm

   In multi-domain optical network, routing problem is divided into two
   sub-problems: intra-domain routing and inter-domain routing. In order 
   to assign a path for business requests which span different domains, 
   we have to first compute a inter-domain loose route, and then compute 
   intra-domain rooting for every domain which the loose route  pass 
   through. Previous works have focused on the inter-domain routing 
   algorithm, but they all base on the shortest path algorithm. We know 
   that in multi-domain network the business request often block because 
   there is not any available wavelength to be assigned for the request, 
   so it is unreasonable to only consider the length of path without 
   idle wavelength in selecting loose route, in response to which, we 
   can combine the length of path with the number of available 
   wavelength when choosing loose route. In this draft, we first adopt 
   improved full-mesh abstraction to change the practical topology into 
   a topology abstraction graph, and then compute a loose route in the 
   topology abstraction graph through the novel inter-domain routing 
   algorithm. In order to select a better inter-domain routing, we use a 
   new algorithm to compute a path between source and destination domain 
   border nodes. 

   Suppose L is a link between any two nodes in topology abstraction 
   graph, P is a path from source domain egress node to destination 
   domain ingress node, and K is the collection of paths which is 
   computed by K shortest path algorithm. In addition, O represents the 
   initial number of wavelength in each link. Note that SUM is a fixed 
   path cost, with the value computed by the sum of all link cost M(L) 
   in one path.


     

  
Wang&Zhu               Expires - June 21, 2011                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft         Inter-domain routing algorithm     December 2010


3.1 The step of the new algorithm 
   The novel inter-domain routing algorithm referred processes are just 
   as the followed steps:
   Step 1: Initiate the fixed weight M(L)of every link and the number of 
           available wavelength W(L)in topology graph.
   Step 2: Decide the incoming connection request. If it is a link 
           connection request, continue to the next step. But if it is 
           link rejection request, transfer to the step 10.
   Step 3: Adopt K shortest path algorithm to compute K paths and 
           compute the figure of SUM in every path.
   Step 4: Compute the max number of available wavelength MAX in every 
           path, which equals to the minimum number of available 
           wavelength of all the links.
   Step 5: Suppose the number of wavelength of every link in initial 
           state is R.
   Step 6: Define C(P)is the total cost of a path. C(P)=L+R/MAX. If MAX 
           equals to zero, there is not any available wavelength in the 
           path. This implies that the business request will block in 
           this path because of having no idle wavelength, as a result, 
           we set the value of c(p) is infinite when MAX equals to zero.
   Step 7: Compute the value of C(P) of every path P.
   Step 8: Choose the path whose C(P)is the smallest and assign 
           wavelength for the selected optical path. If wavelength is 
           unsuccessful, try the other path whose C(P)is the smallest in 
           the remaining paths until we can assign wavelength for the
           path.
   Step 9: Update the value of W(L) and continue to step 2.
   Step 10: Remove the optical path and the occupied wavelength 
           resources, then update the figure of W(L) and turn to step 2.

4. Analysis of the new algorithm

   In the new algorithm, MAX is the max number of available wavelength 
   in a path. That is to say, the number of available wavelength in path 
   P is at most MAX or MAX is the number of idle wavelength on their 
   most congested link in a path. As expected, when L and R is fixed, 
   MAX is reversely proportional to C(P).
   In multi-domain network, if there is not identical idle wavelength, 
   the business request will block because of wavelength continuity 
   constraints. The business requests are more easily to block because 
   of continuity constraints in inter-domain than in intra-domain. The 
   path we select according to the above algorithm is an optimized one, 
   and it has more chance to gain available wavelengths. The new rooting 
   algorithm based on the improved full-mesh topology abstraction 
   scheme. Compared to the shortest path algorithm, the novel scheme 
   combines the shortest path with the number of available wavelength, 
   which is confirmed to have improved the inter-domain blocking 
   performance. As a result, the blocking probability can be reduced.
   



Wang&Zhu                Expires - June 21,  2011                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft         Inter-domain routing algorithm      December 2010


5. IANA Considerations

   This document does not have any implications for IANA.
   
   
6. Security Considerations

    The presence of the Reason header in a response does not affect the
   treatment of the response.

   Including such a header by an untrusted entity could adulterate the
   reactions of the originating entities.  E.G. sending back a cause
   value "87" can cause an announcement within the PSTN/ISDN saying that
   the call was rejected due to the Closed User Group service.

   Therefore it is RECOMMENDED to include the Reason header information
   in Responses only by trusted entities as it is described within
   [RFC3325][7]. 


7. Acknowledgments

   The research was supported by National High Technology Research and 
   Development Program of P. R. China (No.2009AA01Z217) and National 
   Natural Science Foundation Project of P. R. China(NO.60872047).
   
   
8. Normal references

  [RFC3261]  Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., Camarillo, G., Johnston,
             A., Peterson, J., Sparks, R., Handley, M., and E.
             Schooler, "SIP: Session Initiation Protocol", RFC 3261,  
             June 2002.
  [RFC4271]  Rekhter, Y., Li, T., and S. Hares, "A Border Gateway
             Protocol 4 (BGP-4)", RFC 4271, January 2006.
  [RFC4724]  Sangli, S., Chen, E., Fernando, R., Scudder, J., and Y.
             Rekhter, "Graceful Restart Mechanism for BGP", RFC 4724,
             January 2007.
  [RFC3325]  Jennings, C., Peterson, J., and M. Watson, "Private
             Extensions to the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) for
             Asserted Identity within Trusted Networks", RFC 3325,
             November 2002.

Author's Addresses

   Jianping Wang
   University of Science and Technology Beijing
   NO.30 XueYuan Road, HaiDian, Beijing  100083
   P.R China 

   Email: zhuyanping_06@163.com   

Wang&Zhu                 Expires - June 21, 2011                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft           Inter-domain routing algorithm    December 2010


        
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
                                                                                              ag                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Internet-Draft           Inter-domain routing algorithm      April 2010

