
                                                
Network Working Group                                       J.P.Wang  
INTERNET-DRAFT                                               Y.P.Zhu
Intended status: Informational                               U.S.T.B
Expires: June 21, 2011                                December 21, 2010 
                   
       EA-HD: A Novel Link State Update Mechanism for ASON
                 draft-jpwang-rtgwg-update-mech-00.txt
                   
Abstract 
                   
   When a connection request comes in a mesh optical network, the 
   routers automatically choose the suitable routing paths and 
   wavelength to it according to the network topology and link state
   information saved in its global link state database. Because some 
   of these wavelengths may be released or occupied at any time, the 
   global state database is always out of date and needed by update by 
   some an update policy. A suitable link state update policy is 
   critical, since that a high frequency update polity imposes heavy 
   burden on network, while a low frequency one would increase the 
   inaccurate of the global link state database. In this paper, we 
   propose a link state update policy, named EA-HD policy, which 
   considers two index of a link, one is the Hamming distance between 
   the local link state database and the global link state database, 
   and another is the used ratio of its wavelengths. The proposed 
   update policy gets a trade-off between the accurate of link state 
   information and its update cost. Simulation proves that our scheme 
   achieve a good performance in traffic blocking probability while 
   maintaining moderate volume of update traffic. 
                           
Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with 
   the provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 21, 2010.
               
                                         
Wang&Zhu            Expires - June 21, 2011                  [Page 1] 
Internet-Draft     Link State Update Mechanism        December  2010 
                

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.
                  
   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the BSD License.

   This document may contain material from IETF Documents or IETF
   Contributions published or made publicly available before November
   10, 2008.  The person(s) controlling the copyright in some of this
   material may not have granted the IETF Trust the right to allow
   modifications of such material outside the IETF Standards Process.
   Without obtaining an adequate license from the person(s) controlling
   the copyright in such materials, this document may not be modified
   outside the IETF Standards Process, and derivative works of it may
   not be created outside the IETF Standards Process, except to format
   it for publication as an RFC or to translate it into languages other
   than English.

               
                
               
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
             
                
Wang&Zhu              Expires - June 21, 2011                 [Page 2] 
Internet-Draft     Link State Update Mechanism         December  2010   
               
Table of Contents 
                   
   1. Terminology....................................................4
   2. Introduction...................................................4  
   3. THE ea-hd link state update mechanism..........................4 
      3.1 Trigger condition..........................................5 
      3.2 The update Algorithm ......................................5 
   4. The EA-HD update algorithm.....................................6 
   5. Analysis and conclusion........................................6 
   6. Security Considerations........................................7 
   7. IANA Considerations............................................7
   8.References......................................................7  
   Author's Addresses................................................8 



































                   
             
Wang&Zhu              Expires - June 21, 2011                 [Page 3] 
Internet-Draft     Link State Update Mechanism         December  2010 
                
                 
1.  Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].

   This document uses terms from [RFC3261][1].
                 
2. Introduction 
    
   In recent years, optical networks have great potential for better 
   utilizing the large bandwidth provide by wavelength division 
   multiplexing (WDM) technology. The introduction of control plane 
   enables the optical networks into intellective. And, as the most 
   important representative of intelligent optical networks. 
   Automatically Switched Optical Network (ASON) becomes one of the 
   important and hot studies in communication. The node of ASON is 
   composed by several modules, such the protocol module, link 
   resource manager, routing controller, connect controller, etc. 
    
   In the link resource manager of each node, there is a database 
   storing the state information of links adjacent to the node. We 
   call the database local link state database (L-LSD) in this paper. 
   In the routing controller of each node (or only each speaker node), 
   there is another database where saves the state information of all 
   the links in the network. It is named as global link state 
   database(G-LSD). We assume that each node of the network possesses 
   the G-LSD in our paper.To realize a light-path establishment in 
   ASON, link state based routing and wavelength assignment(RWA) 
   algorithms are introduced. When a connecting request comes, the RWA 
   algorithm chooses a path from source node to destination node 
   firstly. The path is composed by several links. Next, the algorithm 
   chooses a set of free wavelengths for each link according to the 
   G-LSD. At last, the link resource managers of the nodes on the path 
   commonly select an actual free and continuous wavelength to build the 
   connection on this wavelength. 
   
                   
3. THE ea-hd link state update mechanism
                   
  In the G-LSD and L-LSD, we use 1 to represent that a wavelength is 
  occupied by some a connection, and 0 to express that a wavelength is 
  free. Thus, the state of a link with N wavelength channels can be 
  denoted as an N-dimension array whose components are 0 or 1. For 
  example, if a link has four wavelength channels and the first and 
  the last wavelengths are occupied by traffic, then its state 
  information in L-LSD is 1001. If a new coming connection request 
  occupies the third wavelength of it, its state information in L-LSD 
  is changed into 1011 immediately.
  

                                            
Wang&Zhu            Expires - June 21, 2011                [Page 4] 
Internet-Draft    Link State Update Mechanism       December  2010 
                
                
  The LSI in G-LSD is similar to that in L-LSD, except that it is a 
  little outdated. There are two kinds of possible outdated states for 
  a wavelength, pseudo surplus and pseudo deficient, which lead to the 
  inaccurate of G-LSD. If a wavelength of a link is shown free in G-LDB 
  but actually has been used by some a connection request in L-LDB, it 
  is said to be pseudo-surplus. On the contrary, if a wavelength of a 
  link is occupied in G-LDB but actually has been released in L-LDB, it 
  is said to be pseudo-deficient. Still seeing the last example, if 
  the occupied information of the third wavelength is not been updated 
  in the G-LSD, there would generate a pseudo-surplus of the LSI in 
  the G-LSD. 
  
  The Hamming distance between the G-LSD and the L-LSD can better 
  reflect the change of link state than the variance of available 
  wavelengths in these two LSDs. The latter is extensive used in the 
  previous link state update policies. We show the distinct of them by 
  an example next. Assume that a link has four wavelength channels, and 
  two update policies have different triggers. The first policy touches 
  off an update when the variance of available wavelengths is greater 
  than or equal to two, and the second one choose a trigger that the 
  Hamming distance is larger than or equal to two. At first, the state 
  information of this link in the L-LDB and the G-LDB are all 1100. The 
  number of available wavelengths is an important index in update policy 
  either, because it can reflect the degree of demand of RWA algorithms 
  to the accurate of LSI. When the number of available wavelengths is 
  great, the update would not be urgent, for there are many free 
  wavelengths for RWA algorithms to choose a continuous one for all the 
  links in the path. However, when the number of available wavelengths 
  is little, the chance to find a same free wavelength for all the 
  links will be small, and the update would be very urgent. Next, we 
  expatiate upon the EA-HD update mechanism by two phases. We firstly 
  introduce the condition to trigger an update, and then describe the 
  EA-HD mechanism in detail.
  
  
3.1 Trigger condition 
                   
  Suppose that each link has N wavelength channels in total. Let A be 
  the number of available wavelengths of a link, and d be the Hamming 
  distance between its state information in L-LSD and in G-LSD. We 
  define a function, named the state-variance metric function of a 
  link, as F(d,A)=(d/N)* a^(-A/N)>=b(a>1).Assume the threshold to touch 
  off an update is b, and a is constant to adjust the effect of d and A 
  to F(d,A), respectively. 
  
     
3.2 The update Algorithm 
                   
   In ASON, routing controllers of nodes possess the G-LSD and they ask 
   
                   
               
Wang&Zhu                Expires - June 21, 2011              [Page 5] 
Internet-Draft       Link State Update Mechanism       December  2010 
                
                
   the link resource manager for the L-LSD. Hence, the update of the 
   LSI is launched by these routing controllers. 
   
   In our update policy, routing controllers record the variance of 
   free wavelengths and the Hamming distance of all its adjacent nodes. 
   When light path for a new coming connect is established, the routing 
   controllers of the nodes on the path update the value of these two 
   indexes. If the trigger condition is satisfied, the corresponding 
   routing controller will launch an update. The detailed steps of the 
   EA-HD update policy (in a node) are described as follows.
                   
   Since every request is allowed to enter the domain to search for free 
   wavelength but does not reserve any wavelength during the Path 
   process, BRP has longer connection setup time and lower blocking 
   probability compared with FRP. 
                   
                   
4. The EA-HD update algorithm
                   
   Step1: When the state of some an adjacent link changes (caused by 
          the establishment or remove of a light-path), the link 
          resource manager (LRM) of this node updates the LSI.
   Step2. LRM sends the change to the routing controller (RC).
   Step3. RC calculates the value of d and A, furthermore, the value 
          of F(d,A).
   Step4. If the formula F(d,A)>=b is satisfied, RC updates the 
          corresponding LSI in G-LSD of itself and notifies the 
          protocol module to send LSA to all other nodes. Else, go to 
          step1.
   Step5. When a node receives LSA of other nodes, its RC updates the 
          corresponding LSI in the G-LSD.
              
              
5. Analysis and conclusion

   In this draft, we propose a novel link state update mechanism for 
   ASON which considers two indexes of a link, one is the Hamming 
   distance of LSI between G-LSD and the L-LSD, and another is the 
   number of available wavelengths in the link. Exponential function 
   is quoted which can be more flexible to reflect state changes in 
   link. The proposal update policy is compared with three existing 
   mechanism. Simulations show that there are a lot of advantages of 
   our mechanism. At first, Update is effective and timely when the 
   network state changed frequent or small number of available 
   wavelengths. Secondly, our mechanism reaches trade-off between 
   network traffic loads and accuracy of LSI. Thirdly, it achieves good 
   performance in traffic block probability while maintaining moderate 
   volume of update traffic.



                                 
Wang&Zhu               Expires - June 21, 2011                 [Page 6] 
Internet-Draft       Link State Update Mechanism        December  2010 
                
                
6. Security Considerations 
                   
   The presence of the Reason header in a response does not affect the
   treatment of the response.

   Including such a header by an untrusted entity could adulterate the
   reactions of the originating entities.  E.G. sending back a cause
   value "87" can cause an announcement within the PSTN/ISDN saying that
   the call was rejected due to the Closed User Group service.

   Therefore it is RECOMMENDED to include the Reason header information
   in Responses only by trusted entities as it is described within
   [RFC3325][7]. 
   
   
7. IANA Considerations

   This document does not have any implications for IANA.
   
   
8.References 
                                    
   [1] Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., Camarillo, G., Johnston,
      A., Peterson, J., Sparks, R., Handley, M., and E.
      Schooler, "SIP: Session Initiation Protocol", RFC 3261, June 2002.
    
   [2] BERGER L. RFC3473, Generalized multi-protocol label switching 
      signaling resource reservation protocol-traffic engineering (RSVP-
      TE) Extensions[S]. 2003. 
                 
   [3] Jennings, C., Peterson, J., and M. Watson, "Private
      Extensions to the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) for
      Asserted Identity within Trusted Networks", RFC 3325,
      November 2002.
      
                                      
Wang&Zhu                  Expires -June 21, 2011              [Page 7] 
Internet-Draft       Link State Update Mechanism      December  2010 
                
                
Authors' Addresses

   Jianping Wang
   University of Science and Technology Beijing
   NO.30 XueYuan Road, HaiDian, Beijing  100083
   P.R China 

   Email: zhuyanping_06@163.com
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
                   

                
Wang&Zhu                Expires - June 21, 2011               [Page 8] 
Internet-Draft       Link State Update Mechanism       December  2010 
                
                
                   

                   
                   

                   

                   


                
                

                                                                                        
  
                  
   


                  





                  
                
