


ALTO                                                           S. Kiesel
Internet-Draft                                   University of Stuttgart
Intended status: Standards Track                                R. Penno
Expires: June 21, 2013                                     Cisco Systems
                                                       December 18, 2012


          ALTO Server Discovery based on well-known IP Address
                 draft-kiesel-alto-ip-based-srv-disc-00

Abstract

   The goal of Application-Layer Traffic Optimization (ALTO) is to
   provide guidance to applications that have to select one or several
   hosts from a set of candidates capable of providing a desired
   resource.  ALTO is realized by a client-server protocol.

   This document establishes a well-known IP address for the ALTO
   service and specifies how ALTO clients embedded in the resource
   consumer can use it to access the ALTO service.































Kiesel & Penno            Expires June 21, 2013                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft       IP-based ALTO Server Discovery        December 2012


Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on June 21, 2013.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2012 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.














Kiesel & Penno            Expires June 21, 2013                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft       IP-based ALTO Server Discovery        December 2012


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.  ALTO Server Discovery based on well-known IP Address . . . . .  5
     2.1.  Well-Known ALTO Server Discovery IP Address (WkAsdIPa) . .  5
     2.2.  Well-Known ALTO Server Discovery URIs (WkAsdURI) . . . . .  5
     2.3.  ALTO Discovery Client behavior . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     2.4.  ALTO Discovery Server behavior . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   3.  Deployment Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   4.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     4.1.  Registration of IPv4 Special Purpose Address . . . . . . .  8
     4.2.  Registration of IPv6 Special Purpose Address . . . . . . .  9
   5.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   6.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     6.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     6.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14


































Kiesel & Penno            Expires June 21, 2013                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft       IP-based ALTO Server Discovery        December 2012


1.  Introduction

   The goal of Application-Layer Traffic Optimization (ALTO) is to
   provide guidance to applications that have to select one or several
   hosts from a set of candidates capable of providing a desired
   resource [RFC5693].  ALTO is realized by a client-server protocol,
   see requirement AR-1 in [RFC6708].  An HTTP based ALTO client
   protocol is specified in [I-D.ietf-alto-protocol].

   Before an ALTO client can ask for guidance it needs to discover one
   or more ALTO servers that can provide suitable guidance.  Several
   algorithms have been specified that produce a suitable HTTP URI for a
   given ALTO client (i.e., the URI may vary for different clients or
   different points of network attachment, etc.).  These approaches are
   based on user input or DHCP [I-D.ietf-alto-server-discovery], a
   "reverse DNS" (PTR) lookup [I-D.kist-alto-3pdisc], or redirection
   within the application protocol [I-D.kiesel-alto-alto4alto].
   However, each of this approaches has technical or operational issues
   that will hinder the fast deployment of ALTO.

   This document follows a different approach: it establishes a well-
   known address for the ALTO service (TBD: this approach could easily
   be generalized in order to discover other services as well.  But this
   is for further study).  All ALTO clients seeking ALTO guidance are
   expected to send requests to this address.  It is then the duty of
   "the network" to direct the query to a suitable server.  This
   (re-)directing could be done on several layers, e.g., by resolving a
   well-known DNS domain name to different IP addresses (DNS split
   horizon), or by routing IP packets with the well-known IP address to
   different servers.  This document follows the second option, as ALTO
   is closely related to IP routing and routing costs.

   This document specifies a procedure that can be used if the ALTO
   client is embedded in the resource consumer.  In other words, this
   document tries to meet requirement AR-32 in [RFC6708] while AR-33 is
   out of scope.  Note that AR-20 mandates that "an ALTO client protocol
   must be designed in a way that the ALTO service can be provided by an
   entity that is not the operator of the underlying IP network."
   Though not violating said requirement, the procedure specified here
   is not helpful to fulfill it.

   A more detailed discussion of various options where to place the
   functional entities comprising the overall ALTO architecture can be
   found in [I-D.ietf-alto-deployments].

   Comments and discussions about this memo should be directed to the
   ALTO working group: alto@ietf.org.




Kiesel & Penno            Expires June 21, 2013                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft       IP-based ALTO Server Discovery        December 2012


2.  ALTO Server Discovery based on well-known IP Address

2.1.  Well-Known ALTO Server Discovery IP Address (WkAsdIPa)

   IANA is requested to register a single IPv4 address 192.0.0.X (TBD)
   and a single IPv6 address 2001::XXXX (TBD) within the respective
   Special Purpose Address Registries as the well-known IP anycast
   addresses for the ALTO service.  These addresses are called WkAsdIPa
   (well-known ALTO server discovery IP address(es)) in this document.

2.2.  Well-Known ALTO Server Discovery URIs (WkAsdURI)

   The Well-Known ALTO Server Discovery URIs (WkAsdURI) are formed using
   the HTTP or HTTPS protocol identifier, the WkAsdIPa in their literal
   forms (for literal IPv6 addresses in URIs see [RFC2732]), and a
   constant suffix.  That is, there are four WkAsdURIs (TBD: replace XXX
   with real value assigned by IANA):

      http://192.0.0.X/alto

      https://192.0.0.X/alto

      http://[2001::XXXX]/alto

      https://[2001::XXXX]/alto

2.3.  ALTO Discovery Client behavior

   ALTO Clients that need to discover an ALTO server use the HTTP GET
   method [RFC2616] to access one WkAsdURI, e.g.  GET
   http://192.0.0.X/alto .  They MUST be prepared to receive an HTTP 307
   temporary redirect to the ALTO server's Information Resource
   Directory URI (Sec. 6.7 of [I-D.ietf-alto-protocol]).

2.4.  ALTO Discovery Server behavior

   ALTO discovery servers MUST listen on the WkAsdIPa on the HTTP and
   HTTPS ports for incoming HTTP(S) requests.  They MUST answer GET
   requests to WkAsdURI using the 307 (Temporary Redirect) status code
   and redirect to an ALTO server's Information Resource Directory URI.

   The ALTO discovery server MAY consider the client's address and other
   information when generating the reply, in order to redirect to
   different ALTO servers depending on the client's identity or location
   within the network topology.

   The Information Resource Directory itself MUST NOT reside on a
   WkAsdIPa, and it MUST not reside on an URI that resolves via DNS to a



Kiesel & Penno            Expires June 21, 2013                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft       IP-based ALTO Server Discovery        December 2012


   WkAsdIPa.  After issuing the 307 status code ALTO discovery serves
   MUST close the HTTP(S) connection.

   Rationale for the requirements in the previous paragraph: The goal is
   to keep the TCP connection to the WkAsdIPa as short as possible.
   When using anycast routing, IP packets belonging to an established
   TCP connection could be diverted to another ALTO discovery server due
   to state changes in the routing protocol or due to scheduled
   maintenance.  Keeping the connection duration as short as possible
   reduces the risk of stalled or aborted connections.  A UDP based
   lookup using one query and one reply packet would further reduce that
   risk.  However, there seems not to be a well-standardized candidate
   protocol and studies have shown that short-lived TCP connections work
   well enough with anycast routing (http://www.nanog.org/meetings/
   nanog37/presentations/matt.levine.pdf).

   TBD: do we need some URI such as
   http://192.0.0.X/discovery-server-identity in order to be able to
   identify the (misbehaving) discovery server that currently serves us?

   TBD: how should the ALTO discovery server handle GET requests to
   other URIs or other HTTP methods?

   TBD: should the discovery server always redirect http requests to the
   http URI of the information resource Directory and redirect https
   always to https?  Or are there other reasonable scenarios?

























Kiesel & Penno            Expires June 21, 2013                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft       IP-based ALTO Server Discovery        December 2012


3.  Deployment Considerations

   Network operators have to install one or more ALTO discovery servers
   as specified above.  Depending on the the network deployment scenario
   they may use IP routing tables, HTTP proxies with URI rewriting, or
   other suitable mechanisms to direct GET-requests for a WkAsdURI to
   one of these servers.

   [TBD: explain in more detail] This works fine even with cascaded
   access routers with NATs.  After each router hop the operator may
   decide whether to handle the discovery requests, e.g., using a static
   routing table entry, or whether let them flow "automatically" towards
   the internet backbones using the default routing table entry.

   TBD: what happens if an operator does not deploy these scheme?
   Requests could be dropped at administrative borders, or there could
   be one or several "public" default discovery servers.

   [TBD: explain in more detail] The advantage of this scheme is that it
   does not need support in home gateways, which would harm quick
   deployment.  This scheme also doesn't need new interfaces between the
   operating system and applications, e.g., for passing DHCP options
   from the operating system to the application.




























Kiesel & Penno            Expires June 21, 2013                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft       IP-based ALTO Server Discovery        December 2012


4.  IANA Considerations

4.1.  Registration of IPv4 Special Purpose Address

   IANA is requested to register a single IPv4 address in the IANA IPv4
   Special Purpose Address Registry [RFC5736].

   [RFC5736] itemizes some information to be recorded for all
   designations:

      1.  The designated address prefix.

      Prefix: TBD by IANA.  Prefix length: /32

      2.  The RFC that called for the IANA address designation.

      This document.

      3.  The date the designation was made.

      TBD.

      4.  The date the use designation is to be terminated (if specified
      as a limited-use designation).

      Unlimited.  No termination date.

      5.  The nature of the purpose of the designated address (e.g.,
      unicast experiment or protocol service anycast).

      protocol service anycast.

      6.  For experimental unicast applications and otherwise as
      appropriate, the registry will also identify the entity and
      related contact details to whom the address designation has been
      made.

      N/A.

      7.  The registry will also note, for each designation, the
      intended routing scope of the address, indicating whether the
      address is intended to be routable only in scoped, local, or
      private contexts, or whether the address prefix is intended to be
      routed globally.







Kiesel & Penno            Expires June 21, 2013                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft       IP-based ALTO Server Discovery        December 2012


      Typically used within a network operator's network domain, but in
      principle globally routable.

      8.  The date in the IANA registry is the date of the IANA action,
      i.e., the day IANA records the allocation.

      TBD.

4.2.  Registration of IPv6 Special Purpose Address

   IANA is requested to register a single IPv6 address in the IANA IPv6
   Special Purpose Address Block [RFC4773].

   [RFC4773] itemizes some information to be recorded for all
   designations:

      1.  The designated address prefix.

      Prefix: TBD by IANA.  Prefix length: /128

      2.  The RFC that called for the IANA address designation.

      This document.

      3.  The date the designation was made.

      TBD.

      4.  The date the use designation is to be terminated (if specified
      as a limited-use designation).

      Unlimited.  No termination date.

      5.  The nature of the purpose of the designated address (e.g.,
      unicast experiment or protocol service anycast).

      protocol service anycast.

      6.  For experimental unicast applications and otherwise as
      appropriate, the registry will also identify the entity and
      related contact details to whom the address designation has been
      made.

      N/A.







Kiesel & Penno            Expires June 21, 2013                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft       IP-based ALTO Server Discovery        December 2012


      7.  The registry will also note, for each designation, the
      intended routing scope of the address, indicating whether the
      address is intended to be routable only in scoped, local, or
      private contexts, or whether the address prefix is intended to be
      routed globally.

      Typically used within a network operator's network domain, but in
      principle globally routable.

      8.  The date in the IANA registry is the date of the IANA action,
      i.e., the day IANA records the allocation.

      TBD.






































Kiesel & Penno            Expires June 21, 2013                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft       IP-based ALTO Server Discovery        December 2012


5.  Security Considerations

   TBD

   Issue: how to deal with TLS certificates for HTTPS?

   TBD: rules for filtering route at administrative boundaries












































Kiesel & Penno            Expires June 21, 2013                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft       IP-based ALTO Server Discovery        December 2012


6.  References

6.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC2616]  Fielding, R., Gettys, J., Mogul, J., Frystyk, H.,
              Masinter, L., Leach, P., and T. Berners-Lee, "Hypertext
              Transfer Protocol -- HTTP/1.1", RFC 2616, June 1999.

   [RFC2732]  Hinden, R., Carpenter, B., and L. Masinter, "Format for
              Literal IPv6 Addresses in URL's", RFC 2732, December 1999.

   [RFC4773]  Huston, G., "Administration of the IANA Special Purpose
              IPv6 Address Block", RFC 4773, December 2006.

   [RFC5736]  Huston, G., Cotton, M., and L. Vegoda, "IANA IPv4 Special
              Purpose Address Registry", RFC 5736, January 2010.

6.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.ietf-alto-deployments]
              Stiemerling, M. and S. Kiesel, "ALTO Deployment
              Considerations", draft-ietf-alto-deployments-03 (work in
              progress), November 2011.

   [I-D.ietf-alto-protocol]
              Alimi, R., Penno, R., and Y. Yang, "ALTO Protocol",
              draft-ietf-alto-protocol-13 (work in progress),
              September 2012.

   [I-D.ietf-alto-server-discovery]
              Kiesel, S., Stiemerling, M., Schwan, N., Scharf, M., and
              S. Yongchao, "ALTO Server Discovery",
              draft-ietf-alto-server-discovery-06 (work in progress),
              November 2012.

   [I-D.kiesel-alto-alto4alto]
              Kiesel, S., "Using ALTO for ALTO server selection",
              draft-kiesel-alto-alto4alto-00 (work in progress),
              July 2010.

   [I-D.kist-alto-3pdisc]
              Kiesel, S. and M. Stiemerling, "Third-Party ALTO Server
              Discovery (3pdisc)", draft-kist-alto-3pdisc-01 (work in
              progress), October 2012.




Kiesel & Penno            Expires June 21, 2013                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft       IP-based ALTO Server Discovery        December 2012


   [RFC5693]  Seedorf, J. and E. Burger, "Application-Layer Traffic
              Optimization (ALTO) Problem Statement", RFC 5693,
              October 2009.

   [RFC6708]  Kiesel, S., Previdi, S., Stiemerling, M., Woundy, R., and
              Y. Yang, "Application-Layer Traffic Optimization (ALTO)
              Requirements", RFC 6708, September 2012.












































Kiesel & Penno            Expires June 21, 2013                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft       IP-based ALTO Server Discovery        December 2012


Authors' Addresses

   Sebastian Kiesel
   University of Stuttgart Computing Center
   Allmandring 30
   Stuttgart  70550
   Germany

   Email: ietf-alto@skiesel.de
   URI:   http://www.rus.uni-stuttgart.de/nks/


   Reinaldo Penno
   Cisco Systems
   170 West Tasman Dr
   San Jose  CA
   USA

   Email: repenno@cisco.com
































Kiesel & Penno            Expires June 21, 2013                [Page 14]

