Internet Draft                                        K. Malbrain
Intended status: Informational               Petz Enterprises LLC
Expires: December 31, 2013                     September 17, 2013


     Problem Statement: Deployment of TLS Strong Authentication
            draft-malbrain-tls-strong-authentication-00


Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   This document may contain material from IETF Documents or IETF
   Contributions published or made publicly available before
   November 10, 2008. The person(s) controlling the copyright in
   some of this material may not have granted the IETF Trust the
   right to allow modifications of such material outside the IETF
   Standards Process.  Without obtaining an adequate license from
   the person(s) controlling the copyright in such materials,
   this document may not be modified outside the IETF Standards
   Process, and derivative works of it may not be created outside
   the IETF Standards Process, except to format it for
   publication as an RFC or to translate it into languages other
   than English.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet
   Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working
   groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute working
   documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other
   documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-
   Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than as
   "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed
   at http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html

   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 31, 2013.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as
   the document authors. All rights reserved.



Malbrain              Expires December 31, 2013         [Page 1]

Internet-Draft            TLS Authentication       September 2013


This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-
info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.  Please
review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights and
restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components extracted
from this document must include Simplified BSD License text as
described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided
without warranty as described in the Simplified BSD License.

Abstract

   The security provided by authenticated TLS connection between
   clients and servers should protect both parties from "Man-in-
   the-Middle" (MITM) attacks.  Clients should be authenticating
   that the server they are connected to is the server they
   requested, and servers that act as client agents need to
   authenticate that the connection is directly to their client.

   An extension to the Domain Name System (DNS), The DNS-Based
   Authentication of Named Entities (DANE) (RFC 6698), allows TLS
   servers to publish their public certificates for use by TLS
   clients to authenticate the server connection.

Table of Contents

   An extension to the Domain Name System (DNS), The DNS-Based
   Authentication of Named Entities (DANE) (RFC 6698), allows TLS
   servers to publish their public certificates for use by TLS
   clients to authenticate the server connection................2
   1. Introduction..............................................3
   2. The Global directory of servers' public keys (DANE).......3
   3. TLS authentication of clients by servers..................3
   4. MITM and Login Hacker attacks are precluded on strongly
   authenticated TLS connections................................4
   5. Why this is not working as designed to obviate attacks and
   what can be done about the current state of affairs..........4
   5.1. Browser vendors don't like the DANE protocol because it
      requires an additional DNS request to obtain both the
      Domain IP address and public certificate for the DNS Server4
   5.2. The average internet user doesn't have a signed public
      certificate and private key pair signed by a CA...........5
   5.3. Server software doesn't ask for user certificates during
      TLS negotiations..........................................5
   6. References................................................5
   6.1. Normative References ...................................5
   7. Acknowledgments...........................................5



Malbrain              Expires December 17, 2013         [Page 2]

Internet-Draft            TLS Authentication       September 2013


  1. Introduction

   TLS strong authentication by clients of their servers relies
   on comparison by the client of public certificates
   authenticated by TLS session negotiations [RFC 5246 Appendix
   F] with a trusted copy of the certificate.  DANE is a database
   of public key certificates published by the Domain Name owners
   in the DNS database, and made available by appropriate DNS
   queries.

   On the server side there is currently only client certificate
   signing by Certificate Authorities (CA) under current TLS
   strong authentication of clients by servers [RFC 5246 Appendix
   D]. Few servers demand authentication because of the lack of
   signed client certificates.

  2. The Global directory of servers' public keys (DANE)

   A network of DNS servers stores and makes available via query
   the public key certificates and IP address submitted and
   maintained by their Domain Owners.

   Whenever a client application needs an authenticated and
   secure TLS connection into a Domain, DNS supplies the Domain's
   IP address and public certificate.

  3. TLS authentication of clients by servers

   At the end of TLS session negotiation, the TLS implementation
   optionally makes available the client's public certificate if
   requested during TLS negotiations.  This currently must be a
   certificate signed by one of the CA and a hash of the
   certificate could be used by the server to authenticate the
   connection to an established client that the server recognizes
   from previous connections. Otherwise, it is up to the server
   and client to authenticate the certificate with a non-standard
   challenge exchange.

   If the server desires strong authentication and is open to
   connections from new clients, it should save a hash of the
   client certificate as part of the account data for
   authentication in future client logins.

   Unfortunately, there is no standard challenge/response by the
   server of the client's public and private key in the current
   TLS version 1.2. which is needed to use self-signed
   certificates.


Malbrain              Expires December 17, 2013         [Page 3]

Internet-Draft            TLS Authentication       September 2013


  4. MITM and Login Hacker attacks are precluded on strongly
     authenticated TLS connections

   Making use of the public keys from the server certificates,
   TLS strong authentication includes a challenge that the
   certificate presenter holds the private key for the public
   certificate.  A MITM attacker inserts a middle point between
   the client and the server under a forged bogus certificate
   provided to the client during TLS session negotiations.  Since
   there is a reliable source of server's public certificates
   available through DANE, it is now possible for the client to
   recognize the forged certificate used by the bogus connection
   by comparison with the server certificate registered for the
   Domain Name with DNS.

   Likewise the server could utilize a hash of the client's
   public certificate to recognize connections to previously
   established accounts prior to demanding the account name and
   password.

  5. Why this is not working as designed to obviate attacks and
     what can be done about the current state of affairs

   The ability by TLS to perform for strong authentication by
   clients of server certificates during TLS negotiations is
   widely deployed. DANE provides the capability to post and
   retrieve IP addresses and public certificates for Domain Names
   in the DNS system. Servers could take the extra step to
   authenticate client certificates.

  5.1. Browser vendors don't like the DANE protocol because it
       requires an additional DNS request to obtain both the
       Domain IP address and public certificate for the DNS
       Server

   DNS requests and their response are normally made using a
   single UDP packet.  The size of the packet is limited by the
   DNS protocol to 512 bytes.

   Either by utilizing larger packet sizes, up to 65536 bytes in
   IPv4, or by utilizing tcp connections, along with an ability
   to request and return both the Domain Name IP address and
   public certificate in a single request could solve this
   problem.





Malbrain              Expires December 17, 2013         [Page 4]

Internet-Draft            TLS Authentication       September 2013


  5.2. The average internet user doesn't have a signed public
       certificate and private key pair signed by a CA

   Certificate generating software is freely available. Browser
   vendors could incorporate self-signed public/private key
   certificates on demand. The TLS server authentication of the
   client could be based on an additional challenge/response
   message exchange.

  5.3. Server software doesn't ask for user certificates during
       TLS negotiations

   Server operators need to exercise due diligence in securing
   client connections beyond the traditional login account and
   password to guarantee that private information is not being
   revealed to third parties. Storing and comparing on each
   connection the hash of the user's public certificate for each
   server account would provide another layer of security for
   the internet.

  6. References

  6.1. Normative References

   [RFC6698] Hoffman P. and Schlyter, J., "The DNS-Based
             Authentication of Named Entities (DANE)", RFC 6698,
             August 2012.

   [RFC5246] Dierks T. and Rescorla, E., "The Transport Layer
             Security (TLS) Protocol Version 1.2", RFC 5246,
             August 2008.

  7. Acknowledgments

   This document was prepared using 2-Word-v2.0.template.dot.

   Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as
   authors of the code. All rights reserved.

   Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or
   without modification, is permitted pursuant to, and subject to
   the license terms contained in, the Simplified BSD License set
   forth in Section 4.c of the IETF Trust's Legal Provisions
   Relating to IETF Documents (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-
   info).




Malbrain              Expires December 17, 2013         [Page 5]

Internet-Draft            TLS Authentication       September 2013


   Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as
   authors of the code. All rights reserved.

   Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or
   without modification, is permitted pursuant to, and subject to
   the license terms contained in, the Simplified BSD License set
   forth in Section 4.c of the IETF Trust's Legal Provisions
   Relating to IETF Documents (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-
   info).

Author's Address

   Karl Malbrain
   Petz Enterprises, LLC
   7575 W Linne Rd
   Tracy, CA 95377

   Email: Malbrain at Yahoo dot com































Malbrain              Expires December 17, 2013         [Page 6]

