


Network Working Group                                              X. He
Internet-Draft                                                     YC.Ma
Intended status: Informational              Hitachi (China) Research and
Expires: April 24, 2012                          Development Corporation
                                                                   Z.Cao
                                                            China Mobile
                                                        October 22, 2011

                    Energy Aware Proxy Discovery for CoAP 
                     draft-he-core-energy-aware-pd-00.txt

Abstract

   CoRE defines a mechanism for resource discovery based on Web linking 
   with discovery, registration,modification, and other procedures. But
   energy efficiency is very important for resource constrained devices.
   This specification shows an efficient method for CoAP proxy finding 
   the resource from end-points by reducing multicast messages.  

   The current version -00 of this document is just an initial draft 
   that is intended to spark discussion.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 11, 2012.

Copyright Notice

   

      
   
He, et al.                  Expires April 11, 2012              [Page 1]

Internet-Draft            Proxy Discovery for CoAP              Oct 2011


   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.
   
   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the BSD License.

   This document may contain material from IETF Documents or IETF
   Contributions published or made publicly available before November
   10, 2008.  The person(s) controlling the copyright in some of this
   material may not have granted the IETF Trust the right to allow
   modifications of such material outside the IETF Standards Process.
   Without obtaining an adequate license from the person(s) controlling
   the copyright in such materials, this document may not be modified
   outside the IETF Standards Process, and derivative works of it may
   not be created outside the IETF Standards Process, except to format
   it for publication as an RFC or to translate it into languages other
   than English.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Resource discovery analysis. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Energy aware proxy discovery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     3.1.  Reduced Protocol Operations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     3.2.  Example                . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   4.  IANA Consideration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   5.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   6.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .7
  















He, et al.                  Expires April 11, 2012              [Page 2]

Internet-Draft            Proxy Discovery for CoAP              Oct 2011

1.  Introduction

   The Constrained RESTful Environments (CoRE) working group aims at 
   realizing the REST architecture in a suitable form for the most
   constrained nodes and networks.  CoRE is aimed at machine-to-machine 
   (M2M) applications such as smart energy and building automation 
   [I-D.shelby-core-coap-req]. As being the main work of CORE,CoAP 
   defined a proxy mechanism for CoAP end-point, that proxy can be 
   tasked by CoAP clients to perform requests on their behalf
   [I-D.ietf-core-coap]. 
   
   Since in many M2M scenarios, direct discovery of resources is not 
   practical due to sleeping nodes, disperse networks, or networks where
   multicast traffic is inefficient.  These problems can be solved by 
   employing an entity called a Resource Directory (RD), which hosts 
   descriptions of resources held on other servers, allowing lookups to 
   be performed for those resources[I-D.shelby-core-resource-directory].

   The proxy mechanism should support this RD function in resource 
   constrained environments. There are several methods to discovery 
   proxy by a CoAP end-point, including assuming a default location 
   (e.g. on an Edge Router in a LoWPAN), by assigning an anycast address
   to the proxy, using DHCP, or using the CoRE Link Format. While 
   reducing energy consumption is essential for battery operated nodes 
   in some devices, which is one of the most important work in M2M 
   communication. Node's energy usage depends on network messages it has
   to receive and or respond. Thus the discovery procedure should be 
   optimized with energy aware consideration. 
   
   
   
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].


















He, et al.                  Expires April 11, 2012              [Page 3]

Internet-Draft            Proxy Discovery for CoAP              Oct 2011

2.  Resource discovery analysis

   As mentioned in other drafts, resource discovery is performed by 
   sending either a multicast or unicast GET request to 
   /.well-known/core and including a Resource Type (rt) parameter 
   [I-D.ietf-core-link-format] with the value "core-rd" in the query 
   string.  Upon success, the response will contain a payload with a 
   link format entry for each RD discovered, with the URL indicating
   the root resource of the RD. 

   After discovering the location of an RD, an end-point MAY register
   its resources to the RD's registration interface.  This interface
   accepts a POST from an end-point containing the list of resources to
   be added to the directory as the message payload in the CoRE Link
   Format along with query string parameters indicating the name of the
   end-point, an optional node identifier and the lifetime of the
   registration. Upon success, the response will be 2.01 "Created" 
   [I-D.shelby-core-resource-directory]. 
   
   That means once resource discovery needs twice communication process 
   between end-point and proxy. For energy saving point of view, this 
   procedure should be optimized. Another draft indicates more efficient
   method.A CoAP server that wants to make itself discoverable sends a 
   POST request to the default discovery URI of any Candidate CoAP 
   Server Discovery Server [I-D.bormann-core-simple-server-discovery]. 
   
   This draft shows more details about energy aware proxy discovery 
   mechanism for CoAP. 
   
   

   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
He, et al.                   Expires April 11, 2012             [Page 4]

Internet-Draft            Proxy Discovery for CoAP              Oct 2011
   
3.  Energy aware proxy discovery

3.1.  Reduced Protocol Operations

   The Energy aware proxy reduces discovery and registration processes 
   into one.
   
   The end-point acting as a server will use server IP address, the CoAP
   default port[I-D.ietf-core-coap], and the absolute path 
   "/.well-known/core"[I-D.ietf-core-link-format] to build its POST 
   request. And this request will be send to its Neighbor by unicast 
   (as using 6LOWPAN or IPv6) or to a multicast address. 
   
   The POST request is a link-format message,  which indicates the 
   service list that requesting server wants to make known to the proxy.
      
   End-point resources in the proxy are kept active for the period
   also indicated by the lifetime parameter.  But unless the end-point 
   needs to refreshing the data with update message, the data will be 
   kept in this lifetime. Then the data will be delete automatically as
   expired. 
   
   The discovery interface is specified as follows:

   Interaction:  EP -> Proxy

   Path:  /.well-known/core 

   Method:  POST

   Content-Type:  application/link-format

   Parameters:

      Lifetime (lt):  Lifetime of the registration in seconds.  Range of
         60-4294967295.  If no lifetime is included, the response will 
         be Failure:  4.00 "Bad Request" .

      Host (h):  The host identifier or name of the registering node.
         The maximum length of this parameter is 63 octets.  This
         parameter is combined with the Instance parameter (if any) to
         form the end-point name.  If not included, the proxy MUST 
         generate a unique Host name on behalf of the node.

      Instance (ins):  The instance of the end-point on this host, if
         there are multiple.  The maximum length of this parameter is 63
         octets.

      Type (rt):  The semantic type of end-point.  The maximum length of
         this parameter is 63 octets.
         

He, et al.                  Expires April 11, 2012              [Page 5]

Internet-Draft            Proxy Discovery for CoAP              Oct 2011

   Success:  2.01 "Created".  The Location header of the new resource
      entry for the end-point could be e.g. in the form /{rd-base}/
      {end-point name}

   Failure:  4.00 "Bad Request".  Malformed request.

   Failure:  5.03 "Service Unavailable".  Service could not perform the
      operation.
      
      
      
      
3.2 Example

   The following example shows an end-point with the name "node1" POST 
   temperature resource to a proxy using this interface.


    End-point                                            Neighbor
        |                                              (as a proxy)
        | --- POST /.well-known/core?rt=core-rd------->   |
        |                                                 |
        |                                                 |
        | <-- 2.01 Created Location: /rd/node1 ---------  |
        |                                                 |
        
        
   Req: POST coap://[ff02::1]/.well-known/core?rt=core-rd
   Payload:
   </sensors/temp>;ct=41;rt="TemperatureC";if="sensor",
   
   Res: 2.01 Created
   Location: /rd/node1
   







4.  Security Considerations

   TBD.


5.  IANA Considerations

   This document does not require any IANA actions.



He, et al.                  Expires April 11, 2012              [Page 6]

Internet-Draft            Proxy Discovery for CoAP              Oct 2011

6.  Normative References

   [I-D.shelby-core-coap-req]
              Shelby, Z., Stuber, M., Sturek, D., Frank, B., and R.
              Kelsey, "CoAP Requirements and Features",
              draft-shelby-core-coap-req-01 (work in progress),
              April 2010.
            
   [I-D.ietf-core-coap]
              Shelby, Z., Hartke, K., Bormann, C., and B. Frank,
              "Constrained Application Protocol (CoAP)",
              draft-ietf-core-coap-06 , May 2011.
              
   [I-D.ietf-core-link-format]
              Shelby, Z., "CoRE Link Format",
              draft-ietf-core-link-format-07,July 2011.
            
   [I-D.bormann-core-simple-server-discovery]
              Bormann, C.,"CoRE Simple Server Discovery"
              draft-bormann-core-simple-server-discovery-00, June, 2011
              
   [I-D.shelby-core-resource-directory]
              Shelby, Z.,Krco, S., "CoRE Resource Directory"
              draft-shelby-core-resource-directory-01, September, 2011




Authors' Addresses


   Xuan He
   Yuanchen Ma
   Hitachi R&D China
   301 of North Tower C, Raycom
   @ Kexuyuan Nanlu, Haidian District
   Beijing 100190
   China

   Email: 
   xhe@hitachi.cn
   ycma@hitachi.cn

   Zhen Cao
   China Mobile
   Unit2, 28 Xuanwumenxi Ave,Xuanwu District
   Beijing 100053
   China

   Email: zehn.cao@gmail.com


He, et al.                  Expires April 11, 2012              [Page 7]