DNS Operations                     Root Server System Advisory Committee
Internet-Draft                                             B.Manning Ed.
Intended status: Informational                                
Expires: 2012 June 18                                   27 December 2011


               Root Name Server Operational Requirements
                  draft-rssac-dnsop-rfc2870bis-00

Status of this Memo

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on June 18, 2012.

IETF Legal Notices

   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

  This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.
  
   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.


     "This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
      contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
      retain all their rights."

     "This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
      "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE
      REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE
      IETF TRUST AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL
      WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY
      WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE
      ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS
      FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE."

     "The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
      Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed
      to pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described
      in this document or the extent to which any license under such
      rights might or might not be available; nor does it represent that
      it has made any independent effort to identify any such rights. 
      Information on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC
      documents can be found in BCP 78 and BCP 79."

     "Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
      assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
      attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use
      of such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
      specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository
      at http://www.ietf.org/ipr."

     "The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
      copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
      rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
      this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
      ietf-ipr@ietf.org."

Abstract
   
   This memo replaces RFC 2870.  As the Internet has become critical to 
   the world's social and economic infrastructure, attention has rightly 
   focused on the correct, safe, reliable, and secure operation of the Internet
   infrastructure itself.  The root domain and its name servers are a crucial
   part of that technical infrastructure.  The primary focus of this
   document is to provide guidelines for secure, stable, and resilient name
   service for the root zone. Additionally it will look into some specifics
   for the operation of the name servers.  Other operators of critical name 
   servers--such as those for generic top-level domains (gTLDs), country code 
   top-level domains (ccTLDs) and other major zones--may also find it useful.
   
   
1.  Background
   
   The resolution of domain names on the Internet is critically
   dependent on the proper, safe and secure operation of the root domain
   name servers.  The Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA)
   publishes the "root hints" file
   (http://www.internic.net/zones/named.root), which lists the names and
   IP addresses of the thirteen root name servers that are the focus of
   this document.  These servers are operated by twelve different
   organizations, which are listed at http://root-servers.org/.  This
   document provides formal guidelines for the operation of these root
   name servers.
   
   1.1   ICANN has appointed a Root Server System Advisory Committee
         (RSSAC) (http://www.icann.org/committees/dns-root/) to give
         technical and operational advice to the ICANN board.  ICANN and
         RSSAC look to the IETF to provide engineering standards.
   
   1.2   The root servers serve the root (".") and ROOT-SERVERS.NET
         zones.  For legacy reasons, some of the root servers have also
         served other important zones, namely ARPA, IN-ADDR.ARPA.  In
         the future, the root servers may not serve any additional
         zones or they may be asked to serve other zones.

   1.3   The root servers are neither involved with nor dependent upon
         any WHOIS [5] data.

   1.4   The domain name system has proven to be sufficiently robust
         that that the (presumably temporary) loss of most of the root
         server instances should not significantly affect operation of the
         Internet.

   1.5   Experience has shown that the Internet is quite vulnerable to
         incorrect data in the root zone or top-level domain (TLD)
         zones.  Providing authentication, validation, and security of these
         data and the communications channels they use are protected.


   Most of the root operators now provision more than one physical or 
   logical host to provide root name service.  In such configurations,
   incoming DNS queries to the IP address providing root name service 
   are distributed to multiple hosts using a variety of techniques,
   including layer-three load balancing devices, equal-cost multipath
   routing and anycast routing.  (Anycast is discussed further in 
   Section 4.)  
   For simplicity, this document uses the term "server" to refer to 
   however many hosts a root operator provisions to provide root name
   service at a single address per address family.

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [1].

         
2.  The Servers Themselves

   The following are requirements for the technical details of the root
   servers themselves:

   2.1   It would be short-sighted of this document to specify
         particular hardware, operating systems, or name serving
         software.  Variations in these areas would actually add overall
         robustness.

   2.2   Each server MUST run software which correctly implements the
         IETF standards for the DNS, currently RFC1035 [2], RFC2181
         [3] and RFC4035[14].  While there are no accepted, formal test suites 
         for standards compliance, the maintainers of software used on root servers
         are expected to take all reasonable actions to conform to the
         IETF's then-current documented expectations.
   
   2.3   At any time, each server MUST be able to handle a load of
         requests for root data which is at least ten times the measured
         average number of requests on that server in then-current
         normal conditions.  This capacity is usually expressed in
         queries per second.  This requirement is intended to ensure
         continued operation of root services in the event of extreme
         scenarios, such as distributed denial-of-service (DDoS) attacks
         and other operational anomalies.
   
   2.4   Each root server should have sufficient connectivity to the
         Internet to support the bandwidth needs of the above
         requirement.  Connectivity to the Internet SHOULD be as diverse
         as possible.

         Root servers SHOULD have mechanisms in place to accept IP
         connectivity to the root server from any Internet provider
         delivering connectivity at their own cost.
   
   
   2.5   Servers MUST provide authoritative responses only from the
         zones they serve.  The servers MUST disable recursive lookup,
         forwarding or any other function that might allow them to
         provide cached answers.  These restrictions help prevent undue load
         on the root servers and reduce the chance of their caching
         incorrect data.

   2.6   Root servers MUST answer queries from any Internet host, i.e.
         root servers may not block root name resolution from any valid
         IP address, except in the case of queries causing operational
         problems, in which case the blocking SHOULD last only as long
         as the problem, and be as specific as reasonably possible.

   2.7   Root servers SHOULD NOT answer AXFR, or other zone transfer,
         queries from clients other than other root servers.  This
         restriction is intended to, among other things, prevent
         unnecessary load on the root servers from both well-meaning but
         misguided operators configuring their recursive name servers to
         secondary the root zone, loading from one of the root servers,
         and from malicious denial-of-service attacks.  The root servers
         MAY distribute the root zone via FTP, HTTP or other access
         methods on other less-critical servers.

   2.8   Servers MUST generate checksums when sending UDP datagrams and
         MUST verify checksums when receiving UDP datagrams containing a
         non-zero checksum.


3.  Security Considerations

   The servers need both physical and protocol security as well as
   unambiguous authentication of their responses.

3.1.  Physical Security

   Physical security MUST be ensured in a manner expected of data
   centers critical to a major enterprise.

   3.1.1   Whether or not the overall site in which a root server is
           located has access control, the specific area in which the
           root server is located MUST have positive access control,
           i.e. the number of individuals permitted access to the area
           MUST be limited, controlled, and recorded.  At a minimum,
           control measures SHOULD be either mechanical or electronic
           locks.  Physical security MAY be enhanced by the use of
           intrusion detection and motion sensors, multiple serial
           access points, security personnel, etc.

   3.1.2   Power continuity for at least 24 hours MUST be assured,
           whether through on-site batteries, on-site power generation
           or some combination thereof.  This backup power source MUST
           supply the server itself, as well as the infrastructure
           necessary to connect the server to the Internet.  There MUST
           be procedures that ensure the power fallback mechanisms and
           supplies are tested no less frequently than the
           specifications and recommendations of the manufacturer.

   3.1.3   Fire detection and/or retardation MUST be provided.

   3.1.4   Provision MUST be made for rapid return to operation after a
           system outage.  Such provision SHOULD involve backup of
           system software and configuration but SHOULD also involve
           backup hardware which is pre-configured and ready to take
           over operation, which MAY require manual procedures.

3.2.  Network Security

   Network security should be of the level provided for critical
   infrastructure of a major commercial enterprise.

   3.2.1   The root servers themselves MUST NOT provide services other
           than DNS name service, secure shell, and network time, e.g.
           protocols such as HTTP, Telnet, rlogin, FTP, routing daemons, 
           etc.  The only login accounts permitted should
           be for the server administrator(s).  

           Servers MUST have a secure mechanism for remote
           administrative access and maintenance.  Failures happen;
           there will be times when something breaks badly enough that
           administrators will need to connect remotely.  Remote logins
           MUST be protected by a secure means that is strongly
           authenticated and encrypted, and sites from which remote
           login is allowed MUST be protected and hardened.  Remote
           logins SHOULD be restricted to a list of discrete IP
           addresses or address ranges.

   3.2.2   Root name servers SHOULD NOT trust other hosts, except
           secondary servers trusting the primary server, for matters of
           network time, authentication, encryption keys, or other access 
           or security information.  If a root operator uses Kerberos authentication
           to manage access to the root server, then the associated
           Kerberos key server MUST be protected with the same prudence
           as the root server itself.  This applies to all related
           services which are trusted in any manner.

   3.2.3   The LAN segment on which a root server is located SHOULD NOT
           also have other Internet-reachable hosts.  Secure monitoring
           hosts that passively monitor network traffic to and from the
           root server MAY be placed on the same LAN segment.  LAN
           segments SHOULD be switched or routed so there is no
           possibility of masquerading.

   3.2.4   The LAN segment(s) on which a root server is located SHOULD
           be separately firewalled or packet filtered to prohibit
           network access to any port other than those needed for name
           service.

   3.2.5   The root servers SHOULD have their clocks synchronized via
           NTP [6], SNTP [7] or similar mechanisms, in as secure manner
           as possible.  For this purpose, servers and their associated
           firewalls SHOULD allow the root servers to be NTP clients.
           Root servers MUST NOT act as NTP peers or servers.

   3.2.6   All attempts at intrusion or other compromise SHOULD be
           logged, and all such logs from all root servers SHOULD be
           analysed by a cooperative security team communicating with
           all server operators to look for patterns, serious attempts,
           etc.  Servers SHOULD log in UTC to facilitate log comparison.

   3.2.7   Server logging SHOULD be to separate hosts which SHOULD be
           protected similarly to the root servers themselves.

   3.2.8   The server SHOULD be protected from attacks based on source
           routing.  The server MUST NOT rely on address- or name-based
           authentication.

   3.2.9   The network on which the server is located SHOULD have in-
           addr.arpa service.

3.3.  Protocol Authentication and Security

   Protocol authentication and security are required to ensure that data
   presented by the root servers are those created by those authorized
   to maintain the root zone data.

   3.3.1    The root zone SHOULD be signed by IANA in accordance with
            DNSSEC ([8], [9] and [10]).

   3.3.2    Once the root zone is DNSSEC-signed, the root servers MUST
            be DNSSEC-capable so that queries may be authenticated by
            clients with security and authentication concerns.

   3.3.3    Transfer of the root zone between root servers MUST be
            authenticated and be as secure as reasonably possible.  Out
            of band security validation of updates MUST be supported.
            Servers MUST use TSIG [4] to authenticate root zones
            received from other servers.

   3.3.4    A "distribution" server, which only allows access by the
            authorized secondary root servers, MAY be used.

   3.3.5    Root zone updates SHOULD only progress after a number of
            heuristic checks designed to detect erroneous updates have
            been passed.  In case the update fails the tests, human
            intervention MUST be requested.

   3.3.6    Root zone updates SHOULD normally be effective no later than
            one fourth of the time between root zone updates from notification 
            of the root server operator.

   3.3.7    A special procedure for emergency updates SHOULD be defined.
            Updates initiated by the emergency procedure SHOULD be made
            no later than 12 hours after notification.

   3.3.8    In the event of a critical network failure, each root server
            MUST have a method to update the root zone data via a medium
            which is delivered through an alternative, non-network,
            path.  In the event that the root server cannot serve
            current data, it MUST cease offering DNS service.  See also
            Paragraph 4.3.

   3.3.9    Each root MUST keep global statistics on the amount and
            types of queries received/answered on a daily basis.  These
            statistics SHOULD be made available to RSSAC and RSSAC-
            sponsored researchers to help determine how to better deploy
            these machines more efficiently across the Internet.  Each
            root MAY collect data snapshots to help determine data
            points such as DNS query storms, significant implementation
            bugs, etc.

   3.3.10   Each root operator MUST monitor its server to detect operational
            problems, such as a host being down, a host not running a
            name server, a name server not returning authoritative
            answers for the root zone, etc.  Servers MAY also be
            monitored from an external network.  These monitoring
            processes SHOULD be automated.  If problems are detected,
            the appropriate staff MUST be notified to troubleshoot and
            remedy the problem.

4.  Anycast and Network Considerations

   The root zone has been available via shared unicast as described in
   RFC 3258 [11] from several of the authoritative root name servers
   since 2002.  This technique is now commonly referred to as "anycast",
   despite its differences from the definition of that term in RFC 1546
   [12].  Anycast has proven to be a successful method for increasing
   the capacity and geographic distribution of the root server system.
   For a root server to offer service successfully using anycast,
   several best practices should be followed.

   4.1   A root server SHOULD be anycast using IPv4 address space that is a
         /24 from legacy allocations.  Using any prefix longer than a /20 that
         is not from the swamp risks reachability problems because of
         filtering by ISPs who won't route such address space. IPv6 address space
	 SHOULD be at least a /48.

   4.2   Each of a root server's anycast instances MAY be sourced
         from a consistent origin autonomous system (AS).  That is, the
         BGP routing announcement for all instances of a given root
         server's service address (i.e., the IPv4 address corresponding
         to the RDATA of that root name server's NS record) should have
         the same origin AS.

   4.3   Each anycast instance of a root server MUST withdraw its BGP
         routing announcement upon service failure.  Each anycast
         instance MUST monitor its ability to provide root name service
         and withdraw its route if it detects itself unable to provide
         service.  Such monitoring SHOULD be automatic and not dependent
         on a human noticing a service failure.

   4.4   Anycast instances SHOULD NOT use the BGP MULTI_EXIT_DISC (MED)
         attribute because of possible inter-domain routing (IDR)
         oscillation in networks using route reflectors or AS
         confederations.  Suggested better alternatives are BGP origin
         code, altering AS path length (i.e., prepending), adjusting
         local preference and communities.  Specific route oscillation
         scenarios and mitigations are described in detail in RFC 3345
         [13].

   4.5   Some root operators provision different kinds of anycast
         instances for a given root server.  Some instances are
         designated to be local to particular autonomous systems and
         thus advertise their routes with the BGP no-export community
         attribute.  Other instances are designated "global" and
         reachable from anywhere on the Internet; these instances do not
         advertise with no-export.  In the event of this configuration,
         the local and global instances SHOULD NOT advertise routes with
         the same prefix length.  The global instances SHOULD advertise
         a shorter covering prefix.

         Failure to advertise a shorter covering prefix from the global
         instances can result in unreachability in certain scenarios.
         For example, consider AS A with a local root server anycast
         instance (i.e., advertising its route with the no-export
         attribute) announced as prefix P1.  AS A prefers its local
         route to P1 over the other paths to P1 it may have received
         (corresponding to any global nodes).  Now consider AS B that
         peers only with AS A. Since the local instance of prefix P1 is
         the best path and is marked no-export, AS A does not send this
         prefix to AS B. AS B thus has no route to prefix P1 and cannot
         reach any instances of this root server.

         Instead, consider if the root server operator advertised a
         shorter covering prefix P2 for its global instances.  In the
         scenario above, AS A would send prefix P2 to AS B, making any
         of this root server's global instances reachable from AS B.

         For IPv4, if the root server prefix is a globally routable /24, and the
         operator does not have the necessary adjacent address space to
         aggregate and advertise a shorter prefix, the /24 itself SHOULD
         be advertised globally and a longer prefix (i.e., /25 or
         longer) designated local-only.  Such a longer local-only prefix
         will not typically be passed across peering boundaries, which
         eliminates the need to tag this prefix as no-export.

   4.6   There SHOULD NOT be more than three root servers (including
         anycast instances) in close physical or topological proximity.
         Multiple root servers near each other introduces the
         possibility of undesirable fate sharing, since the impact of
         any issue that could cause poor performance or an outage is
         magnified by the presence of multiple root servers in one
         place.

         For example, consider an AS hosting multiple root servers that
         suffers a catastrophic failure that drastically reduces
         performance but does not sever connectivity with the rest of
         the Internet.  In such a situation, there could be sufficient
         connectivity to continue announcing routes but not to reliably
         deliver service traffic.  If the routes to the root servers
         located in this AS are sufficiently attractive, some portion of
         the traffic destined for those root servers could be siphoned
         off to this AS and then dropped because of insufficient
         capacity.  Obviously, the more root servers located in the AS,
         the more significant and problematic the resulting
         unreachability.  This scenario is worse for a unicast root
         server because the server's entire traffic load is affected:
         there are no other anycast instances to handle that server's
         query load.


5.  Communications

   Communications and coordination between root server operators and
   between the operators and IANA and ICANN are necessary.

   5.1   Planned outages and other down times SHOULD be coordinated
         between root server operators to ensure that a significant
         number of the root servers are not all down at the same time.
         Announcement of planned outages also keeps other operators from
         wasting time wondering about any anomalies.

   5.2   Root server operators SHOULD coordinate backup timing so that
         many servers are not off-line being backed up at the same time.
         Backups SHOULD be frequently transferred off site.

   5.3   Root server operators SHOULD exchange log files, particularly
         as they relate to security, loading, and other significant
         events.  This MAY be through a central log coordination point,
         or MAY be informal.

   5.4   Statistics as they concern usage rates, loading, and resource
         utilization SHOULD be exchanged between operators, and SHOULD
         be reported to IANA for planning and reporting purposes.

   5.5   Root name server administrative personnel MUST be available to
         provide service 24 hours a day, 7 days per week.  On call
         personnel MAY be used to provide this service outside of normal
         working hours.


6.  IANA considerations
         
   There are no new IANA considerations introduced by this memo.

   
         
7.  Internationalization considerations

   There are no new internationalization considerations introduced by
   this memo.
         

8.  References

8.1.  Normative References

   [1]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
        Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [2]  Mockapetris, P., "Domain names - implementation and
        specification", STD 13, RFC 1035, November 1987.

   [3]  Elz, R. and R. Bush, "Clarifications to the DNS Specification",
        RFC 2181, July 1997.

   [4]  Vixie, P., Gudmundsson, O., Eastlake, D., and B. Wellington,
        "Secret Key Transaction Authentication for DNS (TSIG)",
        RFC 2845, May 2000.

8.2.  Informative References

   [5]   Daigle, L., "WHOIS Protocol Specification", RFC 3912,
         September 2004.

   [6]   Mills, D., "Network Time Protocol (Version 3) Specification,
         Implementation", RFC 1305, March 1992.

   [7]   Mills, D., "Simple Network Time Protocol (SNTP) Version 4 for
         IPv4, IPv6 and OSI", RFC 4330, January 2006.

   [8]   Arends, R., Austein, R., Larson, M., Massey, D., and S. Rose,
         "DNS Security Introduction and Requirements", RFC 4033,
         March 2005.

   [9]   Arends, R., Austein, R., Larson, M., Massey, D., and S. Rose,
         "Resource Records for the DNS Security Extensions", RFC 4034,
         March 2005.

   [10]  Arends, R., Austein, R., Larson, M., Massey, D., and S. Rose,
         "Protocol Modifications for the DNS Security Extensions",
         RFC 4035, March 2005.

   [11]  Hardie, T., "Distributing Authoritative Name Servers via Shared
         Unicast Addresses", RFC 3258, April 2002.

   [12]  Partridge, C., Mendez, T., and W. Milliken, "Host Anycasting
         Service", RFC 1546, November 1993.

   [13]  McPherson, D., Gill, V., Walton, D., and A. Retana, "Border
         Gateway Protocol (BGP) Persistent Route Oscillation Condition",
         RFC 3345, August 2002.

   [14]   R. Arends, R. Austein, M. Larson, D. Massey, S. Rose, "Protocol 
          Modifications for the DNS Security Extensions", RFC 4035, March 2005

Authors' Addresses

   Root Server System Advisory Committee (RSSAC)
   <rssac@icann.org>


   Bill Manning, Editor
   PO Box 12317
   Marina del Rey, CA 90295
   USA


