 



INTERNET DRAFT                                               R. Housley
Intended Status: Informational                           Vigil Security
Expires: 11 February 2010                                11 August 2009

 The application/pkix-attr-cert Content Type for Attribute Certificates
              <draft-ietf-pkix-attr-cert-mime-type-00.txt>

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2009 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents in effect on the date of
   publication of this document (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info). 
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.

Abstract

   This document specifies a MIME content type for use with attribute
   certificates as defined in RFC 3281.






 


Housley                                                         [Page 1]

INTERNET DRAFT                                               August 2009


1. Introduction

   RFC 2528 [RFC2585] defines the MIME content types for public key
   certificates and certificate revocation lists (CRLs).  This document
   specifies a MIME content type for use with attribute certificates as
   defined in RFC 3281 [RFC3281].

2. IANA Considerations

   The content type for an attribute certificate is
   application/pkix-attr-cert.

      MIME media type name: application

      MIME subtype name: pkix-attr-cert

      Required parameters: None

      Optional parameters: version (default value is "1")

      Encoding considerations: will be none for 8-bit transports and
      most likely Base64 for SMTP or other 7-bit transports

      Security considerations: Carries an attribute certificate to
      provide authorization information

      Interoperability considerations: None

      Published specification: RFC 3281

      Applications which use this media type: Any MIME-complaint
      transport

      Additional information:
        Magic number(s): None
        File extension(s): .AC
        Macintosh File Type Code(s): none

      Person & email address to contact for further information:
      Russ Housley <housley@vigilsec.com>

      Intended usage: COMMON

      Author/Change controller:
      Russ Housley <housley@vigilsec.com>



 


Housley                                                         [Page 2]

INTERNET DRAFT                                               August 2009


3. Security Considerations

   Attribute certificate issuers must encode the holder entity name in
   exactly the same way as the public key certificate distinguished
   name.  If they are encoded differently, implementations may fail to
   recognize that the attribute certificate and public key certificate
   belong to the same entity.

4. References

4.1. Normative References

   [RFC3281] S. Farrell, S., and R. Housley, "An Internet Attribute
             Certificate Profile for Authorization", RFC 3281,
             April 2002.

4.2. Informative References

   [RFC2585] Housley, R., and P. Hoffman, " Internet X.509 Public Key
             Infrastructure Operational Protocols: FTP and HTTP",
             RFC 2585, May 1999.

Authors' Addresses

   Russell Housley
   Vigil Security, LLC
   918 Spring Knoll Drive
   Herndon, VA 20170
   USA
   EMail: housley@vigilsec.com





















Housley                                                         [Page 3]
