 



INTERNET-DRAFT                          Stefan Santesson (3xA Security)
Intended Status: Proposed Standard        Russ Housley (Vigil Security)
Updates: 3709 (once approved)                Siddharth Bajaj (VeriSign)
Expires: February 26, 2010                    Leonard Rosenthol (Adobe)
                                                        August 25, 2009

               Internet X.509 Public Key Infrastructure:
                           Certificate Image
                   <draft-ietf-pkix-certimage-01.txt>
                                    


Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html



Abstract

   This document specifies a method to bind a visual representation of a
   certificate in the form of a certificate image to a [RFC5280] public
   key certificate by defining a new otherLogos image type according to
   [RFC3709].







 


Santesson et all.      Expires February 26, 2010                [Page 1]

INTERNET DRAFT             Certificate Image             August 25, 2009


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
      1.2  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   2  Certificate Image  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   3 LogotypeImageInfo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   4  Certificate Image Formats  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
      4.1 PDF  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
      4.2 SVG  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
      4.2 PNG  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   5  Embedded images  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   6  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
   7  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
   8  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
      8.1 Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
      8.2 Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   Full Copyright Statement  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12






























 


Santesson et all.      Expires February 26, 2010                [Page 2]

INTERNET DRAFT             Certificate Image             August 25, 2009


1.  Introduction


   This standard specifies a Certificate Image that may be signed and
   referenced by a certificate as a visual representation of that
   certificate to humans.

   This standard makes use of the certificate Logotype extension defined
   in [RFC3709] and specifies the Certificate Image as a new otherLogos
   type.

   The purpose of the Certificate image is to enable a meaningful
   informational and visual experience for a human user in situations
   where a Graphical User Interface (GUI) of an application needs to
   show a certificate to a user.

   Typical situations when an application may want to show a certificate
   to a human are:

      - A person establishes contact with an authenticated entity, such
      as a commercial web site or government service. The person wants
      to see the authenticated identity of the service provider.

      - A person consumes signed information such as a signed e-mail, a
      signed document, or a signed contract. The person wants to see the
      authenticated identity of the signer.

      - A person is requested to authenticate to a service, or to sign
      some information, and is requested to select an appropriate
      certificate for the purpose. The person needs to see the available
      certificates to understand what type of personal data they contain
      and for what purpose they are intended.


   Unless an application recognizes the certificate type and has some
   predefined display logic for the certificate it displays, it will
   extremely hard for the application to provide meaningful information
   about the certificate to humans. Some important reasons are:

      - Many common attributes are not specific enough to identify their
      information content. For example, the country attribute includes a
      country identifier but does not define whether this represents a
      country of residence, country of citizenship or something else.
      The attribute SRIALNUMBER may contain any type of identifier such
      as social security number, membership number or driver's license
      number.

      - Some name forms are suitable for human consumption and others
 


Santesson et all.      Expires February 26, 2010                [Page 3]

INTERNET DRAFT             Certificate Image             August 25, 2009


      for machine processing. It is extremely hard for a certificate
      viewer to know exactly which name types that make sense to a human
      and how to label this information in the user interface.

   RFC 3709 specifies how to bind images to a certificate, such as
   community logo, issuer logo. RFC 3709 is also extensible and allows
   inclusion of new image types using the other-Logos structure. This
   extensibility is used in this standard to allow inclusion of a
   complete certificate display image.


1.2  Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].
































 


Santesson et all.      Expires February 26, 2010                [Page 4]

INTERNET DRAFT             Certificate Image             August 25, 2009


2  Certificate Image

   This section defines the Certificate Image as a new otherLogos type
   according to section 4.1 of [RFC3709].

   The Certificate Image otherLogos type is identified by the Object
   Identifier (OID) id-logo-certimage.

      id-pkix  OBJECT IDENTIFIER  ::=
           { iso(1) identified-organization(3) dod(6) internet(1)
           security(5) mechanisms(5) pkix(7) }

      id-logo OBJECT IDENTIFIER ::= { id-pkix 20 }

      id-logo-certimage OBJECT IDENTIFIER ::= { id-logo TBD }

   //* Note: TBD is to be replaced by a real OID before publication of
   this draft *//

   When present the Certificate Image MUST represent a complete visual
   representation of the certificate. This means that the display of
   this certificate image represents all information about the
   certificate that the issuer subjectively defines as relevant to show
   a typical human user within the typical intended use of the
   certificate, giving adequate information about at least the following
   three aspects of the certificate:

      - Certificate Context
      - Certificate Issuer
      - Certificate Subject

   Certificate Context information is visual marks and/or textual
   information which helps the typical user to understand the typical
   usage and/or purpose of the certificate

   It is up to the issuer to decide what information in the form of text
   and graphical symbols and elements, which represents a complete
   visual representation of the certificate.

   Applications providing a Graphical User Interface (GUI) to the
   certificate user MAY present a Certificate Image according to this
   standard in any given application interface, as the only visual
   representation of a certificate.

3 LogotypeImageInfo

   The optional LogotypeImageInfo structure is defined in [RFC3709] and
   is included here for convenience:
 


Santesson et all.      Expires February 26, 2010                [Page 5]

INTERNET DRAFT             Certificate Image             August 25, 2009


      LogotypeImageInfo ::= SEQUENCE {
        type          [0] LogotypeImageType DEFAULT color,
        fileSize      INTEGER,  -- In octets
        xSize         INTEGER,  -- Horizontal size in pixels
        ySize         INTEGER,  -- Vertical size in pixels
        resolution    LogotypeImageResolution OPTIONAL,
        language      [4] IA5String OPTIONAL }  -- RFC 3066 Language Tag

   When the optional LogotypeImageInfo is included with a certificate
   image, the parameters shall be used with the following semantics and
   restrictions.

   xSize and ySize represents recommended display size for the image.
   When a value of 0 (zero) is present, no recommended display size
   specified. When non-zero values are present and these values differ
   from corresponding size values in the referenced image file, then the
   referenced image SHOULD be scaled to fit within the size parameters
   of LogotypeImageInfo, while keeping x and y ratio intact.

   Resolution MUST NOT be specified.


4  Certificate Image Formats

4.1 PDF

   A Certificate Image MAY be provided in the form of a Portable
   Document Format (PDF) document according to [ISO32000] following the
   conventions defined in this section. When a certificate image is
   formatted as a PDF document, it MUST also be formatted according to
   the profile PDF/A [ISO19005].

   When including a PDF document as Certificate Image, the following
   MIME media type as specified in [RFC3778] MUST be used as mediaType
   in LogotypeDetails:

      application/pdf

4.2 SVG

   A Certificate Image MAY be provided in the form of a Scalable Vector
   Graphic (SVG) image, which MUST follow the SVG Tiny profile [SVGT1.2]

   The following MIME media type defined in Appendix M of [SVGT1.2] MUST
   be used as mediaType in LogotypeDetails for SVG images:

      image/svg+xml

 


Santesson et all.      Expires February 26, 2010                [Page 6]

INTERNET DRAFT             Certificate Image             August 25, 2009


   The SVG image file MUST NOT incorporate any external image data by
   reference to an external SVG document, or by reference to an external
   media source other than SVG. Doing so would incorporate image data
   that is not covered by the logotypeHash value of the image.
   Certificate using applications MUST reject any image that violates
   this rule.

   The XML structure in the SVG file MUST use <LF> (linefeed 0x0A) as
   end-of-line (EOL) character when calculating the hash over the SVG
   file. The referenced SVG file may be provided in compressed form, for
   example as SVG.GZ or SVGZ. It is outside the scope of this
   specification to specify any such compression algorithm. However,
   after decompression the EOL characters of the SVG file MUST be
   normalized according to this section before computing the hash of the
   SVG file.

4.2 PNG

   If a certificate image is provided as a bit mapped image, the PNG
   [ISO15948] format SHOULD be used.

   PNG images are identified by the following mediaType in
   LogotypeDetails:

      image/png

5  Embedded images

   The certificate image otherLogos type MAY be stored within the
   logotype extension using the "data" URL scheme defined in RFC 2397
   [RFC2397] if the logotype image is provided through direct
   addressing, i.e. the image is referenced using the LogotypeDetails
   structure.

   The syntax of Logotype details defined in RFC 3709 is included here
   for convenience:

      LogotypeDetails ::= SEQUENCE {
         mediaType       IA5String, -- MIME media type name and optional
                                    -- parameters
         logotypeHash    SEQUENCE SIZE (1..MAX) OF HashAlgAndValue,
         logotypeURI     SEQUENCE SIZE (1..MAX) OF IA5String }






 


Santesson et all.      Expires February 26, 2010                [Page 7]

INTERNET DRAFT             Certificate Image             August 25, 2009


   When including the image data in the logotype extension using the
   "data" URL scheme the following conventions apply.

      -  the value of mediaType MUST be identical to the mediatype value
         in the "data:" URL.
      -  The hash of the image MUST be included in logotypeHash and MUST
         be calculated over the same data as it would have been, had the
         image been referenced through a link to an external resource.



   Note: As the "data:" URL scheme is processed as a data source rather
         than as a URL, the image data is typically not limited by any
         URL length limit setting that otherwise apply to URLs in
         general.

   Note: Implementations need to be cautious about the the size of
         images included in a certificate in order to ensure that the
         size of the certificate does not prevent the certificate to be
         used as intended.




























 


Santesson et all.      Expires February 26, 2010                [Page 8]

INTERNET DRAFT             Certificate Image             August 25, 2009


6  Security Considerations

   The security considerations of [RFC3709] apply also to this standard.

   This standard makes it possible for a CA to issue a certificate with
   a Certificate Image that is in conflict with other data included in
   the certificate without the relying party application being able to
   detect the delta.

   A relying party application MUST decide that the certificate is valid
   and trustworthy enough to provide a Certificate Image to the local
   GUI before using it.

   Referenced image files are hashed in order to bind the image to the
   signature of the certificate. Some image types, such as SVG allow
   part of the image to be collected from external source by
   incorporating a reference to an external image file. If this feature
   were used within a certificate image file, the hash of the image file
   would only cover the URI reference to the external image file, but
   not the referenced image data. To ensure that the hash of the
   certificate image covers the whole image, implementations of this
   standard MUST reject images that incorporate parts of the image by
   reference to external image files.

   CAs issuing certificate with embedded certificate images should be
   cautious when accepting graphics from the certificate requestor for
   inclusion in the certificate, if the hash algorithm used to sign the
   certificate is vulnerable to collision attacks. In such case the
   accepted image may contain data that could help an attacker to obtain
   colliding certificates with identical certificate signatures.


7  IANA Considerations

   This document requires no actions from IANA.


8  References

8.1 Normative References

   [RFC2119]  S. Bradner, "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997

   [RFC5280]  Cooper, D., Santesson, S., Farrell, S., Boeyen, S.,
              Housley, R., and W. Polk, "Internet X.509 Public Key
              Infrastructure Certificate and Certificate Revocation List
              (CRL) Profile", RFC 5280, May 2008
 


Santesson et all.      Expires February 26, 2010                [Page 9]

INTERNET DRAFT             Certificate Image             August 25, 2009


   [RFC3709]  S. Santesson, R. Housley, T. Freeman, "Internet X.509
              Public Key Infrastructure Logotypes in X.509
              Certificates", RFC 3709, February 2004

   [RFC2397]  L. Masinter, 'The "data" URL scheme' RFC 2397, August 1998

   [ISO32000] ISO 32000-1:2008, "Document management - Portable document
              format" -- Part 1: PDF 1.7, April 2008

   [ISO19005] ISO 19005-1:2005, "Document Management - Electronic
              document file format for long term preservation - Part 1:
              Use of PDF 1.4 (PDF/A-1)", 2005

   [ISO15948] ISO/IEC 15948:2004, "Information technology - Computer
              graphics and image processing -- Portable Network Graphics
              (PNG): Functional specification", 2004

   [SVGT1.2]  W3C Recommendation, "Scalable Vector Graphics (SVG) Tiny
              1.2 Specification", December 2008


8.2 Informative References

   [RFC3778]  E. Taft, J. Pravetz, S. Zilles, L. Masinter "The
              application/pdf Media Type", RFC 3778, May 2004























 


Santesson et all.      Expires February 26, 2010               [Page 10]

INTERNET DRAFT             Certificate Image             August 25, 2009


Authors' Addresses


   Stefan Santesson
   3xA Security (AAA-sec.com)
   Bjornstorp 744
   247 98 Genarp
   Sweden
   EMail: sts@aaa-sec.com

   Russell Housley
   Vigil Security, LLC
   918 Spring Knoll Drive
   Herndon, VA 20170
   USA
   EMail: housley@vigilsec.com

   Siddharth Bajaj
   VeriSign
   685 East Middlefield rd
   Mountain view, CA 94043
   USA
   Email: sbajaj@verisign.com

   Leonard Rosenthol
   3533 Sunset Way
   Huntingdon Valley, PA 19006
   USA
   Email: leonardr@adobe.com



















 


Santesson et all.      Expires February 26, 2010               [Page 11]

INTERNET DRAFT             Certificate Image             August 25, 2009


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (c) 2009 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors. All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents in effect on the date of
   publication of this document (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info).
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.


   All IETF Documents and the information contained therein are provided
   on an "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE
   REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE
   IETF TRUST AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL
   WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY
   WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION THEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE
   ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS
   FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.































Santesson et all.      Expires February 26, 2010               [Page 12]
