A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3029

        Title:      Internet X.509 Public Key Infrastructure Data
                    Validation and Certification Server Protocols
        Author(s):  C. Adams, P. Sylvester, M. Zolotarev,
                    R. Zuccherato 
        Status:     Experimental
        Date:       February 2001
        Mailbox:    cadams@entrust.com, mzolotarev@baltimore.com,
                    peter.sylvester@edelweb.fr,
                    robert.zuccherato@entrust.com 
        Pages:      51
        Characters: 107347
        Updates/Obsoletes/SeeAlso:    None        

        I-D Tag:    draft-ietf-pkix-dcs-07.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3029.txt


This document describes a general Data Validation and Certification
Server (DVCS) and the protocols to be used when communicating with
it.  The Data Validation and Certification Server is a Trusted Third
Party (TTP) that can be used as one component in building reliable
non-repudiation services.
 
Useful Data Validation and Certification Server responsibilities in a
PKI are to assert the validity of signed documents, public key
certificates, and the possession or existence of data.
 
Assertions created by this protocol are called Data Validation
Certificates (DVC).
 
We give examples of how to use the Data Validation and Certification
Server to extend the lifetime of a signature beyond key expiry or
revocation and to query the Data Validation and Certification Server
regarding the status of a public key certificate.  The document
includes a complete example of a time stamping transaction.

This document is a product of the Public-Key Infrastructure (X.509)
Working Group of the IETF.

This memo defines an Experimental Protocol for the Internet community.
It does not specify an Internet standard of any kind.  Discussion and
suggestions for improvement are requested.  Distribution of this memo
is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.
