A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3039

        Title:      Internet X.509 Public Key Infrastructure Qualified
                    Certificates Profile
        Author(s):  S. Santesson, W. Polk, P. Barzin, M. Nystrom
        Status:     Standards Track
        Date:       January 2001
        Mailbox:    stefan@addtrust.com, wpolk@nist.gov,
                    barzin@secude.com, magnus@rsasecurity.com
        Pages:      35
        Characters: 67619
        Updates/Obsoletes/SeeAlso:    None

        I-D Tag:    draft-ietf-pkix-qc-06.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3039.txt


This document forms a certificate profile for Qualified Certificates,
based on RFC 2459, for use in the Internet.  The term Qualified
Certificate is used to describe a certificate with a certain
qualified status within applicable governing law.  Further, Qualified
Certificates are issued exclusively to physical persons.
 
The goal of this document is to define a general syntax independent of
local legal requirements.  The profile is however designed to allow
further profiling in order to meet specific local needs.
 
It is important to note that the profile does not define any legal
requirements for Qualified Certificates.

This document is a product of the Public-Key Infrastructure (X.509)
Working Group of the IETF.

This is now a Proposed Standard Protocol.

This document specifies an Internet standards track protocol for
the Internet community, and requests discussion and suggestions
for improvements.  Please refer to the current edition of the
"Internet Official Protocol Standards" (STD 1) for the
standardization state and status of this protocol.  Distribution
of this memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.
