


Network Working Group                                         P. Eardley
Internet-Draft                                              T. Burbridge
Intended status: Informational                                        BT
Expires: January 16, 2014                                      A. Morton
                                                               AT&T Labs
                                                           July 15, 2013


                A framework for large-scale measurements
                    draft-eardley-lmap-framework-02

Abstract

   Measuring broadband service on a large scale requires standardisation
   of the logical architecture and a description of the key protocols
   that coordinate interactions between the components.  The document
   presents an overall framework for large-scale measurements and
   discusses which elements could be standardised in the IETF.  It is
   intended to assist the work of the LMAP working group.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 16, 2014.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must



Eardley, et al.         Expires January 16, 2014                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft               LMAP Framework                    July 2013


   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Outline of framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Constraints  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.1.  Measurement system is under the direction of a single
           organisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.2.  Each MA may only have a single Controller at any point
           in time  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     3.3.  A Measurement Agent acts autonomously  . . . . . . . . . .  7
   4.  Work items for LMAP WG . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     4.1.  Information Model  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     4.2.  Control Protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     4.3.  Report Protocol  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   5.  Related work required but out of scope of LMAP . . . . . . . . 10
     5.1.  Standard measurement tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     5.2.  Characterisation plan  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     5.3.  Other elements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   6.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   7.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   8.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   9.  Changes  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     9.1.  from -00 to -01  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   10. Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14





















Eardley, et al.         Expires January 16, 2014                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft               LMAP Framework                    July 2013


1.  Introduction

   The Large-Scale Measurement of Broadband Performance (LMAP) working
   group standardizes the LMAP measurement system for performance
   measurements of broadband access devices such as home and enterprise
   edge routers, personal computers, mobile devices, set top box,
   whether wired or wireless.  Measuring portions of the Internet on a
   large scale is essential for accurate characterizations of
   performance over time and geography.

   [use-cases] discusses several use cases have been proposed for large-
   scale measurements:

   o  Operators: to help plan their network and identify faults

   o  End Users: to run diagnostic checks, such as a network speed test

   o  Regulators: to benchmark several network operators and support
      public policy development

   The LMAP framework should be useful for all these.

   The goal is to have the measurements (made using the same metrics and
   mechanisms) for a large number of points on the Internet, and to have
   the results collected and stored in the same form.

   There are existing measurement systems.  However, they typically lack
   some of the desirable features for a large-scale measurement system:

   o  Standardised - in terms of the tests that they perform, the
      components, the data models and protocols for transferring
      information between the components.  For example so that it is
      meaningful to compare measurements made of the same metric at
      different times and places.  For example so that the operator of a
      measurement system can buy the various components from different
      vendors.  Today's systems are proprietary in some or all of these
      aspects.

   o  Extensible - it should be easy to add or modify tests, for example
      an improved test methodology or to measure a performance metric
      not previously considered important (e.g., bufferbloat).

   o  Large-scale - [use-cases] envisages Measurement Agents in every
      home gateway and edge device such as set-top-boxes and tablet
      computers.  Existing systems have up to a few thousand Measurement
      Agents (without judging how much further they could scale).





Eardley, et al.         Expires January 16, 2014                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft               LMAP Framework                    July 2013


   o  Diversity - a measurement system should handle different types of
      Measurement Agent - for example Measurement Agents may come from
      different vendors, be in wired and wireless networks and be on
      devices with IPv4 or IPv6 addresses.


2.  Outline of framework

   The LMAP framework for large-scale measurements has four elements:

   o  Measurement Agent (MA)

   o  Measurement Peer

   o  Controller

   o  Collector

   In addition there are some components that are outside LMAP but
   useful within the context of a large scale measurement system:

   o  Initialiser

   o  Subscriber Parameter Database

   o  Results Database

   o  Data Analysis Tools

   o  Operator's OAM (Operations Administration and Management)

   a large-scale measurement system essentially has three sets of
   communications:

   o  several measurement protocols between a Measurement Agent and a
      Measurement Peer

   o  a Control Protocol between a Controller and a MA

   o  a Report Protocol between a MA and a Collector.

   A Measurement Agent and a Measurement Peer jointly perform an active
   measurement test, by generating test traffic and measuring some
   metric associated with its transfer over the path from one to the
   other; for example the time taken to transfer a 'test file'.  A MA
   may also conduct passive testing through the observation of traffic
   (i.e. without the involvement of a Measurement Peer); for example an
   end user's mix of applications.



Eardley, et al.         Expires January 16, 2014                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft               LMAP Framework                    July 2013


   The MA interacts with the Controller and Collector, and a Measurement
   Peer only takes part in active tests (and does not interact with the
   Controller and Collector).

   The MA functions are implemented either in specialised hardware or as
   code on general purpose devices like a PC, tablet or smartphone.  The
   Measurement Peer may be an LMAP device or a normal, non-LMAP device
   (for example if the MA measures the time for a DNS response or a
   webpage download from www.example.com).

   The Controller manages a MA by instructing it which tests it should
   perform and when.  For example it may instruct a MA at a home
   gateway: "Run the 'download speed test' with the test server at the
   end user's first IP point in the network; if the end user is active
   then delay the test and re-try 1 minute later, with up to 3 re-tries;
   repeat every hour at xx.05 + Unif[0,180] seconds".  The Controller
   also manages a MA by instructing it how to report the test results,
   for example: "Report results once a day in a batch at 4am +
   Unif[0,180] seconds; if the end user is active then delay the report
   5 minutes".  As well as regular tests, a Controller can initiate a
   one-off test ("Do test now", "Report as soon as possible").  These
   are called the Test and Report Schedule.

   The Collector accepts a Report from a MA with the results from its
   tests.  It may also do some processing on the results - for instance
   to eliminate outliers, as they can severely impact the aggregated
   results.

   Therefore the MA is a LMAP-specific device that initiates the test,
   gets instructions from the Controller and reports to the Collector.

   It is possible that communications between two Collectors, two
   Controllers and a Controller and Collector may be useful in some use
   cases, perhaps to help a measurement system scale.  Work on such a
   protocol is out of scope of LMAP (?)

   The Initialiser, Subscriber Parameter Database, Results Database,
   Data Analysis Tools and OAM are out of scope of LMAP.  They may be
   provided through existing protocols or applications and are likely to
   be part of a complete large-scale measurement system.  See Section 5
   for further discussion.










Eardley, et al.         Expires January 16, 2014                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft               LMAP Framework                    July 2013


+------------+                 +-----------+               +-----------+
|            |   Instruction   |           | test traffic  |           |
| Controller | --------------> |Measurement| ............. |Measurement|
|            |                 |Agent (MA) |               |   Peer    |
+------------+                 +-----------+               +-----------+
                                     |
                                     | Report
                                     |
                                     V
                               +-------------+
                               |  Collector  |
                               +-------------+

Figure 1: Schematic of main elements of LMAP framework


3.  Constraints

3.1.  Measurement system is under the direction of a single organisation

   In the LMAP framework (as defined in the WG's charter) the
   measurement system is under the direction of a single organisation
   that is responsible both for the data and the quality of experience
   delivered to its users.  Clear responsibility is critical given that
   a misbehaving large-scale measurement system could potentially harm
   user experience, user privacy and network security.

   However, the components of an LMAP measurement system can be deployed
   in administrative domains that are not owned by the measuring
   organisation.  Thus, the system of functions deployed by a single
   organisation constitutes a single LMAP domain which may span
   ownership or other administrative boundaries.

   Note that different LMAP measurement systems may overlap, in the
   sense that the active measurement packets of one measurement system
   appear along with normal user traffic to another measurement system.
   For instance, imagine an operator with an MA on the home gateway and
   an end user with an MA on their laptop.  Rather than making separate
   measurements, an organisation might share its measurement data, or a
   suitably anonymised version of it, with another organisation.
   However, any form of coordination between different organisation
   involves difficult commercial and technical issues and so, given the
   novelty of large-scale measurement efforts, any form of inter-
   organisation coordination is outside the scope of LMAP.







Eardley, et al.         Expires January 16, 2014                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft               LMAP Framework                    July 2013


3.2.  Each MA may only have a single Controller at any point in time

   The constraint avoids different Controllers giving a MA conflicting
   instructions and so means that the MA does not have to manage
   contention between multiple Test (or Report) Schedules.  This
   simplifies the design of MAs (critical for a large-scale
   infrastructure) and allows a Test Schedule to be tested on specific
   types of MA before deployment to ensure that the home user experience
   is not impacted (due to CPU, memory or broadband-product
   constraints).

   An operator may have several Controllers, perhaps with a Controller
   for different types of MA (home gateways, tablets) or location
   (Ipswich, Edinburgh).

   To avoid problems with NAT and firewalls, it is likely that the MA
   'pulls' the configuration from its Controller, as identified by the
   Initialiser.

   o  Open issue: Should there be negotiation between a Controller and
      its MA, or should the Controller simply instruct the MA by sending
      its Test and Report Schedules?

      *  The argument for negotiation is that occasionally the MA may be
         updated with enhanced with versions of existing tests.  It is
         easier for the Controller to learn the MAs capabilities
         directly from the MA than from a management system.  It avoids
         any mis-synchronisation.

      *  The argument against negotiation is that it makes the
         Controller-MA protocol more complicated, increases the MAs
         resource requirements and increases the complexity of the
         Controller when it decides how to schedule tests across
         numerous MAs or when it deploys a new Test Schedule to
         potentially millions of MAs.

   o  Open issue: what happens if a Controller fails, how is the MA is
      homed onto a new one?

3.3.  A Measurement Agent acts autonomously

   Once the MA gets its Test and Report Schedules from its Controller
   then it acts autonomously, in terms of operation of the tests and
   reporting of the result.

   Firstly, this means that the MA initiates Measurement Tasks.  For the
   typical case where the MA is on a home gateway or edge device, this
   means that the MA initiates a 'download speed test' by asking a



Eardley, et al.         Expires January 16, 2014                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft               LMAP Framework                    July 2013


   Measurement Peer to send the file.  The main rationale is that, for a
   test that should be performed when there is no user traffic on the
   link, the MA knows whether the end user is active and therefore
   whether to start the test or delay it.  Having the Schedule on the MA
   also avoids it having to check frequently with the Controller.
   Further, if the MA is behind a NAT then the Measurement Peer
   naturally learns its public-facing IP address.

   Secondly, it is useful for the MA and perhaps the Measurement Peer to
   make some 'admission control' checks at the initiation of the
   Measurement Task to ensure that desired test conditions are present.
   The exchange of initialization packets between the MA and Measurement
   Peer ensures basic connectivity between them.  Also, the MA may delay
   Measurement Task may if the associated subscriber is active, or the
   Measurement Peer may reject a testing request if it is overloaded.
   It has also been suggested that, in extremis, the Controller may want
   the ability to send a Measurement Suppression message to an MA, which
   causes the Measurement Tasks to be temporarily stopped.

   Last, it is easier to secure the reporting process, for example with
   a unique certificate for each MA-Collector pair, so that the
   Collector is confident the results really do originate from the MA.
   All measurement results are sent from the MA.


4.  Work items for LMAP WG

   This Section considers the work that the LMAP working group needs to
   tackle.  Section 5 considers other work that needs doing that would
   be beyond the scope of the LMAP WG.

   The main work items are:

   o  Information Model, the abstract definition of the information
      carried from the Controller to the MA and the information carried
      from the MA to the Collector.

   o  Control protocol and the associated data model: The definition of
      how instructions are delivered from a Controller to a MA; this
      includes a Data Model consistent with the Information Model plus a
      transport protocol.

   o  Report protocol and the associated data model: The definition of
      how the Report is delivered from a MA to a Collector; this
      includes a Data Model consistent with the Information Model plus a
      transport protocol.





Eardley, et al.         Expires January 16, 2014                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft               LMAP Framework                    July 2013


4.1.  Information Model

   The Information Model provides a protocol and device independent view
   of the information carried from the Controller to the MA and the
   information carried from the MA to the Collector.  It can be
   implemented via a Control Protocol and Report Protocol, as defined by
   the LMAP WG.  It is also possible that other Control and Report
   Protocols could be defined by other standards bodies or proprietary,
   however it is important that they all implement the same Information
   Model, in order to ease the definition, operation and
   interoperability of large-scale measurement systems.

   The Information Model also includes information that is pre-
   configured on the MA in order that it can start communicating with a
   Controller.

   An initial proposal for the Information Model is in
   [information-model].

   The Information Model is divided into two main parts, each of which
   may be broken down into sub-parts:

   o  information about the Instruction: Information that is received by
      the MA from the Controller pertaining to the measurement and
      reporting configuration.  This includes:

      *  what measurements to do: the Measurement Task could be defined
         by reference to a registry entry, along with any parameters
         that need to be set (such as the address of the Measurement
         Peer) and any Environmental Constraint (such as, delay the test
         if the end user is active)

      *  when to do them: the Measurement Schedule details the timings
         of regular tests, one-off tests, and if regularly tests should
         be temporarily suppressed

      *  how to report the Measurement Results: via Reporting
         Channel(s), each of which defines a target Collector and Report
         Schedule

   o  information about the Report: Information transmitted from the MA
      to the Collector including measurement results and the context in
      which they were conducted.  This includes:

      *  the MAs identifier, or perhaps a Group-ID to anonymise results

      *  the actual Measurement Results, including the time they were
         measured



Eardley, et al.         Expires January 16, 2014                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft               LMAP Framework                    July 2013


      *  the details of the Measurement Task (to avoid the Collector
         having to ask the Controller for this information later)

   It is important to consider how to divide the Information Model into
   (sub-)parts, so that each (sub-)part can be updated independently at
   different times and regularities, as discussed in [information-model]

4.2.  Control Protocol

   The Control protocol and its associated data model define how
   instructions are delivered from a Controller to a MA; this includes a
   Data Model consistent with the Information Model plus a transport
   protocol.  This may be a simple instruction - response protocol, and
   LMAP will specify how it operates over an existing protocol (to be
   selected, perhaps REST-style HTTP(s) or NETCONF).

4.3.  Report Protocol

   The Report protocol and the associated data model: The definition of
   how the Report is delivered from a MA to a Collector; this includes a
   Data Model consistent with the Information Model plus a transport
   protocol (to be selected, perhaps REST-style HTTP(s) or IPFIX).


5.  Related work required but out of scope of LMAP

   This section considers the items that need to be agreed between
   deployers of large-scale measurement systems, but that are out of
   scope of the LMAP WG (Section 4 considers items within its scope).

5.1.  Standard measurement tests

   Standardised methods are needed for each metric that is measured.  A
   registry for commonly-used metrics [registry] is also required, so
   that a test can be defined simply by its identifier in the registry.
   The methods and registry would hopefully also be referenced by other
   standards organisations.

   o  Such activities are in scope of the IPPM working group (possibly
      re-chartered) and not LMAP.

   A new (or revised) test may need to be uploaded to MAs.  How this is
   done is out of scope of the IETF; it could be as a firmware upgrade
   for a home hub, or new app for a PC, etc and may be device-specific.







Eardley, et al.         Expires January 16, 2014               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft               LMAP Framework                    July 2013


5.2.  Characterisation plan

   Each organisation operating an LMAP system and collecting
   measurements for comparison purposes needs to conduct the same
   measurements according to the same sampling plan (ie size and
   schedule) and make the results available in the same format.  The
   scope of comparison determines the set of organisations needing to
   agree on the common characterisation plan; for example those falling
   within the same regulatory environment in a particular country or
   region.  Such agreements are certainly facilitated by IETF's work,
   but the details of the plan are beyond the scope of work in IETF.

5.3.  Other elements

   Other elements may be useful within the context of a large scale
   measurement system and worthy of standardisation, but are outside the
   scope of the LMAP WG: Initialiser, Subscriber Parameter Database,
   Results Database, Data Analysis Tools and operator's OAM.

   An Initialiser configures a MA with details about its Controller,
   including authentication credentials.  A bootstrap protocol is likely
   to be technology specific and so for different types of device could
   be defined by the Broadband Forum, DOCSIS or IEEE.  Possible
   protocols are SNMP, NETCONF or (for Home Gateways) CPE WAN Management
   Protocol (CWMP) from the Auto Configuration Server (ACS) (as
   specified in TR-069).

   A Subscriber Parameter Database contains information about the line,
   for example the customer's broadband contract (2, 40 or 80Mb/s), the
   line technology (DSL or fibre), the time zone where the MA is
   located, and the type of home gateway and MA.  These are all factors
   which may affect the choice of what Measurement Tasks to run and how
   to interpret the Measurement Results.  For example, a download test
   suitable for a line with an 80Mb/s contract may overwhelm a 2Mb/s
   line.  Another example is if the Controller wants to run a one-off
   test to diagnose a fault, then it should understand what problem the
   customer is experiencing and what tests have already been run.  The
   subscribers' service parameters are already gathered and stored by
   existing operations systems.

   A Results Database records all measurements in an equivalent form,
   for example an SQL database [schulzrinne], so that they can be easily
   accessed by the Data Analysis Tools whilst the LMAP system
   implementor can choose local solutions for each component.  The Data
   Analysis Tools also need to understand subscriber service
   information, for example the broadband contract.

   The Data Analysis Tools receive the results from the Collector or via



Eardley, et al.         Expires January 16, 2014               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft               LMAP Framework                    July 2013


   the Results Database.  They might visualise the data or identify
   which component or link is likely to be the cause of a fault or
   degradation.

   The operator's OAM (Operations, Administration and Management) uses
   the results from the tools.


6.  IANA Considerations

   This document makes no request of IANA.

   Note to RFC Editor: this section may be removed on publication as an
   RFC.


7.  Security Considerations

   The security of the LMAP framework should protect the interests of
   the measurement operator(s), the network user(s) and other actors who
   could be impacted by a compromised measurement deployment.

   We assume that each Measurement Agent will receive test
   configuration, scheduling and reporting instructions from a single
   organisation (operator of the Controller).  These instructions must
   be authenticated (to ensure that they come from the trusted
   Controller), checked for integrity (to ensure no-one has tampered
   with them) and be prevented from replay.  If a malicious party can
   gain control of the Measurement Agent they can use the MA
   capabilities to launch DoS attacks at targets, reduce the network
   user experience and corrupt the measurement results that are reported
   to the Collector.  By altering the tests that are operated and/or the
   Collector address they can also compromise the confidentiality of the
   network user and the MA environment (such as information about the
   location of devices or their traffic).

   The reporting of the MA must also be secured to maintain
   confidentiality.  The results must be encrypted such that only the
   authorised Collector can decrypt the results to prevent the leakage
   of confidential or private information.  In addition it must be
   authenticated that the results have come from the expected MA and
   that they have not been tampered with.  It must not be possible to
   spoof an MA to inject falsified data into the measurement platform or
   to corrupt the results of a real MA.

   Availability should also be considered.  While the loss of some MAs
   may not be considered critical, the unavailability of the Collector
   could mean that valuable business data or data critical to a



Eardley, et al.         Expires January 16, 2014               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft               LMAP Framework                    July 2013


   regulatory process is lost.  Similarly, the unavailability of a
   Controller could mean that the MAs continue to operate an incorrect
   test schedule or fail to initiate.

   A malicious party could "game the system".  For example, where a
   regulator is running a measurement system in order to benchmark
   operators, an operator could try to identify the broadband lines that
   the regulator was measuring and prioritise that traffic.  This
   potential issue is currently handled by a code of conduct.  It is
   outside the scope of the LMAP WG to consider the issue.

   Concerning privacy and data protection, the role of the LMAP
   framework should be to ensure that only authorised data is collected
   and that this data is returned securely to the framework operator.
   Data should be stored securely and onward sharing of data to other
   parties should be controlled according to local data protection
   regulations.  Depending upon the ownership/placement of the MA, local
   data protection laws, the tests being operated and existing user
   agreements, it is possible that additional consent may need to be
   secured from parties such as the home broadband user.  Having the
   measurement system under the direction of a single organisation
   clarifies the responsibility for data protection.

   The next versions of [lmap-yang] and [lmap-ipfix] will also include
   further consideration of security.


8.  Acknowledgements

   Thanks to numerous people for much discussion, directly and on the
   LMAP list.  This document tries to capture the current conclusions.

   Philip Eardley and Trevor Burbridge work in part on the Leone
   research project, which receives funding from the European Union
   Seventh Framework Programme [FP7/2007-2013] under grant agreement
   number 317647.


9.  Changes

9.1.  from -00 to -01

   aligned with terminology in draft-eardley-lmap-terminology

   introduced aspects mentioned in the LMAP WG charter

   introduced aspects from the Information model in
   draft-burbridge-lamp-information-model



Eardley, et al.         Expires January 16, 2014               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft               LMAP Framework                    July 2013


10.  Informative References

   [RFC6241]  "Network Configuration Protocol (NETCONF)",
              <http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6241>.

   [information-model]
              Burbridge, T., Eardley, P., Bagnulo, M., and J.
              Schoenwaelder, "Information Model for Large-Scale
              Measurement Platforms (LMAP)", <http://tools.ietf.org/
              html/draft-burbridge-lmap-information-model>.

   [lmap-ipfix]
              "An LMAP application for IPFIX",
              <http://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-bagnulo-lmap-ipfix>.

   [lmap-netconf]
              "Considerations on using NETCONF with LMAP Measurement
              Agents",
              <http://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-schoenw-lmap-netconf>.

   [lmap-yang]
              "A YANG Data Model for LMAP Measurement Agents",
              <http://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-schoenw-lmap-yang>.

   [registry]
              "A registry for commonly used metrics. Independent
              registries", <http://tools.ietf.org/html/
              draft-bagnulo-ippm-new-registry-independent>.

   [schulzrinne]
              "Large-Scale Measurement of Broadband Performance: Use
              Cases, Architecture and Protocol Requirements", <http://
              tools.ietf.org/html/draft-schulzrinne-lmap-requirements>.

   [use-cases]
              "Large-Scale Broadband Measurement Use Cases",
              <http://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-linsner-lmap-use-cases>.

   [yang-api]
              "YANG-API Protocol", <http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6241>.











Eardley, et al.         Expires January 16, 2014               [Page 14]

Internet-Draft               LMAP Framework                    July 2013


Authors' Addresses

   Philip Eardley
   British Telecom
   Adastral Park, Martlesham Heath
   Ipswich
   ENGLAND

   Email: philip.eardley@bt.com


   Trevor Burbridge
   British Telecom
   Adastral Park, Martlesham Heath
   Ipswich
   ENGLAND

   Email: trevor.burbridge@bt.com


   Al Morton
   AT&T Labs
   200 Laurel Avenue South
   Middletown, NJ
   USA

   Email: acmorton@att.com
























Eardley, et al.         Expires January 16, 2014               [Page 15]

