


Internet Engineering Task Force                                J. Durand
Internet-Draft                                       CISCO Systems, Inc.
Intended status: BCP                                        I. Pepelnjak
Expires: March 25, 2013                                              NIL
                                                              G. Doering
                                                                SpaceNet
                                                      September 21, 2012


                      BGP operations and security
                   draft-jdurand-bgp-security-02.txt

Abstract

   BGP (Border Gateway Protocol) is the protocol almost exclusively used
   in the Internet to exchange routing information between network
   domains.  Due to this central nature, it's important to understand
   the security measures that can and should be deployed to prevent
   accidental or intentional routing disturbances.

   This document describes measures to protect the BGP sessions itself
   (like TTL, MD5, control plane filtering) and to better control the
   flow of routing information, using prefix filtering and
   automatization of prefix filters, max-prefix filtering, AS path
   filtering, route flap dampening and BGP community scrubbing.

Foreword

   A placeholder to list general observations about this document.

Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [1].

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any



Durand, et al.           Expires March 25, 2013                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                  BGP OPSEC                 September 2012


   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on March 25, 2013.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2012 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.
































Durand, et al.           Expires March 25, 2013                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                  BGP OPSEC                 September 2012


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.  Definitions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Protection of BGP router . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   4.  Protection of BGP sessions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     4.1.  Protection of TCP sessions used by BGP . . . . . . . . . .  4
     4.2.  BGP TTL security . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   5.  Prefix filtering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     5.1.  Definition of prefix filters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
       5.1.1.  Prefixes that MUST not be routed by definition . . . .  5
       5.1.2.  Prefixes not allocated . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
       5.1.3.  Prefixes too specific  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
       5.1.4.  Filtering prefixes belonging to local AS . . . . . . .  9
       5.1.5.  Internet exchange point (IXP) LAN prefixes . . . . . . 10
       5.1.6.  Default route  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     5.2.  Prefix filtering recommendations in full routing
           networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
       5.2.1.  Filters with internet peers  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
       5.2.2.  Filters with customers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
       5.2.3.  Filters with upstream providers  . . . . . . . . . . . 14
     5.3.  Prefix filtering recommendations for leaf networks . . . . 14
       5.3.1.  Inbound filtering  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
       5.3.2.  Outbound filtering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   6.  BGP route flap dampening . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   7.  Maximum prefixes on a peering  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   8.  AS-path filtering  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   9.  Next-Hop Filtering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
   10. BGP community scrubbing  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
   11. Change logs  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
     11.1. Diffs between draft-jdurand-bgp-security-01 and
           draft-jdurand-bgp-security-00  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
     11.2. Diffs between draft-jdurand-bgp-security-02 and
           draft-jdurand-bgp-security-01  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
   12. Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
   13. IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
   14. Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
   15. References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
     15.1. Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
     15.2. Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22










Durand, et al.           Expires March 25, 2013                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                  BGP OPSEC                 September 2012


1.  Introduction

   BGP [7] is the protocol used in the internet to exchange routing
   information between network domains.  This protocol does not directly
   include mechanisms that control that routes exchanged conform to the
   various rules defined by the Internet community.  This document
   intends to summarize most common existing rules and help network
   administrators applying simply coherent BGP policies.


2.  Definitions

   o  BGP peering: any TCP BGP connection on the Internet.


3.  Protection of BGP router

   The BGP router needs to be protected from stray packets.  This
   protection should be achieved by an access-list (ACL) which would
   discard all packets directed to TCP port 179 on the local device and
   sourced from an address not known to be a BGP neighbor.  If
   supported, an ACL specific to the control-plane of the router should
   be used (receive-ACL, control-plane policing, etc.), to avoid
   filtering transit traffic if not needed.  If the hardware can not do
   that, interface ACLs can be used to block packets to the local
   router.

   Some routers automatically program such an ACL upon BGP
   configuration.  On other devices this ACL should be configured and
   maintained manually or using scripts.

   The filtering of packets destined to the local router is a wider
   topic than "just for BGP" (if you bring down a router by overloading
   one of the other protocols from remote, BGP is harmed as well).  For
   a more detailed recommendation, see RFC6192 [19].


4.  Protection of BGP sessions

4.1.  Protection of TCP sessions used by BGP

   Attacks on TCP sessions used by BGP (ex: sending spoofed TCP
   RST packets) could bring down the TCP session.  Following a
   successful ARP spoofing attack (or other similar Man-in-the-Middle
   attack), the attacker might even be able to inject packets into
   the TCP stream (routing attacks).

   TCP sessions used by BGP can be secured with a variety of mechanisms.



Durand, et al.           Expires March 25, 2013                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                  BGP OPSEC                 September 2012


   MD5 protection of TCP session header [2] is the most common one, but
   one could also use IPsec or TCP Authentication Option (TCP-AO, [10]).

   The drawback of TCP session protection is additional configuration
   and management overhead for authentication information (ex: MD5
   password) maintenance.  Protection of TCP sessions used by BGP is
   thus recommended when peerings are established over shared networks
   where spoofing can be done (like internet exchanges, IXPs).

   You should block spoofed packets (packets with source IP address
   belonging to your IP address space) at all edges of your network,
   making the protection of TCP sessions used by BGP unnecessary on iBGP
   session or EBGP sessions run over point-to-point links.

4.2.  BGP TTL security

   BGP sessions can be made harder to spoof with the TTL security [9].
   Instead of sending TCP packets with TTL value = 1, the routers send
   the TCP packets with TTL value = 255 and the receiver checks that the
   TTL value equals 255.  Since it's impossible to send an IP packet
   with TTL = 255 to a non-directly-connected IP host, BGP TTL security
   effectively prevents all spoofing attacks coming from third parties
   not directly connected to the same subnet as the BGP-speaking
   routers.

   Note: Like MD5 protection, TTL security has to be configured on both
   ends of a BGP session.


5.  Prefix filtering

   The main aspect of securing BGP resides in controlling the prefixes
   that are received/advertised on the BGP peerings.  Prefixes exchanged
   between BGP peers are controlled with inbound and outbound filters
   that can match on IP prefixes (prefix filters, Section 5), AS paths
   (as-path filters, Section 8) or any other attributes of a BGP prefix
   (for example, BGP communities, Section 10).

5.1.  Definition of prefix filters

   This section list the most commonly used prefix filters.  Following
   sections will clarify where these filters should be applied.

5.1.1.  Prefixes that MUST not be routed by definition







Durand, et al.           Expires March 25, 2013                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                  BGP OPSEC                 September 2012


5.1.1.1.  IPv4

   At the time of the writing of this document, there is no dynamic IPv4
   registry listing special prefixes and their status on the internet.
   On the other hand static document RFC5735 [17] clarifies "special"
   IPv4 prefixes and their status in the Internet.  Since publication of
   that RFC another prefix has been added on the list of the special use
   prefixes.  Following prefixes MUST NOT cross network boundaries (ie.
   ASN) and therefore MUST be filtered:

   o  Prefixes defined in RFC5735 [17] and more specifics

   o  Shared address space [31] - 100.64.0.0/10 and more specifics

5.1.1.2.  IPv6

   IPv6 registry [26] maintains the list of IPv6 special purpose
   prefixes.  With the exception of the 6to4 2002::/16 prefix in that
   registry, all other prefixes that are mentioned and more specifics
   MUST not cross network boundaries and therefore MUST be filtered.
   The 6to4 prefix 2002::/16 is an exception because the prefix itself
   can be advertised, but more specifics MUST be filtered according to
   [4], section 5.2.3.

   At the time of the writing of this document, the list of IPv6
   prefixes that MUST not cross network boundaries can be simplified as
   IANA allocates at the time being prefixes to RIR's only in 2000::/3
   prefix [25].  All other prefixes (ULA's, link-local, multicast... are
   outside of that prefix) and therefore the simplified list becomes:

   o  2001:DB8::/32 and more specifics - documentation [13]

   o  Prefixes more specifics than 2002::/16 - 6to4 [4]

   o  3FFE::/16 and more specifics - was initially used for the 6Bone
      (worldwide IPv6 test network) and returned to IANA

   o  All prefixes that are outside 2000::/3 prefix

5.1.2.  Prefixes not allocated

   IANA allocates prefixes to RIRs which in turn allocate prefixes to
   LIRs.  It is wise not to accept in the routing table prefixes that
   are not allocated.  This could mean allocation made by IANA and/or
   allocations done by RIRs.  This section details the options for
   building list of allocated prefixes at every level.  It is important
   to understand that filtering prefixes not allocated requires constant
   updates as IANA and RIRs keep allocating prefixes.  Therefore



Durand, et al.           Expires March 25, 2013                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                  BGP OPSEC                 September 2012


   automation of such prefix filters is key for the success of this
   approach.  One should probably not consider solutions described in
   this section if it is not capable of maintaining updated prefix
   filters: damage would probably be worse than the intended security
   policy.

5.1.2.1.  IANA allocated prefixes filters

   IANA has allocated all the IPv4 available space.  Therefore there is
   no reason why one would keep checking prefixes are in the IANA
   allocated address space [24].  No specific filter need to be put in
   place by administrators who want to make sure that IPv4 prefixes they
   receive have been allocated by IANA.

   For IPv6, given the size of the address space, it can be seen as wise
   accepting only prefixes derived from those allocated by IANA.
   Administrators can dynamically build this list from the IANA
   allocated IPv6 space [27].  As IANA keeps allocating prefixes to
   RIRs, the aforementioned list should be checked regularly against
   changes and if they occur, prefix filter should be computed and
   pushed on network devices.  As there is delay between the time a RIR
   receives a new prefix and the moment it starts allocating portions of
   it to its LIRs, there is no need doing this step quickly and
   frequently.  At least process in place should make sure there is no
   more than one month between the time the IANA IPv6 allocated prefix
   list changes and the moment all IPv6 prefix filters have been
   updated.

   If process in place (manual or automatic) cannot guarantee that the
   list is updated regularly then it's better not to configure any
   filter based on allocated networks.  The IPv4 experience has shown
   that many network operators implemented filters for prefixes not
   allocated by IANA but did not update them on a regular basis.  This
   created problems for latest allocations and required a extra work for
   RIR's that had to "de-boggonize" the newly allocated prefixes.

5.1.2.2.  RIR allocated prefixes filters

   A more precise check can be performed as one would like to make sure
   that prefixes they receive are being originated by the autonomous
   system which actually own the prefix.  It has been observed in the
   past that one could easily advertise someone else's prefix (or more
   specific prefixes) and create black holes or security threats.  To
   overcome that risk, administrators would need to make sure BGP
   advertisements correspond to information located in the existing
   registries.  At this stage 2 options can be considered (short and
   long term options).  They are described in the following subsections.




Durand, et al.           Expires March 25, 2013                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                  BGP OPSEC                 September 2012


5.1.2.3.  Prefix filters creation from Internet Routing Registries (IRR)

   An Internet Routing Registry (IRR) is a database containing internet
   routing information, described using Routing Policy Specification
   Language objects [14].  Network engineers are given privileges to
   describe routing policies of their own networks in the IRR and
   information is published, usually publicly.  Most of Regional
   Internet Registries do also operate an IRR and can control that
   registered routes conform to allocations made.

   It is possible to use IRR information in order to build for a given
   BGP neighbor a list of prefixes, with corresponding originating
   autonomous system.  This can be done relatively easily using scripts
   and existing tools capable of retrieving this information in the
   registries.  This approach is exactly the same for both IPv4 and
   IPv6.

   The macro-algorithm for the script is described as follows.  For the
   peer that is considered, the distant network administrator has
   provided the autonomous system and may be able to provide an AS-SET
   object (aka AS-MACRO).  An AS-SET is an object which contains AS
   numbers or other AS-SET's.  An operator may create an AS-SET defining
   all the AS numbers of its customers.  A tier 1 transit provider might
   create an AS-SET describing the AS-SET of connected operators, which
   in turn describe the AS numbers of their customers.  Using recursion,
   it is possible to retrieve from an AS-SET the complete list of AS
   numbers that the peer is susceptible to announce.  For each of these
   AS numbers, it is also easy to check in the corresponding IRR all
   associated prefixes.  With these 2 mechanisms a script can build for
   a given peer the list of allowed prefixes and the AS number from
   which they should be originated.

   As prefixes, AS numbers and AS-SET's may not all be under the same
   RIR authority, a difficulty resides choosing for each object the
   appropriate IRR to poll.  Some IRR have been created and are not
   restricted to a given region or authoritative RIR.  They allow RIRs
   to publish information contained in their IRR in a common place.
   They also make it possible for any subscriber (probably under
   contract) to publish information too.  When doing requests inside
   such an IRR, it is possible to specify the source of information in
   order to have the most reliable data.  One could check the central
   registry and only check that the source is one of the 5 RIRs.  The
   probably most famous registry of that kind is the RADB [28] (Routing
   Assets Database).

   As objects in IRR's may quickly vary over time, it is important that
   prefix filters computed using this mechanism are refreshed regularly.
   A daily basis could even been considered as some routing changes must



Durand, et al.           Expires March 25, 2013                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                  BGP OPSEC                 September 2012


   be done sometimes in a certain emergency and registries may be
   updated at the very last moment.  It has to be noted that this
   approach significantly increases the complexity of the router
   configurations as it can quickly add more than ten thousands
   configuration lines for some important peers.

5.1.2.4.  SIDR - Secure Inter Domain Routing

   IETF has created a working group called SIDR (Secure Inter-Domain
   Routing) in order to create an architecture to secure internet
   advertisements.  At the time this document is written, many document
   has been published and a framework is proposed so that advertisements
   can be checked against signed routing objects in RIR routing
   registries.  Implementing mechanisms proposed by this working group
   is the solution that will solve at a longer term the BGP routing
   security.  But as it may take time objects are signed and deployments
   are done such a solution will need to be combined at the time being
   with other mechanisms proposed in this document.  The rest of this
   section assumes the reader understands all technologies associated
   with SIDR.

   Each received route on a router should be checked against the RPKI
   data set: if a corresponding ROA is found and is valid then the
   prefix should be accepted.  It the ROA is found and is INVALID then
   the prefix should be discarded.  If an ROA is not found then the
   prefix should be accepted but corresponding route should be given a
   low preference.

5.1.3.  Prefixes too specific

   Most ISPs will not accept advertisements beyond a certain level of
   specificity (and in return do not announce prefixes they consider as
   too specific).  That acceptable specificity is decided for each
   peering between the 2 BGP peers.  Some ISP communities have tried to
   document acceptable specificity.  This document does not make any
   judgement on what the best approach is, it just recalls that there
   are existing practices on the internet and recommends the reader to
   refer to what those are.  As an example RIPE community has documented
   that IPv4 prefixes longer than /24 and IPv6 prefixes longer than /48
   are generally not announced/accepted in the internet [21] [22].

5.1.4.  Filtering prefixes belonging to local AS

   A network SHOULD filter its own prefixes on peerings with all its
   peers (inbound direction).  This prevents local traffic (from a local
   source to a local destination) to leak over an external peering in
   case someone else is announcing the prefix over the Internet.  This
   also protects the infrastructure which may directly suffer in case



Durand, et al.           Expires March 25, 2013                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft                  BGP OPSEC                 September 2012


   backbone's prefix is suddenly preferred over the Internet.  To an
   extent, such filters can also be configured on a network for the
   prefixes of its downstreams in order to protect them too.  Such
   filters must be defined with caution as they can break existing
   redundancy mechanisms.  For example in case an operator has a
   multihomed customer, it should keep accepting the customer prefix
   from its peers and upstreams.  This will make it possible for the
   customer to keep accessing its operator network (and other customers)
   via the internet in case the BGP peering between the customer and the
   operator is down.

5.1.5.  Internet exchange point (IXP) LAN prefixes

5.1.5.1.  Network security

   When a network is present on an exchange point (IXP) and peers with
   other IXP members over a common subnet (IXP LAN prefix), it MUST NOT
   accept more specific prefixes for the IXP LAN prefix from any of all
   its external BGP peers.  Accepting these routes would create a black
   hole for connectivity to the IXP LAN.

   If the IXP LAN prefix is accepted as an "exact match", care needs to
   be taken to avoid other routers in the network sending IXP traffic
   towards the externally-learned IXP LAN prefix (recursive route lookup
   pointing into the wrong direction).  This can be achieved by
   preferring IGP routes before eBGP, or by using "BGP next-hop-self" on
   all routes learned on that IXP.

   If the IXP LAN prefix is accepted at all, it MUST only be accepted
   from the ASes that the IXP authorizes to announce it - which will
   usually be automatically achieved by filtering announcements by IRR
   DB.

5.1.5.2.  pMTUd and loose uRPF problem

   In order to have pMTUd working in the presence of loose uRPF, it is
   necessary that all the networks that may source traffic that could
   flow through the IXP (ie.  IXP members and their downstreams) have a
   route for the IXP LAN prefix.  This is necessary as "packet too big"
   ICMP messages sent by IXP members' routers may be sourced using an
   address of the IXP LAN prefix.  In the presence of loose uRPF, this
   ICMP packet is dropped if there is no route for the IXP LAN prefix or
   a less specific route covering IXP LAN prefix.

   In that case, any IXP member SHOULD make sure it has a route for the
   IXP LAN prefix or a less specific prefix on all its routers and that
   it announces the IXP LAN prefix or less specific (up to a default
   route) to its downstreams.  The announcements done for this purpose



Durand, et al.           Expires March 25, 2013                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft                  BGP OPSEC                 September 2012


   SHOULD pass IRR-generated filters described in Section 5.1.2.3 as
   well as "prefixes too specific" filters described in Section 5.1.3.
   The easiest way to implement this is that the IXP itself takes care
   of the origination of its prefix and advertises it to all IXP members
   through a BGP peering.  Most likely the BGP route servers would be
   used for this.  The IXP would most likely send its entire prefix
   which would be equal or less specific than the IXP LAN prefix.

5.1.5.3.  Example

   Let's take as an example an IXP in RIPE region for IPv4.  It would be
   allocated a /22 by RIPE NCC (X.Y.0.0/22 in our example) and use a /23
   of this /22 for the IXP LAN (let say X.Y.0.0/23).  This IXP LAN
   prefix is the one used by IXP members to configure eBGP peerings.
   The IXP could also be allocated an AS number (AS64496 in our
   example).

   Any IXP member MUST make sure it filters prefixes more specific than
   X.Y.0.0/23 from all its eBGP peers.  If it received X.Y.0.0/24 or
   X.Y.1.0/24 this could seriously impact its routing.

   The IXP SHOULD originate X.Y.0.0/22 and advertise it to its members
   through its BGP route servers (configured with AS64496).

   The IXP members SHOULD accept the IXP prefix only if it passes the
   IRR generated filters (see Section 5.1.2.3)

   IXP members SHOULD then advertise X.Y.0.0/22 prefix to their
   downstreams.  This announce would pass IRR based filters as it is
   originated by the IXP.

5.1.6.  Default route

5.1.6.1.  IPv4

   0.0.0.0/0 prefix MUST NOT be announced on the Internet but it is
   usually exchanged on upstream/customer peerings.

5.1.6.2.  IPv6

   ::/0 prefix MUST NOT be announced on the Internet but it is usually
   exchanged on upstream/customer peerings.

5.2.  Prefix filtering recommendations in full routing networks

   For networks that have the full internet BGP table, some policies
   should be applied on each BGP peer for received and advertised
   routes.  It is recommended that each autonomous system configures



Durand, et al.           Expires March 25, 2013                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft                  BGP OPSEC                 September 2012


   rules for advertised and received routes at all its borders as this
   will protect the network and its peer even in case of
   misconfiguration.  The most commonly used filtering policy is
   proposed in this section.

5.2.1.  Filters with internet peers

5.2.1.1.  Inbound filtering

   There are basically 2 options, the loose one where no check will be
   done against RIR allocations and the strict one where it will be
   verified that announcements strictly conform to what is declared in
   routing registries.

5.2.1.1.1.  Inbound filtering loose option

   In that case, the following prefixes received from a BGP peer will be
   filtered:

   o  Prefixes not routable (Section 5.1.1)

   o  Prefixes not allocated by IANA (IPv6 only) (Section 5.1.2.1)

   o  Routes too specific (Section 5.1.3)

   o  Prefixes belonging to local AS (Section 5.1.4)

   o  Exchange points LAN prefixes (Section 5.1.5)

   o  Default route (Section 5.1.6)

5.2.1.1.2.  Inbound filtering strict option

   In that case, filters are applied to make sure advertisements
   strictly conform to what is declared in routing registries
   Section 5.1.2.2.  It must be checked that in case of script failure
   all routes are rejected.

   In addition to this, one could apply following filters beforehand in
   case routing registry used as source of information by the script is
   not fully trusted:

   o  Prefixes not routable (Section 5.1.1)

   o  Routes too specific (Section 5.1.3)

   o  Prefixes belonging to local AS (Section 5.1.4)




Durand, et al.           Expires March 25, 2013                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft                  BGP OPSEC                 September 2012


   o  Exchange points LAN prefixes (Section 5.1.5)

   o  Default route (Section 5.1.6)

5.2.1.2.  Outbound filtering

   Configuration in place will make sure that only appropriate prefixes
   are sent.  These can be for example prefixes belonging to the
   considered networks and those of its customers.  This can be done
   using BGP communities or many other solution.  Whatever scenario
   considered, it can be desirable that following filters are positioned
   before to avoid unwanted route announcement due to bad configuration:

   o  Prefixes not routable (Section 5.1.1)

   o  Routes too specific (Section 5.1.3)

   o  Exchange points LAN prefixes (Section 5.1.5)

   o  Default route (Section 5.1.6)

   In case it is possible to list the prefixes to be advertised, then
   just configuring the list of allowed prefixes and denying the rest is
   sufficient.

5.2.2.  Filters with customers

5.2.2.1.  Inbound filtering

   Inbound policy with end customers is pretty straightforward: only
   customers prefixes must be accepted, all others MUST be discarded.
   The list of accepted prefixes can be manually specified, after having
   verified that they are valid.  This validation can be done with the
   appropriate IP address management authorities.

   Same rules apply in case the customer is also a network connecting
   other customers (for example a tier 1 transit provider connecting
   service providers).  An exception can be envisaged in case it is
   known that the customer network applies strict inbound/outbound
   prefix filtering, and the number of prefixes announced by that
   network is too large to list them in the router configuration.  In
   that case filters as in Section 5.2.1.1 can be applied.

5.2.2.2.  Outbound filtering

   Outbound policy with customers may vary according to the routes
   customer wants to receive.  In the simplest possible scenario,
   customer wants to receive only the default route, which can be done



Durand, et al.           Expires March 25, 2013                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft                  BGP OPSEC                 September 2012


   easily by applying a filter with the default route only.

   In case the customer wants to receive the full routing (in case it is
   multihomed or if wants to have a view on the internet table), the
   following filters can be simply applied on the BGP peering:

   o  Prefixes not routable (Section 5.1.1)

   o  Routes too specific (Section 5.1.3)

   o  Default route (Section 5.1.6)

   There can be a difference for the default route that can be announced
   to the customer in addition to the full BGP table.  This can be done
   simply by removing the filter for the default route.  As the default
   route may not be present in the routing table, one may decide to
   originate it only for peerings where it has to be advertised.

5.2.3.  Filters with upstream providers

5.2.3.1.  Inbound filtering

   In case the full routing table is desired from the upstream, the
   prefix filtering to apply is more or less the same than the one for
   peers Section 5.2.1.1.  There can be a difference for the default
   route that can be desired from an upstream provider even if it
   advertises the full BGP table.  In case the upstream provider is
   supposed to announce only the default route, a simple filter will be
   applied to accept only the default prefix and nothing else.

5.2.3.2.  Outbound filtering

   The filters to be applied should not differ from the ones applied for
   internet peers (Section 5.2.1.2).

5.3.  Prefix filtering recommendations for leaf networks

5.3.1.  Inbound filtering

   The leaf network will position the filters corresponding to the
   routes it is requesting from its upstream.  In case a default route
   is requested, simple inbound filter will be applied to accept only
   that default route (Section 5.1.6).  In case the leaf network is not
   capable of listing the prefix because the amount is too large (for
   example if it requires the full internet routing table) then it
   should configure filters to avoid receiving bad announcements from
   its upstream:




Durand, et al.           Expires March 25, 2013                [Page 14]

Internet-Draft                  BGP OPSEC                 September 2012


   o  Prefixes not routable (Section 5.1.1)

   o  Routes too specific (Section 5.1.3)

   o  Prefixes belonging to local AS (Section 5.1.4)

   o  Default route (Section 5.1.6) depending if the route is requested
      or not

5.3.2.  Outbound filtering

   A leaf network will most likely have a very straightforward policy:
   it will only announce its local routes.  It can also configure the
   following prefixes filters described in Section 5.2.1.2 to avoid
   announcing invalid routes to its upstream provider.


6.  BGP route flap dampening

   BGP route flap dampening mechanism makes it possible to give
   penalties to routes each time they change in the BGP routing table.
   Initially this mechanism was created to protect the entire internet
   from multiple events impacting a single network.  RIPE community now
   recommends not using BGP route flap dampening [20].  Author of this
   document proposes to follow the proposal of the RIPE community.


7.  Maximum prefixes on a peering

   It is recommended to configure a limit on the number of routes to be
   accepted from a peer.  Following rules are generally recommended:

   o  From peers, it is recommended to have a limit lower than the
      number of routes in the internet.  This will shut down the BGP
      peering if the peer suddenly advertises the full table.  One can
      also configure different limits for each peer, according to the
      number of routes they are supposed to advertise plus some headroom
      to permit growth.

   o  From upstreams which provide full routing, it is recommended to
      have a limit much higher than the number of routes in the
      internet.  A limit is still useful in order to protect the network
      (and in particular the routers' memory) if too many routes are
      sent by the upstream.  The limit should be chosen according to the
      number of routes that can actually be handled by routers.

   It is important to regularly review the limits that are configured as
   the internet can quickly change over time.  Some vendors propose



Durand, et al.           Expires March 25, 2013                [Page 15]

Internet-Draft                  BGP OPSEC                 September 2012


   mechanisms to have 2 thresholds: while the higher number specified
   will shutdown the peering, the first threshold will only trigger a
   log and can be used to passively adjust limits based on observations
   made on the network.


8.  AS-path filtering

   The following rules should be applied on BGP AS-paths:

   o  Do not accept anything other than customer's AS number from the
      customer.  Alternatively, only accept AS-paths with a single AS
      number (potentially repeated several times) from your customers.
      The latter option is easier to configure than per-customer AS-path
      filters: the default BGP logic will make sure in that case that
      the first AS number in the AS-path is the one of the peer.

   o  Do not accept overly long AS path prepending from the customer.

   o  Do not accept more than two distinct AS path numbers in the AS
      path if your customer is an ISP with customers.  This rule is not
      adding anything extra in case prefix filters are built from
      registries as described in Section 5.1.2.3.

   o  Do not advertise prefixes with non-empty AS-path if you're not
      transit.

   o  Do not advertise prefixes with upstream AS numbers in the AS path
      to your peering AS.

   o  Do not accept private AS numbers except from customers

   o  Do not advertise private AS numbers.  Exception: Customers using
      BGP without having their own AS number must use private AS numbers
      to advertise their prefixes to their upstream.  The private AS
      number is usually provided by the upstream.

   o  Do not accept prefixes when the first AS number in the AS-path is
      not the one of the peer.  In case the peering is done toward a BGP
      route-server [30] (connection on an Internet eXchange Point - IXP)
      with transparent AS path handling, this verification needs to be
      de-activated as the first AS number will be the one of an IXP
      member whereas the peer AS number will be the one of the BGP
      route-server.







Durand, et al.           Expires March 25, 2013                [Page 16]

Internet-Draft                  BGP OPSEC                 September 2012


9.  Next-Hop Filtering

   If peering on a shared network, like an Exchange-Point, BGP can
   advertise prefixes with a 3rd-party next-hop, thus directing packets
   not to the peer announcing the prefix but somewhere else.

   This is a desirable property for BGP route-server setups [30], where
   the route-server will relay routing information, but has neither
   capacity nor desire to receive the actual data packets.  So the BGP
   route-server will announce prefixes with a next-hop setting pointing
   to the router that originally announced the prefix to the route-
   server.

   In direct peerings between ISPs, this is undesirable, as one of the
   peers could trick the other one to send packets into a black hole
   (unreachable next-hop) or to an unsuspecting 3rd party who would then
   have to carry the traffic.  Especially for black-holing, the root
   cause of the problem is hard to see without inspecting BGP prefixes
   at the receiving router at the IXP.

   Therefore, the authors recommend to, by default, apply an inbound
   route policy to IXP peerings which sets the next-hop for accepted
   prefixes to the BGP peer that sent the prefix (which is what "next-
   hop-self" would enforce on the sending side, but you can not rely on
   the other party to always send correct information).

   This policy MUST NOT be used on route-server peerings, or on peerings
   where you intentionally permit the other side to send 3rd-party next-
   hops.


10.  BGP community scrubbing

   Optionally we can consider the following rules on BGP AS-paths:

   o  Scrub inbound communities with your AS number in the high-order
      bits - allow only those communities that customers/peers can use
      as a signaling mechanism

   o  Do not remove other communities: your customers might need them to
      communicate with upstream providers.  In particular do not
      (generally) remove the no-export community as it is usually
      announced by your peer for a certain purpose.








Durand, et al.           Expires March 25, 2013                [Page 17]

Internet-Draft                  BGP OPSEC                 September 2012


11.  Change logs

11.1.  Diffs between draft-jdurand-bgp-security-01 and
       draft-jdurand-bgp-security-00

   Following changes have been made since previous document
   draft-jdurand-bgp-security-00:

   o  "This documents" typo corrected in the former abstract

   o  Add normative reference for RFC5082 in former section 3.2

   o  "Non routable" changed in title of former section 4.1.1

   o  Correction of typo for IPv4 loopback prefix in former section
      4.1.1.1

   o  Added shared transition space 100.64.0.0/10 in former section
      4.1.1.1

   o  Clarification that 2002::/16 6to4 prefix can cross network
      boundaries in former section 4.1.1.2

   o  Rationale of 2000::/3 explained in former section 4.1.1.2

   o  Added 3FFE::/16 prefix forgotten initially in the simplified list
      of prefixes that MUST not be routed by definition in former
      section 4.1.1.2

   o  Warn that filters for prefixes not allocated by IANA must only be
      done if regular refresh is guaranteed, with some words about the
      IPv4 experience, in former section 4.1.2.1

   o  Replace RIR database with IRR.  A definition of IRR is added in
      former section 4.1.2.2

   o  Remove any reference to anti-spoofing in former section 4.1.4

   o  Clarification for IXP LAN prefix and pMTUd problem in former
      section 4.1.5

   o  "Autonomous filters" typo (instead of Autonomous systems)
      corrected in the former section 4.2

   o  Removal of an example for manual address validation in former
      section 4.2.2.1





Durand, et al.           Expires March 25, 2013                [Page 18]

Internet-Draft                  BGP OPSEC                 September 2012


   o  RFC5735 obsoletes RFC3300

   o  Ingress/Egress replaced by Inbound/Outbound in all the document

11.2.  Diffs between draft-jdurand-bgp-security-02 and
       draft-jdurand-bgp-security-01

   Following changes have been made since previous document
   draft-jdurand-bgp-security-01:

   o  2 documentation prefixes were forgotten due to errata in RFC5735.
      But all prefixes were removed from that document which now point
      to other references for sake of not creating a new "registry" that
      would become outdated sooner or later.

   o  Change MD5 section with global TCP security session and
      introducing TCP-AO in former section 3.1.  Added reference to
      BCP38

   o  Added new section 3 about BGP router protection with forwarding
      plane ACL

   o  Change text about prefix acceptable specificity in former section
      4.1.3 to explain this doc does not try to make recommendations

   o  Refer as much as possible to existing registries to avoid creating
      a new one in former section 4.1.1.1 and 4.1.1.2

   o  Abstract reworded

   o  6to4 exception described (only more specifics must be filtered)

   o  More specific -> more specifics

   o  should -> MUST for the prefixes an ISP needs to filter from its
      customers in former section 4.2.2.1

   o  Added "plus some headroom to permit growth" in former section 7

   o  Added new section on Next-Hop filtering


12.  Acknowledgements

   Authors would like to thank the following people for their comments
   and support: Marc Blanchet, Ron Bonica, Daniel Ginsburg, David
   Groves, Tim Kleefass, Hagen Paul Pfeifer, Thomas Pinaud, Carlos
   Pignataro, Matjaz Straus, Tony Tauber, Gunter Van de Velde, Sebastian



Durand, et al.           Expires March 25, 2013                [Page 19]

Internet-Draft                  BGP OPSEC                 September 2012


   Wiesinger.


13.  IANA Considerations

   This memo includes no request to IANA.


14.  Security Considerations

   This document is entirely about BGP operational security.


15.  References

15.1.  Normative References

   [1]   Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
         Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997,
         <http://xml.resource.org/public/rfc/html/rfc2119.html>.

   [2]   Heffernan, A., "Protection of BGP Sessions via the TCP MD5
         Signature Option", RFC 2385, August 1998.

   [3]   Rose, M., "Writing I-Ds and RFCs using XML", RFC 2629,
         June 1999.

   [4]   Carpenter, B. and K. Moore, "Connection of IPv6 Domains via
         IPv4 Clouds", RFC 3056, February 2001.

   [5]   Huitema, C. and B. Carpenter, "Deprecating Site Local
         Addresses", RFC 3879, September 2004.

   [6]   Hinden, R. and B. Haberman, "Unique Local IPv6 Unicast
         Addresses", RFC 4193, October 2005.

   [7]   Rekhter, Y., Li, T., and S. Hares, "A Border Gateway Protocol 4
         (BGP-4)", RFC 4271, January 2006.

   [8]   Hinden, R. and S. Deering, "IP Version 6 Addressing
         Architecture", RFC 4291, February 2006.

   [9]   Gill, V., Heasley, J., Meyer, D., Savola, P., and C. Pignataro,
         "The Generalized TTL Security Mechanism (GTSM)", RFC 5082,
         October 2007.

   [10]  Touch, J., Mankin, A., and R. Bonica, "The TCP Authentication
         Option", RFC 5925, June 2010.



Durand, et al.           Expires March 25, 2013                [Page 20]

Internet-Draft                  BGP OPSEC                 September 2012


15.2.  Informative References

   [11]  Crocker, D., Ed. and P. Overell, "Augmented BNF for Syntax
         Specifications: ABNF", RFC 2234, November 1997.

   [12]  Ferguson, P. and D. Senie, "Network Ingress Filtering:
         Defeating Denial of Service Attacks which employ IP Source
         Address Spoofing", BCP 38, RFC 2827, May 2000.

   [13]  Huston, G., Lord, A., and P. Smith, "IPv6 Address Prefix
         Reserved for Documentation", RFC 3849, July 2004.

   [14]  Blunk, L., Damas, J., Parent, F., and A. Robachevsky, "Routing
         Policy Specification Language next generation (RPSLng)",
         RFC 4012, March 2005.

   [15]  Crocker, D., Ed. and P. Overell, "Augmented BNF for Syntax
         Specifications: ABNF", RFC 4234, October 2005.

   [16]  Blanchet, M., "Special-Use IPv6 Addresses", RFC 5156,
         April 2008.

   [17]  Cotton, M. and L. Vegoda, "Special Use IPv4 Addresses",
         BCP 153, RFC 5735, January 2010.

   [18]  Arkko, J., Cotton, M., and L. Vegoda, "IPv4 Address Blocks
         Reserved for Documentation", RFC 5737, January 2010.

   [19]  Dugal, D., Pignataro, C., and R. Dunn, "Protecting the Router
         Control Plane", RFC 6192, March 2011.

   [20]  Smith, P. and C. Panigl, "RIPE-378 - RIPE Routing Working Group
         Recommendations On Route-flap Damping", May 2006.

   [21]  Smith, P., Evans, R., and M. Hughes, "RIPE-399 - RIPE Routing
         Working Group Recommendations on Route Aggregation",
         December 2006.

   [22]  Smith, P. and R. Evans, "RIPE-532 - RIPE Routing Working Group
         Recommendations on IPv6 Route Aggregation", November 2011.

   [23]  Doering, G., "IPv6 BGP Filter Recommendations", November 2009,
         <http://www.space.net/~gert/RIPE/ipv6-filters.html>.

   [24]  "IANA IPv4 Address Space Registry", <http://www.iana.org/
         assignments/ipv4-address-space/ipv4-address-space.xml>.

   [25]  "IANA IPv6 Address Space", <http://www.iana.org/assignments/



Durand, et al.           Expires March 25, 2013                [Page 21]

Internet-Draft                  BGP OPSEC                 September 2012


         ipv6-address-space/ipv6-address-space.xml>.

   [26]  "IANA IPv6 Special Purpose Registry", <http://www.iana.org/
         assignments/iana-ipv6-special-registry/
         iana-ipv6-special-registry.xml>.

   [27]  "IANA IPv6 Address Space Registry", <http://www.iana.org/
         assignments/ipv6-unicast-address-assignments/
         ipv6-unicast-address-assignments.xml>.

   [28]  "Routing Assets Database", <http://www.radb.net>.

   [29]  "Secure Inter-Domain Routing IETF working group",
         <http://datatracker.ietf.org/wg/sidr/>.

   [30]  "Internet Exchange Route Server", <http://tools.ietf.org/id/
         draft-jasinska-ix-bgp-route-server-03.txt>.

   [31]  "IANA Reserved IPv4 Prefix for Shared Address Space", <http://
         tools.ietf.org/id/
         draft-weil-shared-transition-space-request-15.txt>.


Authors' Addresses

   Jerome Durand
   CISCO Systems, Inc.
   11 rue Camille Desmoulins
   Issy-les-Moulineaux  92782 CEDEX
   FR

   Email: jerduran@cisco.com


   Ivan Pepelnjak
   NIL Data Communications
   Tivolska 48
   Ljubljana  1000
   Slovenia

   Email: ip@nil.com










Durand, et al.           Expires March 25, 2013                [Page 22]

Internet-Draft                  BGP OPSEC                 September 2012


   Gert Doering
   SpaceNet AG
   Joseph-Dollinger-Bogen 14
   Muenchen  D-80807
   Germany

   Email: gert@space.net












































Durand, et al.           Expires March 25, 2013                [Page 23]

