



Security Automation and Continuous Monitoring WG           D. Waltermire
Internet-Draft                                                      NIST
Intended status: Informational                             D. Harrington
Expires: April 17, 2014                               Effective Software
                                                        October 14, 2013


      Endpoint Security Posture Assessment - Enterprise Use Cases
                      draft-ietf-sacm-use-cases-02

Abstract

   This memo documents a sampling of use cases for securely aggregating
   configuration and operational data and assessing that data to
   determine an organization's security posture.  From these operational
   use cases, we can derive common functional capabilities and
   requirements to guide development of vendor-neutral, interoperable
   standards for aggregating and assessing data relevant to security
   posture.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 17, 2014.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must



Waltermire & Harrington  Expires April 17, 2014                 [Page 1]

Internet-DraftEnterprise Use Cases for Security Assessment  October 2013


   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Endpoint Posture Assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     2.1.  Definition and Publication of Automatable Configuration
           Guides  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     2.2.  Automated Checklist Verification  . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     2.3.  Organizational Software Policy Compliance . . . . . . . .   6
     2.4.  Detection of Posture Deviations . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     2.5.  Search for Signs of Infection . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     2.6.  Remediation and Mitigation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     2.7.  Endpoint Information Analysis and Reporting . . . . . . .   7
     2.8.  Others... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   3.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   4.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   5.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   6.  Change Log  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     6.1.  -00- to -01-  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     6.2.  -00- to -01-  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     6.3.  draft-waltermire-sacm-use-cases-05 to draft-ietf-sacm-
           use-cases-00  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     6.4.  -04- to -05-  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   7.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
     7.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
     7.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11

1.  Introduction

   Our goal with this document is to improve our agreement on which
   problems we're trying to solve.  We need to start with short, simple
   problem statements and discuss those by email and in person.  Once we
   agree on which problems we're trying to solve, we can move on to
   propose various solutions and decide which ones to use.

   This document describes example use cases for endpoint posture
   assessment for enterprises.  It provides a sampling of use cases for
   securely aggregating configuration and operational data and assessing
   that data to determine the security posture of individual endpoints,
   and, in the aggregate, the security posture of an enterprise.

   These use cases cross many IT security information domains.  From
   these operational use cases, we can derive common concepts, common
   information expressions, functional capabilities and requirements to



Waltermire & Harrington  Expires April 17, 2014                 [Page 2]

Internet-DraftEnterprise Use Cases for Security Assessment  October 2013


   guide development of vendor-neutral, interoperable standards for
   aggregating and assessing data relevant to security posture.

   Using this standard data, tools can analyze the state of endpoints,
   user activities and behaviour, and assess the security posture of an
   organization.  Common expression of information should enable
   interoperability between tools (whether customized, commercial, or
   freely available), and the ability to automate portions of security
   processes to gain efficiency, react to new threats in a timely
   manner, and free up security personnel to work on more advanced
   problems.

   The goal is to enable organizations to make informed decisions that
   support organizational objectives, to enforce policies for hardening
   systems, to prevent network misuse, to quantify business risk, and to
   collaborate with partners to identify and mitigate threats.

   It is expected that use cases for enterprises and for service
   providers will largely overlap, but there are additional
   complications for service providers, especially in handling
   information that crosses administrative domains.

   The output of endpoint posture assessment is expected to feed into
   additional processes, such as policy-based enforcement of acceptable
   state, verification and monitoring of security controls, and
   compliance to regulatory requirements.

2.  Endpoint Posture Assessment

   Endpoint posture assessment involves orchestrating and performing
   data collection and analysis pertaining to the posture of a given
   endpoint.  Typically, endpoint posture information is gathered and
   then published to appropriate data repositories to make collected
   information available for further analysis supporting organizational
   security processes.

   Endpoint posture assessment typically includes:

   o  Collecting the posture of a given endpoint;

   o  Making that posture available to the enterprise for further
      analysis and action; and

   o  Performing analysis to assess that the endpoint's posture is in
      compliance with enterprise standards and policy.






Waltermire & Harrington  Expires April 17, 2014                 [Page 3]

Internet-DraftEnterprise Use Cases for Security Assessment  October 2013


   As part of these activities it is often necessary to identify and
   acquire any supporting content that is needed to drive data
   collection and analysis.

   The following is a typical workflow scenario for assessing endpoint
   posture:

   1.  Define a target endpoint to be assessed

   2.  Select policies applicable to the target, and identify what
       posture attributes need to be collected for assessment.

   3.  Verify the identity of the target being assessed

   4.  Collect posture attributes from the target

   5.  Communicate target identity and collected attributes to external
       system for evaluation

   6.  Evaluator compares collected posture attributes from the target
       with expected values as expressed in policies

   The following subsections detail specific use cases for data
   collection, analysis, and related operations pertaining to the
   publication and use of supporting content.

2.1.  Definition and Publication of Automatable Configuration Guides

   A network device vendor manufactures a number of enterprise grade
   routers and other network devices.  They also develop and maintain an
   operating system for these devices that enables end-user
   organizations to configure a number of security and operational
   settings for these devices.  As part of their customer support
   activities, they publish a number of secure configuration guides that
   provide minimum security guidelines for configuring their devices.

   Each guide they produce applies to a specific model of device and
   version of the operating system and provides a number of specialized
   configurations depending on the devices intended function and what
   add-on hardware modules and software licenses are installed on the
   device.  To enable their customers to assess the security posture of
   their devices to ensure that all appropriate minimal security
   settings are enabled, they publish an automatable configuration
   checklist using a popular data format that defines what settings to
   check using a network management protocol and appropriate values for
   each setting.  They publish these guides to a public content
   repository that customers can query to retrieve applicable guides for
   their deployed enterprise network infrastructure endpoints.



Waltermire & Harrington  Expires April 17, 2014                 [Page 4]

Internet-DraftEnterprise Use Cases for Security Assessment  October 2013


   Guides could also come from sources other than a device vendor, such
   as industry groups or regulatory authorities, or enterprises could
   develop their own checklists.

   QUESTION: This use case applies equally to vendors representing other
   endpoint types.  Should this be generalized to capture this notion?

   QUESTION: Is providing traceability to functional capabilities
   useful?  If so, we need to replicate this for the other use cases.

2.2.  Automated Checklist Verification

   A financial services company operates a heterogeneous IT environment.
   In support of their risk management program, they utilize vendor
   provided automatable security configuration checklists for each
   operating system and application used within their IT environment.
   Multiple checklists are used from different vendors to insure
   adequate coverage of all IT assets.

   To identify what checklists are needed, they use automation to gather
   an inventory of the software versions utilized by all IT assets in
   the enterprise.  This data gathering will involve querying existing
   data stores of previously collected endpoint software inventory
   posture data and actively collecting data from reachable endpoints as
   needed utilizing network and systems management protocols.
   Previously collected data may be provided by periodic data
   collection, network connection-driven data collection, or ongoing
   event-driven monitoring of endpoint posture changes.

   Using the gathered software inventory data and associated asset
   management data indicating the organizational defined functions of
   each endpoint, they locate and query each vendors content repository
   for the appropriate checklists.  These checklists are cached locally
   to reduce the need to download the checklist multiple times.

   Driven by the setting data provided in the checklist, a combination
   of existing configuration data stores and data collection methods are
   used to gather the appropriate posture information from each
   endpoint.  Specific data is gathered based on the defined enterprise
   function and software inventory of each endpoint.  The data
   collection paths used to collect software inventory posture will be
   used again for this purpose.  Once the data is gathered, the actual
   state is evaluated against the expected state criteria in each
   applicable checklist.  Deficiencies are identified and reported to
   the appropriate endpoint operators for remedy.






Waltermire & Harrington  Expires April 17, 2014                 [Page 5]

Internet-DraftEnterprise Use Cases for Security Assessment  October 2013


   Checklists could also come from sources other than the application or
   OS vendor, such as industry groups or regulatory authorities, or
   enterprises could develop their own checklists.

2.3.  Organizational Software Policy Compliance

   Example Corporation, in support of compliance requirements, has
   identified a number of secure baselines for different endpoint types
   that exist across their enterprise IT environment.  Determining which
   baseline applies to a given endpoint is based on the organizationally
   defined function of the device.

   Each baseline, defined using an automatable standardized data format,
   identifies the expected hardware, software and patch inventory, and
   software configuration item values for each endpoint type.  As part
   of their compliance activities, they require that all endpoints
   connecting to their network meet the appropriate baselines.  Each
   endpoint is checked to make sure it complies with the appropriate
   baseline whenever it connects to the network and at least once a day
   thereafter.  These daily compliance checks assess the posture of each
   endpoint and report on its compliance with the appropriate baseline.

   [TODO: Need to speak to how the baselines are identified for a given
   endpoint connecting to the network.]

2.4.  Detection of Posture Deviations

   Example corporation has established secure configuration baselines
   for each different type of endpoint within their enterprise
   including: network infrastructure, mobile, client, and server
   computing platforms.  These baselines define an approved list of
   hardware, software (i.e., operating system, applications, and
   patches), and associated required configurations.  When an endpoint
   connects to the network, the appropriate baseline configuration is
   communicated to the endpoint based on its location in the network,
   the expected function of the device, and other asset management data.
   It is checked for compliance with the baseline indicating any
   deviations to the device's operators.  Once the baseline has been
   established, the endpoint is monitored for any change events
   pertaining to the baseline on an ongoing basis.  When a change occurs
   to posture defined in the baseline, updated posture information is
   exchanged allowing operators to be notified and/or automated action
   to be taken.

2.5.  Search for Signs of Infection

   TODO




Waltermire & Harrington  Expires April 17, 2014                 [Page 6]

Internet-DraftEnterprise Use Cases for Security Assessment  October 2013


2.6.  Remediation and Mitigation

   TODO

2.7.  Endpoint Information Analysis and Reporting

   TODO

2.8.  Others...

   Additional use cases will be identified as we work through other
   domains.

3.  IANA Considerations

   This memo includes no request to IANA.

4.  Security Considerations

   This memo documents, for Informational purposes, use cases for
   security automation.  While it is about security, it does not affect
   security.

5.  Acknowledgements

   The National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) and/or the
   MITRE Corporation have developed specifications under the general
   term "Security Automation" including languages, protocols,
   enumerations, and metrics.

   The authors would like to recognize and thank Adam Montville for his
   work on early edits of this draft.  Additionally, the authors would
   like to thank Kathleen Moriarty and Stephen Hanna for contributing
   text to this document.  The authors would also like to acknowledge
   the members of the SACM mailing list for their keen and insightful
   feedback on the concepts and text within this document.

6.  Change Log

6.1.  -00- to -01-

   Changed title

   removed section 4, expecting it will be moved into the requirements
   document.

   removed the list of proposed caabilities from section 3.1




Waltermire & Harrington  Expires April 17, 2014                 [Page 7]

Internet-DraftEnterprise Use Cases for Security Assessment  October 2013


   Added empty sections for Search for Signs of Infection, Remediation
   and Mitigation, and Endpoint Information Analysis and Reporting.

   Removed Requirements Language section and rfc2119 reference.

   Removed unused references (which ended up being all references).

6.2.  -00- to -01-

   o  Work on this revision has been focused on document content
      relating primarily to use of asset management data and functions.

   o  Made significant updates to section 3 including:

      *  Reworked introductory text.

      *  Replaced the single example with multiple use cases that focus
         on more discrete uses of asset management data to support
         hardware and software inventory, and configuration management
         use cases.

      *  For one of the use cases, added mapping to functional
         capabilities used.  If popular, this will be added to the other
         use cases as well.

      *  Additional use cases will be added in the next revision
         capturing additional discussion from the list.

   o  Made significant updates to section 4 including:

      *  Renamed the section heading from "Use Cases" to "Functional
         Capabilities" since use cases are covered in section 3.  This
         section now extrapolates specific functions that are needed to
         support the use cases.

      *  Started work to flatten the section, moving select subsections
         up from under asset management.

      *  Removed the subsections for: Asset Discovery, Endpoint
         Components and Asset Composition, Asset Resources, and Asset
         Life Cycle.

      *  Renamed the subsection "Asset Representation Reconciliation" to
         "Deconfliction of Asset Identities".

      *  Expanded the subsections for: Asset Identification, Asset
         Characterization, and Deconfliction of Asset Identities.




Waltermire & Harrington  Expires April 17, 2014                 [Page 8]

Internet-DraftEnterprise Use Cases for Security Assessment  October 2013


      *  Added a new subsection for Asset Targeting.

      *  Moved remaining sections to "Other Unedited Content" for future
         updating.

6.3.  draft-waltermire-sacm-use-cases-05 to draft-ietf-sacm-use-cases-00

   o  Transitioned from individual I/D to WG I/D based on WG consensus
      call.

   o  Fixed a number of spelling errors.  Thank you Erik!

   o  Added keywords to the front matter.

   o  Removed the terminology section from the draft.  Terms have been
      moved to: draft-dbh-sacm-terminology-00

   o  Removed requirements to be moved into a new I/D.

   o  Extracted the functionality from the examples and made the
      examples less prominent.

   o  Renamed "Functional Capabilities and Requirements" section to "Use
      Cases".

      *  Reorganized the "Asset Management" sub-section.  Added new text
         throughout.

         +  Renamed a few sub-section headings.

         +  Added text to the "Asset Characterization" sub-section.

   o  Renamed "Security Configuration Management" to "Endpoint
      Configuration Management".  Not sure if the "security" distinction
      is important.

      *  Added new sections, partially integrated existing content.

      *  Additional text is needed in all of the sub-sections.

   o  Changed "Security Change Management" to "Endpoint Posture Change
      Management".  Added new skeletal outline sections for future
      updates.

6.4.  -04- to -05-






Waltermire & Harrington  Expires April 17, 2014                 [Page 9]

Internet-DraftEnterprise Use Cases for Security Assessment  October 2013


   o  Are we including user activities and behavior in the scope of this
      work?  That seems to be layer 8 stuff, appropriate to an IDS/IPS
      application, not Internet stuff.

   o  I removed the references to what the WG will do because this
      belongs in the charter, not the (potentially long-lived) use cases
      document.  I removed mention of charter objectives because the
      charter may go through multiple iterations over time; there is a
      website for hosting the charter; this document is not the correct
      place for that discussion.

   o  I moved the discussion of NIST specifications to the
      acknowledgements section.

   o  Removed the portion of the introduction that describes the
      chapters; we have a table of concepts, and the existing text
      seemed redundant.

   o  Removed marketing claims, to focus on technical concepts and
      technical analysis, that would enable subsequent engineering
      effort.

   o  Removed (commented out in XML) UC2 and UC3, and eliminated some
      text that referred to these use cases.

   o  Modified IANA and Security Consideration sections.

   o  Moved Terms to the front, so we can use them in the subsequent
      text.

   o  Removed the "Key Concepts" section, since the concepts of ORM and
      IRM were not otherwise mentioned in the document.  This would seem
      more appropriate to the arch doc rather than use cases.

   o  Removed role=editor from David Waltermire's info, since there are
      three editors on the document.  The editor is most important when
      one person writes the document that represents the work of
      multiple people.  When there are three editors, this role marking
      isn't necessary.

   o  Modified text to describe that this was specific to enterprises,
      and that it was expected to overlap with service provider use
      cases, and described the context of this scoped work within a
      larger context of policy enforcement, and verification.

   o  The document had asset management, but the charter mentioned
      asset, change, configuration, and vulnerability management, so I
      added sections for each of those categories.



Waltermire & Harrington  Expires April 17, 2014                [Page 10]

Internet-DraftEnterprise Use Cases for Security Assessment  October 2013


   o  Added text to Introduction explaining goal of the document.

   o  Added sections on various example use cases for asset management,
      config management, change management, and vulnerability
      management.

7.  References

7.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

7.2.  Informative References

   [RFC2865]  Rigney, C., Willens, S., Rubens, A., and W. Simpson,
              "Remote Authentication Dial In User Service (RADIUS)", RFC
              2865, June 2000.

Authors' Addresses

   David Waltermire
   National Institute of Standards and Technology
   100 Bureau Drive
   Gaithersburg, Maryland  20877
   USA

   Email: david.waltermire@nist.gov


   David Harrington
   Effective Software
   50 Harding Rd
   Portsmouth, NH  03801
   USA

   Email: ietfdbh@comcast.net














Waltermire & Harrington  Expires April 17, 2014                [Page 11]
