Network Working Group                                          V. Manral
Internet-Draft                                       Hewlett Packard Co.
Intended status: Standards Track                       February 2, 2012 
Expires: August 5, 2012                                        
                                                                 





                             Tiny Fragments in IPv6
                       draft-manral-6man-tiny-fragments-issues-00


Abstract

   IPv6 fragmentation allows fragments to be sent only by the source of
   a  packet. The Fragment  header is used by an IPv6 source to send a 
   packet larger than would fit in the path MTU to its   destination. 

   Firewalls generally use 5-tuples to filter out packets. However there
   are cases where  fragmentation can be used to disguise TCP  packets 
   from IP filters used in routers and hosts. This document specifies
   where tiny fragments can be issues.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 05, 2012.



Manral                                                                [Page 1]

INTERNET-DRAFT                Tiny                                  August 2012
                       Fragments in IPv6         


Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2012 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

1.  Introduction

   With many IP implementations it is possible to impose a fragment
   small  enough to force some of a packet's Upper Layer e.g. TCP header
   fields  into the second fragment. 

   This can cause all middlebox's like firewall and NAT-PT which expect
   the fields header information in the first fragment to not work properly.

   Though the NAT Behave draft, states that NAT box should reassemble
   the packets, a lot of new issues can result. Keeping state could result 
   in easy DoS attacks. Besides the jury is still out about how many NAT
   boxes do reassembly.

   All policy based devices where packets are forwarded or sent on a
   tunnel based on some policy are also affected.

2.  Issues with Firewalls

   There are different types of firewalls and state can be created in
   these firewalls through different methods.  Independent of the
   adopted method, firewalls typically look at five parameters of the
   traffic arriving at the firewalls:

   o  Source IP address

   o  Destination IP address

   o  Protocol type

   o  Source port number

   o  Destination port number

   Based on these parameters, firewalls usually decide whether to allow
   the traffic or to drop the packets.  

   However in cases where the first fragment does not have the upper
   layer header information, the firewall is not able to get the port
   information and other upper layer information, thus allowing the 
   packets to be sent to the protected side.


Manral                                                                [Page 2]

INTERNET-DRAFT       Tiny Fragments in IPv6                         August 2012
                                

  
   This can lead to attacks to the network and the firewall not being
   able to block such an attack.
  

3.  Issues with NAT-PT

   NAT-PT [RFC2766] assumes that for NAPT-PT operation the ports are
   visible to the translator. However if the Upper Layer Header is not 
   there in the first fragment. This causes the visibility ot the port to
   be lost. This can cause the translation process to fail.

   When the translator gets a tiny IPv6 fragment which has to be
   translated  to an IPv4 packet. The translator will have to reassemble 
   the packets as the IPv4 non last  fragment needs to have a datagram 
   size of 68 octets  atleast.
  
    STD 5, RFC 791 states:

      Every internet module must be able to forward a datagram of 68
      octets without further fragmentation.  This is because an internet
      header may be up to 60 octets, and the minimum fragment is 8
      octets.

4.  Issues with Policy Boxes 

   Tiny Fragments could cause issues to Policy boxes which look further
   inside the packet, to make decisions.

   For IPsec Security Policy Database (SPD) specifies what services are
   to be offered to IP datagrams and in what fashion.  The draft 
   [RFC2401bis] states:

     "Non-initial" vs "Initial" Fragments

      Throughout this document, the phrase "non-initial" fragments is
      used to mean fragments that do not contain all of the selector
      values that may be needed for access control.  And the phrase 
      "initial" fragment is used to mean a fragment that  contains all 
      the selector values needed for access control.

   However, it should be noted that for IPv6, which fragment contains 
   the Next Layer Protocol and ports (or ICMP message type/code or 
   Mobility Header type) will depend on the kind and number of extension 
   headers present.

   Having tiny fragments could mean that none of the fragments would
   be the Initial Fragment. So any access control/ tunneling based on
   that may not work unless reassembly is done, or extra state like next
   Header  and previous header length remaining are kept across 
   fragments.

   
Manral                                                                [Page 3]

INTERNET-DRAFT          Tiny Fragments in IPv6                   August 2012         

5. Proposed solutions to the problem

   a. Impose a minimum packet size for the non-last fragments. If a 
      fragment of a lesser size is received, the packet is treated as a
      malformed packet and is discarded.     
  
   b. Reassemble all the fragments of the packet, translate the header
     fields and, glean out relevent information and then pass the original 
     fragments ahead after modifying the relevent fields.

   c.  Reassemble all the fragments of the packet till we have the header
     fields of the upper layer , glean out relevent information and then 
     pass the original fragments ahead after modifying the relevent fields.
 
   d. If upper layer protocol present then the header must be there in
      the first fragment.

   The above is just a first summary and the proposals are expected to
   change as the draft matures.


6.  Issues with fragment size of Minimum MTU

   The minimum fragment size of the non last fragment could be
   specified to be 1280 octets, the minimum link MTU [RFC2460]. 

   However if the IPv6 packet has to be further tunnelled the packet
   may have to be fragmented. To prevent such a case a minimum packet 
   size of the non-last fragment should be less then 1280.


7.  IANA Considerations

   This document makes no request of IANA.

   Note to RFC Editor: this section may be removed on publication as an
   RFC.
















Manral                                                                [Page 4]

INTERNET-DRAFT         Tiny Fragments in IPv6                      August 2012        


8.  Security Considerations

   This draft outlines security issues arising if "Tiny Fragments" are
   sent. This draft raises no new security issues.















































Manral                                                                [Page 5]

INTERNET-DRAFT       Tiny Fragments in IPv6                         August 2012         

9.  Acknowledgements
     
   This draft borrows text heavily from
   draft-ietf-mip6-firewalls-03.txt and RFC1858. Thanks to Brian 
   Carpenter, Pekka Savola, Stig Venaas,Fred Baker, Pyda 
   Srisuresh, Senthil Sivakumar and Radhakrishnan.S for the 
   helpful discussion.















































Manral                                                                [Page 6]

INTERNET-DRAFT          Tiny Fragments in IPv6                       August 2012       


10.  References

10.1  Normative References

  [RFC2460] Deering & Hinden, "Internet Protocol, Version 6 (IPv6)
            Specification", RFC2460, December 1998

  [RFC2766] Tsirtsis & Srisuresh, "Network Address Translation -
            Protocol Translation (NAT-PT)", RFC2766, February 2000

  [RFC2401bis] Kent & Seo, "Security Architecture for the Internet 
            Protocol", Work in Progress, September, 2005


10.2  Informative References

  [RFC1858] Ziemba, Reed & Traina ,  "Security Considerations - IP 
            Fragment Filtering", RFC1858, October 1995


Authors' Addresses

   Vishwas Manral
   Hewlett Packard Co,
   19111 Pruneridge Ave.
   Cupertino, CA  95014
   USA  
     
   Email: vishwas.manral@hp.com



















Manral                                                                [Page 7]

INTERNET-DRAFT         Tiny Fragments in IPv6                       August 2012
