


TSVWG                                           K. Carlberg
Internet-Draft                                  G11
Intended Status: Informational                  P. O'Hanlon
Expires: August 25, 2013                        UCL
                                                Feb 25, 2013



          Reactions to Signaling from ECN Support for RTP/RTCP
              <draft-carlberg-tsvwg-ecn-reactions-04.txt>


Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering Task
   Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute working
   documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-Drafts is at
   http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference material
   or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 25, 2013.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Abstract

   This document presents an examination of various responses to Congestion
   Experience (CE) notifications by real time applications that have
   negotiated end-to-end support of Explicit Congestion Notification (ECN).
   This document is a follow-on effort of [rfc6679], which specifies the
   signaling used to provide ECN support for RTP/RTCP flows.



Carlberg & O'Hanlon                Expires August 25, 2013      [Page 1]





Internet Drafts       Reactions to ECN for RTP/RTCP         Feb 25, 2013


1. Introduction


   This document presents an examination of various responses to Congestion
   Experience (CE) notifications by real time applications that have
   negotiated end-to-end support of Explicit Congestion Notification (ECN).
   [rfc6679] defines the signaling for support of ECN by RTP based sessions
   and also covers the case where a et of nodes do not respond to CE
   notifications.  A more detailed discussion about how back-off algorithms
   can be achieved, as well as other potential reactions, is viewed as out
   of scope of that document and may be addressed by a companion document.

1.1 Background

   ECN is a mechanism used to explicitly signal the presence of congestion
   without relying on packet loss.  It was initially designed using a dual
   layer signaling model; negotiation and feedback at the transport layer,
   and downstream notification of congestion at the network layer.  For IP,
   a new two bit field was used to both indicate the successful negotiated
   support for ECN signaling, as well as indicate the presence of
   congestion via the CE flag.  In the case of TCP [rfc3168], a new TCP
   header flag was defined that provides upstream end-to-end indication of
   congestion occurring somewhere along the downstream path.

   There should be no difference in congestion response if ECN-CE marks or
   packet drops are detected.  However it is noted that there MAY be other
   reactions to ECN-CE specified in the future.  Such an alternative
   reaction MUST be specified and considered to be safe for deployment
   under any restrictions specified.  We specify such an alternative in
   this document.

   With respect to ECN for TCP, [rfc3168] specifies an indication of
   congestion, but it does so once per Round Trip Time (RTT). [rfc6679] is
   an effort that proposes a finer grained notification reflecting a more
   accurate indication of the number of ECN marked packets received within
   one RTT. It should be noted that there is also other on going work to
   provide more accurate ECN feedback information for TCP
   [draft-tcpm-accecn-reqs].



1.2  Terminology and Abbreviations

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC2119 [RFC2119].

2. Issues



Carlberg & O'Hanlon                Expires August 25, 2013      [Page 2]





Internet Drafts       Reactions to ECN for RTP/RTCP         Feb 25, 2013


   The initial discussions and presentation of [draft-rtp-ecn] produced a
   consensus that the specification of signaling was to be done within the
   AVTcore working group, and any subsequent discussion on end-to-end
   reactions to the signaling would be accomplished in the Transport
   Services (TSV) working group.  This draft satisfies the latter effort.

   Another issue that needs to be recognized is that the reactions to CE in
   the context of [rfc6679] are the responsibility of the application.
   This is in contrast to ECN support for TCP, where explicit signaled
   feedback of, and reaction to, CE is kept transparent to the application.
   The issue of placing the feedback responsibility in the application is
   that each application needs to add specific support for that reaction.
   On the other hand, multiple reactions may be considered by the
   application.  For this reason, [rfc6679] states the need for a default
   congestion control reaction that MUST be supported.  Section 3 through 5
   expands on this topic.

3. Congestion Control Algorithms

   The transport of any data flow across the Internet produces a need for some
   form of congestion control to attain a suitable share of the capacity of the
   path through a network.  Most of the existing work on realtime congestion
   control algorithms has been rooted in TCP-friendly approaches but with smoother
   adaptation cycles.  TCP congestion control is unsuitable for interactive media
   for a number of reasons including the fact that it is loss-based so it
   maximizes the latency on a path, it changes its transmit rate to quickly
   for multimedia, and favors reliability over timeliness. In the case of
   real time media transport, one requires:

       Smoother rate variation: (than for bulk data) to accommodate
               the underlying media flow's characteristics.

       Low latency: Maintaining latencies sufficient to be usable, where 150ms
               is understood to be a good target [ITU.G114.2003].

       Burst handling: Ability to handle bursts due to the nature of the
               media and codec (e.g. I-frames etc)



3.1 TCP Friendly Rate Control (TFRC)

   TFRC has a smoother response to congestion than TCP-like approaches,
   thus making it more suitable for real-time interactive multimedia
   applications.  It has been cited in a number of other documents within
   the IETF for use with UDP and media flows [rfc3714, bcp145] and is
   seeing full and partial deployment in related solutions such as
   Empathy/Farsight, and GoogleTalk [goog1].



Carlberg & O'Hanlon                Expires August 25, 2013      [Page 3]





Internet Drafts       Reactions to ECN for RTP/RTCP         Feb 25, 2013


   However it should be noted that TFRC is only recommended for real-time
   media use with ECN response. TFRC is not recommended for non-ECN paths
   due to its loss based operation which leads to full queues with
   maximised latencies. It is assumed that ECN markings will usually occur
   with lower queue occupancy and thus lower latency. However it is
   understood that ECN marks may not provide for sufficiently low latencies
   in some situations so other congestion control solutions would be
   preferable.

   [rfc4342] specifies the profile for TFRC for use in the Datagram
   Congestion Control Protocol (DCCP) [rfc4340] for a half connection.  A
   DCCP half connection is defined as application data sent downstream with
   corresponding acknowledgements sent upstream.  These half-connections
   can be realized in the form of one-way pre-recoded media, one-way live
   media, or two-way interactive.  A perceived drawback in this profile
   concerns its application to interactive media that use small packets.
   [RFC4828] is an experimental protocol defining a variation of TFRC used
   to address this drawback and achieve the same bandwidth as a TCP flow
   using packets of size 1500 bytes.

   [rfc6679] is an standard that specifies how RTP flows can be supported
   using the RTP/AVPF profile and the general RTP header extension
   mechanism.

3.2 Related Work

3.2.1 3GPP

   Outside of this previous and on-going work with TFRC, it is understood
   that some parties have issues with the behavior of TFRC under certain
   conditions.  A notable mention of this is made in the 3GPP's document on
   IP Multimedia Subsystem (IMS) Media handling and interaction [TR26.114],
   where it is mentioned:

     "Note that for IMS networks, which normally have nonzero packet loss and
     fairly long round-trip delay, the amount of bitrate reduction specified
     in RFC 3448 is generally too restrictive for video and may, if used as
     specified, result in very low video bitrates already at (for IMS)
     moderate packet loss rates."

   Though it is unclear exactly what the 3GPP community consider as too
   restrictive and whether some alteration of the response may be suitable.
   It should be noted that the 3GPP document only referred to an older
   version of TFRC defined in [RFC3448]. Given that the current version
   of TFRC [RFC5348] has made significant changes to the idle and data-limited responses it is unclear whether their assessment is relevant
   to current TFRC implementations.




Carlberg & O'Hanlon                Expires August 25, 2013      [Page 4]





Internet Drafts       Reactions to ECN for RTP/RTCP         Feb 25, 2013


   Furthermore the specification [TR26.114] only outlines a rudimentary
   approach to congestion control, providing an example of a 60% back-off
   reaction to loss within an RTCP reporting period. The proposed signalling
   employs Temporary Maximum Media Stream Bit Rate Request (TMMBR)
   [RFC5104] and Codec Mode Request (CMR) [RFC4867] for video and audio
   respectively, which would only provide for very basic rate control
   if used as specified.  We note that [TR26.114] specifies terminal
   behavior, while [TS36.300] specifies base station behaviour, though
   neither specify any standardised congestion control approach.

   It is understood that there are a number of proprietary and patented
   approaches that provide more sophisticated response in the case of
   3G/LTE, but since these are neither endorsed nor standardized this
   document advocates a standardized approach such as TFRC.

   We also acknowledge that there are many congestion control algorithms
   available for implementers to choose from, with a subset that are
   specifically suited to real time media transmission.  However, given a
   variety of real time applications and their various characteristics
   (sender-only broadcast, interactive unicast, etc), we need to expand the
   notion of how back-off can be achieved.  Hence, the focus needs to be on
   an output that would resemble the characteristics of TFRC.

3.2.2 RTCweb

   Within the RTCweb Working Group the need for a more media friendly
   congestion control mechanism has been made apparent.  Currently, TFRC is
   perceived as having deficiencies (e.g. its loss-based design, lack of
   cross-stream congestion control functionality etc) that make it an
   incomplete or insufficient solution for the envisioned RTCWEB media
   flows.  The RTP Media Congestion Avoidance Techniques (rmcat) working
   group has now been formed which aims to lead to the formation of a
   working group on these issues.  The group aims to develop one or more
   congestion control algorithms, associated extensions, and evaluation
   criteria. Furthermore it has been proposed that certain practices, such
   as 'circuit-breaker' conditions, to provide operational limits on
   congestion control algorithms, and feedback messages, may be tackled in
   other groups such as AVTCORE and AVTEXT respectively.

   Thus there is some movement to attempt to develop new algorithms better
   suited to media transport, but these efforts will clearly take a
   considerable time to reach fruition.

3.3 ECN response

   As mentioned above and in accordance to [rfc3168], the actual response
   to the reception of an ECN-CE marked packet MUST normally be the same as
   that of a lost packet.  However there are a number of contexts where one



Carlberg & O'Hanlon                Expires August 25, 2013      [Page 5]





Internet Drafts       Reactions to ECN for RTP/RTCP         Feb 25, 2013


   may also be interested in more varied approaches.  We expand on this in
   Section 5 below.

4. Application Layer Congestion Response

   Whilst the congestion control algorithm may decide to alter the rate at
   which the application should operate, in the case of media applications
   this process is not as straightforward as the case of bulk data.  The
   different media engines and codecs in use may only have limited
   adaptation ranges, thus, this limitation needs to be a consideration
   when adapting the rate.  Furthermore the application needs to be aware
   of the capability of the specific codecs in terms of their ability to
   switch configuration mid-stream (without loss of fidelity), which may
   impose further limits on the modes of operation.

   One approach for achieving a lower generation of data is through reduced
   sampling of the media (e.g., voice or video).  In the case of video,
   this may also involve slower frame rates.  Specific recommendations that
   describe how applications should respond to congestion in the context of
   supporting the algorithmic characteristics of a congestion control
   algorithm are outside the scope of this document.

5. Other Reactions

   In addition to the activation of congestion control algorithm, other
   reactions can be used or leveraged by an application in response to CE.
   We divide these other potential reactions into three categories:
   signaling, fault tolerance, and reduction.  In the first two cases, we
   note that these other reactions are considered symmetric because they
   require downstream peer support.  We also point out that activation of
   other reactions represents an example of an on-demand and as-needed
   approach in responding to CE.

   In each case, we discuss issues that should be considered when
   contemplating a different reaction in the presence of CE feedback.

5.1 Signaling

5.1.1  RSVP

   The resource Reservation Protocol (RSVP) can be used to signal a desired
   set of path characteristics (e.g., bandwidth, delay) in response to CE
   feedback [rfc2205].  Its operation is based on the use of PATH messages
   sent downstream hop-by-hop from the source to a destination that specify
   requested forwarding characteristics.  In return, the destination sends
   a hop-by-hop RESV message upstream towards the source confirming the
   resources that have been reserved for that flow.




Carlberg & O'Hanlon                Expires August 25, 2013      [Page 6]





Internet Drafts       Reactions to ECN for RTP/RTCP         Feb 25, 2013


   [rfc3181] defines a priority policy element that specifies both an
   allocation and defending priority.  This dual specification supports the
   use of preemption of existing reservations.  [draft-priority-rsvp] is a
   work-in-progress that defines a new policy element that only conveys
   priority during reservation establishment.  This latter effort also
   presents several reservation models, including one that describes
   engineered resources set aside for priority users.

5.1.1.1 Issues

   As discussed in [rfc-3583], RSVP presents a difficult challenge of
   establishing state and effectively and efficiently migrating it during
   roaming in mobile environments.  Its soft state design allows the
   protocol to attempt re-establishment of reserved resources along new
   path(s), but there is no guarantee that resources along the new path
   will be available.  In addition, there is at least 1 RTT of delay and
   the delta in initiating a new PATH message that delays reservation
   establishment.

   Some user groups, such as those found in the military, make a
   distinction between mobile and transportable environments.  The former
   case resembles scenarios attributed to Mobile IP.  The latter case is
   characterized by wireless hosts operating in a new location, but never
   moving to the extent that new paths through a network need to be
   established.  In this latter example, the challenges of RSVP in a
   wireless environment are diminished.  In addition, these environments
   tend to involve a single administrative control of both hosts and
   routing/forwarding nodes within a network infrastructure.

   RSVP is associated with a means of retaining a minimal bound of
   forwarding characteristics per flow, or aggregate of flows.  As such, it
   can be considered to run contrary to the objectives of ECN.  However, in
   cases where some flows must be reserved, CE feedback could be used to
   signal the need to lower a pre-existing killer app reservation.

5.1.2 Differentiated Services

   Unlike RSVP and its use of a separate signaling mechanism to reserve
   resources, Differentiated Services (diff-serv) uses code points within
   the IP header to convey the forwarding behavior of that packet
   [rfc2474].  This may range from various drop precedence values to a code
   point that signifies low delay and low loss (i.e., characteristics
   attributed to real time flows).

   As in the case of RSVP, applications could rely on the reception of CE
   feedback to initiate a subsequent setting of diff-serv code points to
   provide additional protection or explicit association of forwarding
   characteristics of a given flow of packets.  In addition, the setting of



Carlberg & O'Hanlon                Expires August 25, 2013      [Page 7]





Internet Drafts       Reactions to ECN for RTP/RTCP         Feb 25, 2013


   diff-serv code points would be done on an as-needed basis in reaction to
   CE feedback.  Recommendations concerning specific diff-serv values are
   outside the scope of this document.

5.1.2.1 Issues

   Given the ease by which applications or middle boxes can set diff-serv
   code points, the issue of trusting values other than best effort can
   become problematic when hosts and routing/forwarding nodes are not
   associated with a single administrative authority.

   As in the case of RSVP, the effectiveness of diff-serv is dependent on
   the number of nodes along a path that support the protocol.  Thus, as
   opposed to a single end-point reaction to CE feedback, differentiated
   services requires additional support in the network to either increase
   or decrease the probability of traffic being forwarded to its
   destination.

   A symbiotic capability to consider is the use of on-demand/as-needed
   diff-serv code points to trigger downstream actions by the network.  A
   specific example would be a diff-serv code point sent in reaction to CE
   feedback that could trigger alternate path routing via MPLS.

5.2 Fault Tolerance

   Fault tolerance is another category of reactions that may be used by
   applications in response to CE feedback.  In some cases, these efforts
   may contribute to an increase in traffic load in order to add protection
   and resiliency to a flow.

   Redundant Transmissions: This approach is based on a source sending
   duplicate payloads that can be used to compensate for lost packets.  Its
   positive value may emerge in cases where a path has several downstream
   congestion points that increase the probability that a packet will be
   dropped instead of marked as CE and forwarded downstream.

   Application Layer Forward Error Correction (FEC): This approach also
   adds additional overhead to the flow in order to compensate for
   potential packet loss.  And as the case of redundant transmissions, the
   value of this approach can be realized when there exists multiple
   downstream congestion points that increase the probability of dropping
   packets.  However, the impact of the overhead is minimized by having one
   (or a few) additional packet(s) used to compensate for the loss of a set
   of packets.

   Codec Swapping: This approach involves changing codecs to either reduce
   load or achieve an improvement in compensating for lost packets.
   Depending on the codec, the reduction of load may be a simple step



Carlberg & O'Hanlon                Expires August 25, 2013      [Page 8]





Internet Drafts       Reactions to ECN for RTP/RTCP         Feb 25, 2013


   function, or it may involve a gradual and variable reduction in load
   based on the rate of congestion feedback received by the source.

   Interweaving packets: To Be Done (based on research at UCL)

5.2.1 Issues

   The use of redundant transmissions or FEC produces a detrimental impact
   of contributing to an increase in load and the measure of congestion
   that triggers CE feedback.  In the case of FEC, additional delay is
   typically incurred through the generation of X amount of erasure packets
   for each set of original source packets.  And while an initial increase
   in QoS may be observed for these flows, the overall rate of congestion
   can be expected to increase.

   Swapping codecs based on the reception of CE feedback has the positive
   affect of reducing load at the risk of reducing perceived QoS by the
   user.  As in the case of all options described above regarding fault
   tolerance, the ability to change to a different codec is depending on
   end-to-end peer support.  In addition, there is no assurance that the
   different codec reduces load in relation to the amount of congestion
   experienced over time.


5.3  Alternative Reaction for Emergency Communications

   As mentioned in [rfc6679], the default reaction on the reception of these
   ECN-CE marked packets MUST be to provide the congestion control algorithm with
   a congestion notification that triggers the algorithm to react as if packet
   loss had occurred.  There MAY be an alternative reaction if it is considered
   safe for deployment.  An example of the need for an alternative reaction would
   be the case of Emergency Telecommunications Service (ETS) [rfc3689, rfc4190],
   where an improvement in QoS or a higher probability of session establishment
   and forwarding of traffic is of high interest.

   It is proposed that certain authorized ETS flows may be permitted to employ
   either a substantially less aggressive back-off algorithm than the default
   algorithm, or some level of exemption from reacting to ECN marked packets.
   This alternative reaction will benefit these flows as the marks would normally
   be considered as equivalent to lost packets, which would effectively increase
   the loss level, which in turn will generally result in the reduction of flow
   rate. This applies to all flows that utilize some form of the rate control that
   is inversely proportional to the loss rate, which includes TCP-like algorithms
   or equation-based approaches.

   Simulations of the use of ECN exemption with TFRC and have found that it has
   limited effect on the normal flows with low numbers of exempt flows. A
   half-dumbbell network was used with a RED router queue configured using the



Carlberg & O'Hanlon                Expires August 25, 2013      [Page 9]





Internet Drafts       Reactions to ECN for RTP/RTCP         Feb 25, 2013


   settings recommended by Sally Floyd. The candidate flows are 1Mbit/s each with
   a backhaul 100Mbit/s link. In the standard case where 1% of flows would be
   exempt the remaining flows achieve 99.99% of the bandwidth that they would
   achieve without the presence of the exempt flows. This is what would be
   expected from the simple calculation of the allocation, given that the exempt
   flows achieve their full rate (1Mbit/s); With 100 normal plus 1 exempt flow,
   assuming that the except flow uses 1Mbit/s, the remaining capacity is 99Mbit/s
   which is divided between the 100 normal flows.  Whilst when 101 normal flows
   are run over the 100Mbit/s link they would have to share it evenly, so it works
   out thus: ((99/100)/(100/101))*100=99.99%. In the case of 5% exempt flows then
   the proportion is very slightly lower at ((95/100)/(100/105))*100=99.75%.  Both
   these calculations are borne out in the simulation runs.

   The level of exemption employed can be altered in a number of ways. Two simple
   approaches would be to either set a threshold number of ECN marked packets that
   could be considered as a loss, and another approach would be to set a
   percentage threshold of ECN marked packet that would be considered as a loss.

   It should be noted that in the simulations the end-to-end delay of the packets
   within the flows was monitored and the relative delay of the exempt flows
   apparently rises somewhat when exemption is enacted. However what is actually
   occurring is that the 'normal' flows are reducing their throughput and are thus
   reducing their latency somewhat. There is normally some limited latency when
   using loss-based techniques such as TFRC because it fills the queues to
   ascertain the link capacity and maintains that level of delay throughout a
   session. However the level of latency is clearly limited by the queue sizes in
   the network and on media specific links these queue sizes are typically quite
   small, so the resulting latency is limited.

   Furthermore in the case where media flows employing TFRC, or any other
   congestion control algorithm (e.g. delay-based), are sharing a bottleneck
   link with TCP flows then the queues will be filled by the TCP flows and
   the latency will be kept near or at a their maximum despite any other flows.

5.3.1 Issues

   To Be Done


6.  IANA Considerations

   This document requires no actions from IANA.

7.  Security Considerations

   The reliance on accurate and un-modified RTCP information means that
   SRTP needs to be used, or any other mechanism that helps prevent
   modification of RTCP feedback packets.



Carlberg & O'Hanlon                Expires August 25, 2013     [Page 10]





Internet Drafts       Reactions to ECN for RTP/RTCP         Feb 25, 2013


8. Acknowledgements

   TBD

9.  References

9.1 Normative

   [rfc2119] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
             Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.


   [rfc2205] Braden, B., et. al., "Resource ReSerVation Protocol (RSVP)
             Version 1 Functional Specification", RFC 2205, September
             1997

   [rfc2209] Braden, R., L. Zhang, "Resource Reservation Protocol
             (RSVP) Version 1 Message Processing Rules", RFC2209
             September 1997

   [rfc2474] Nichols, K., et. al., "Definition of the Differentiated
             Services Field in the IPv4 and IPv6 Headers", RFC 2474,
             December 1998

   [rfc3168] Ramakrishnan, K,. et. al., "The Addition of Explicit
             Congestion Notification (ECN) to IP", RFC 3168,
             September, 2001

   [rfc3181] Herzog, S., "Signaled Preemption Priority Policy Element",
             RFC 3181, October 2001

   [rfc3448] Handley, M., et. al., "TCP Friendly Rate Control (TFRC):
             Protocol Specification", RFC 3448, January 2003

   [rfc3583] Chaskar, H., "Requirements of a Quality of Service (QoS)
             Solution for Mobile IP", RFC 3583, September 2003

   [rfc4867] Sjoberg, J., et. al., "RTP Payload Format and File Storage
             Format for the AMR and AMR-WB Audio Codecs", RFC 4867,
             April 2007

   [rfc5104] Wenger, S., et. al., "Codec Control Messages in the RTP
             Audio-Visual Profile with Feedback (AVPF)", RFC 5104,
             February 2008

   [rfc6679] Westerlund, M., et. al., "Explicit Congestion Notification
             (ECN) for RTP over UDP", RFC 6679, IETF, Aug 2012




Carlberg & O'Hanlon                Expires August 25, 2013     [Page 11]





Internet Drafts       Reactions to ECN for RTP/RTCP         Feb 25, 2013


9.2 Informative

   [draft-rtp-tfrc] Gharai, L., C. Perkins, "RTP with TCP Friendly Rate
                    Control", work-in-progress, Sept 2011

   [draft-tcpm-accecn-reqs] M. Kuehlewind, R. Scheffenegger, "Problem
          Statement and Requirements for a More Accurate ECN Feedback",
          work-in-progress, Feb 2013

   [Goog1] http://code.google.com/apis/talk/call_signaling.html

   [tr26.114] "IMS; Multimedia telephony; Media Handling and
              Interaction", 3GPP, version 10, April 2011

   [ts36.300] "E-UTRA and E-UTRAN Overall Description, Stage 2",
              3GPP, Release 10, September, 2011

   [rfc4340] Kohler, E., et. al, Datagram Congestion Control
             Protocol (DCCP), RFC4340, March 2006

   [rfc4342] Floyd, S., et. al., "Profile for DCCP Congestion
             Control ID 3: TFRC", RFC 4342, March 2006

   [rfc4828] Floyd, S., E. Kohler, "TFRC: The Small Packet
             Variant", RFC 4828, April 2007

   [rfc3689] Carlberg, K., Atkinson, R., "General Requirements for
             Emergency Telecommunications Service (ETS)", RFC 3689,
             February 2004

   [rfc4190] Carlberg, K. et, al., "Framework for Supporting
             Emergency Telecommunications Service (ETS) in
             IP Telephony", RFC 4190, November 2005

   [rfc3714] Floyd, S., Kempf, J., "IAB Concerns Regarding Congestion
             Control for Voice Traffic in the Internet", RFC 3714,
             March 2004

   [bcp145]  Eggert, L., Fairhurst, G., "Unicast UDP Usage Guidelines
             for Application Designers", RFC 5405, BCP 145, November 2008

   [ITU.G114.2003]
             International Telecommunications Union, "One-way
             transmission time", ITU-T Recommendation G.707, May 2003.

Author's Addresses

   Piers O'Hanlon



Carlberg & O'Hanlon                Expires August 25, 2013     [Page 12]





Internet Drafts       Reactions to ECN for RTP/RTCP         Feb 25, 2013


   University of Oxford
   Oxford Internet Institute
   1 St Giles
   Oxford  OX1 3JS
   United Kingdom

   Email: piers.ohanlon@oii.ox.ac.uk


   Ken Carlberg
   G11
   1600 Clarendon Blvd
   Arlington  VA
   USA

   Email: carlberg@g11.org.uk



































Carlberg & O'Hanlon                Expires August 25, 2013     [Page 13]

