


TSVWG                                                   K. Carlberg
Internet-Draft                                          G11
Intended Status: Informational                          P. O'Hanlon
Expires: September 12, 2012                             UCL
                                                        March 12, 2012



          Reactions to Signaling from ECN Support for RTP/RTCP
              <draft-carlberg-tsvwg-ecn-reactions-01.txt>


Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering Task
   Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute working
   documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-Drafts is at
   http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference material
   or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal Provisions
   Relating to IETF Documents (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in
   effect on the date of publication of this document.  Please review these
   documents carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with
   respect to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document
   must include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

   This document may contain material from IETF Documents or IETF
   Contributions published or made publicly available before November 10,
   2008.  The person(s) controlling the copyright in some of this material
   may not have granted the IETF Trust the right to allow modifications of
   such material outside the IETF Standards Process.  Without obtaining an
   adequate license from the person(s) controlling the copyright in such
   materials, this document may not be modified outside the IETF Standards
   Process, and derivative works of it may not be created outside the IETF
   Standards Process, except to format it for publication as an RFC or to
   translate it into languages other than English.



Carlberg & O'Hanlon                Expires September 12, 2012   [Page 1]

Internet Drafts      Reactions to ECN for RTP/RTCP        March 12, 2012


Abstract

   This document presents recommendations for response to Congestion
   Experience (CE) notifications by real time applications that have
   negotiated end-to-end support of Explicit Congestion Notification (ECN).
   This document is a follow-on effort of [draft-rtp-ecn], which specifies
   the signaling used to provide ECN support for RTP/RTCP flows.

1. Introduction

   This document presents recommendations for response to Congestion
   Experience (CE) notifications by real time applications that have
   negotiated end-to-end support of Explicit Congestion Notification (ECN).
   [draft-rtp-ecn] defines the signaling for support of ECN by RTP based
   sessions.  The draft also recommends a specific congestion control
   algorithm as the default reaction when congestion is signaled back to
   the source node.  However, a more detailed discussion about how back-off
   algorithms can be achieved, as well as other potential reactions, is
   viewed as out of scope of that document and may be addressed by a
   companion document.

1.1 Background

   ECN is a mechanism used to explicitly signal the presence of congestion
   without relying on packet loss.  It was initially designed using a dual
   layer signaling model; negotiation and feedback at the transport layer,
   and downstream notification of congestion at the network layer.  For IP,
   a new two bit field was used to both indicate the successful negotiated
   support for ECN signaling, as well as indicate the presence of
   congestion via the CE flag.  In the case of TCP [rfc3168], a new TCP
   header flag was defined that provides upstream end-to-end indication of
   congestion occurring somewhere along the downstream path.

   As mentioned in [draft-rtp-ecn], the default reaction on the reception
   of these ECN-CE marked packets MUST be to provide the congestion control
   algorithm with a congestion notification that triggers the algorithm to
   react as if packet loss had occurred.  There should be no difference in
   congestion response if ECN-CE marks or packet drops are detected.
   However it is noted that there MAY be other reactions to ECN-CE
   specified in the future.  Such an alternative reaction MUST be specified
   and considered to be safe for deployment under any restrictions
   specified.  We specify such an alternative in this document.

   With respect to ECN for TCP, [rfc3168] specifies an indication of
   congestion, but it does so once per Round Trip Time (RTT).
   [draft-rtp-ecn] is a work-in-progress effort proposing a more granular
   notification reflecting a more accurate indication in the number of ECN
   marked packets received within one RTT.



Carlberg & O'Hanlon                Expires September 12, 2012   [Page 2]

Internet Drafts      Reactions to ECN for RTP/RTCP        March 12, 2012


1.2  Terminology and Abbreviations

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC2119 [RFC2119].

2. Issues

   The initial discussions and presentation of [draft-rtp-ecn] produced a
   consensus that the specification of signaling was to be done within the
   AVTcore working group, and any subsequent discussion on end-to-end
   reactions to the signaling would be accomplished in the Transport
   Services (TSV) working group.  This draft satisfies the latter effort.

   Another issue that needs to be recognized is that the reactions to CE
   in the context of [draft-rtp-ecn] are the responsibility of the
   application.  This is in contrast to ECN support for TCP, where explicit
   signaled feedback of, and reaction to, CE is kept transparent to the
   application.  The issue in placing the feedback responsibility to the
   application is that each application needs to add specific support for
   that reaction.  On the other hand, multiple reactions may be considered
   by the application.  For this reason, [draft-rtp-ecn] states the need
   for a default congestion control reaction that MUST be supported.
   Section 3 through 5 expands on this topic.

3. Congestion Control Algorithms

   The transport of any data flow across the Internet produces a need for
   some form of congestion control to match a flow's rate with that of the
   available capacity of the path through a network.  In the case of real
   time media transport, one requires smoother rate variation, than for
   bulk data, to accommodate the underlying media flow's characteristics.

   This draft advocates the use of TCP Friendly Rate Control (TFRC) to
   satisfy the requirement of a default congestion control response to CE
   marked packets, as required by [draft-rtp-ecn].  TFRC has a smoother
   response to congestion than TCP-like approaches, thus making it more
   suitable for real-time interactive multimedia applications.  It has
   been cited in a number of other documents within the IETF for use with
   UDP and media flows [rfc3714, bcp145] and is seeing full and partial
   deployment in related solutions such as Empathy/Farsight, and
   GoogleTalk [goog1].

   [RFC4342] specifies the profile for TFRC for use in the Datagram
   Congestion Control Protocol (DCCP) [4340] for a half connection.  A DCCP
   half connection is defined as application data sent downstream with
   corresponding acknowledgements sent upstream.  These half-connections
   can be realized in the form of one-way prerecoded media, one-way live



Carlberg & O'Hanlon                Expires September 12, 2012   [Page 3]

Internet Drafts      Reactions to ECN for RTP/RTCP        March 12, 2012


   media, or two-way interactive.  A perceived drawback in this profile
   concerns its application to interactive media that use small packets.
   [RFC4828] is an experimental protocol defining a variation of TFRC used
   to address this drawback and achieve the same bandwidth as a TCP flow
   using packets of size 1500 bytes.

   [draft-rtp-tfrc] is a work in progress that specifies how RTP flows can
   be supported using the RTP/AVPF profile and the general RTP header
   extension mechanism.

3.1  Related Work

3.1.1 3GPP

   Outside of this previous and on-going work with TFRC, it is understood
   that some parties have issues with the behavior of TFRC under certain
   conditions.  A notable mention of this is made in the 3GPP's document on
   IP Multimedia Subsystem (IMS) Media handling and interaction [TR26.114],
   where it is mentioned:

     "Note that for IMS networks, which normally have nonzero packet loss and
     fairly long round-trip delay, the amount of bitrate reduction specified
     in RFC 3448 is generally too restrictive for video and may, if used as
     specified, result in very low video bitrates already at (for IMS)
     moderate packet loss rates."

   Though it is unclear exactly what the 3GPP community consider as too
   restrictive and whether some alteration of the response may be suitable.
   It should be noted that the 3GPP document only referred to an older
   version of TFRC defined in [RFC3448], though it is assumed that this is
   just an omission to have not referred to the current RFC5348
   specification.

   Furthermore instead of using TFRC, [TR26.114] suggests that one
   employs Temporary Maximum Media Stream Bit Rate Request (TMMBR)
   [RFC5104] and Codec Mode Request (CMR) [RFC4867] for video and audio
   respectively, which would only provide for very rudimentary rate control
   if used as specified.  Whilst the CMR messages for the Adaptive
   Multi-Rate (AMR) codec are designed for dynamic use, TMMBR was primarily
   intended for control of rates from an Multipoint Control Unit (MCU) or a
   mixer.  We note that [TR26.114] specifies terminal behavior, while
   [TS36.300] specifies base station behaviour.

   It is understood that there are a number of proprietary and patented
   approaches that provide more sophisticated response in the case of
   3G/LTE, but since these are neither endorsed nor standardized this
   document advocates a standardized approach such as TFRC.




Carlberg & O'Hanlon                Expires September 12, 2012   [Page 4]

Internet Drafts      Reactions to ECN for RTP/RTCP        March 12, 2012


   We also acknowledge that there are many congestion control algorithms
   available for implementers to choose from, with a subset that are
   specifically suited to real time media transmission.  However, given a
   variety of real time applications and their various characteristics
   (sender-only broadcast, interactive unicast, etc), we need to expand the
   notion of how back-off can be achieved.  Hence, the focus needs to be on
   an output that would resemble the characteristics of TFRC.


   Within the RTCweb Working Group the need for a more media friendly congestion
   control mechanism has been made apparent.  Currently, TFRC is perceived as
   having deficiencies (e.g. its loss-based design, lack of cross-stream
   congestion control functionality etc) that make it an incomplete or insufficient
   solution for the envisioned RTCWEB media flows. Thus far one draft has been
   published by Google outlining their suggested approach.  Whilst there has been
   talk of a potential group, RTP Media Congestion Avoidance Techniques (rmcat),
   these efforts are still in their early stages within the IETF as there has not
   yet been a BoF or Working Group formed. However it has been proposed that
   certain issues, such as 'circuit-breaker' conditions to provide operational
   limits on congestion control algorithms, and feedback messages, may be tackled
   in existing groups such as AVTCORE and AVTEXT respectively.

   Thus there is some movement to attempt to develop new algorithms better
   suited to media transport, but these efforts will clearly take a considerable time
   to reach fruition. Whilst TFRC has some perceived issues it still provides the
   best existing solution for media transport.

3.2 ECN response

   As mentioned above and in accordance to [rfc3168], the actual response
   to the reception of an ECN-CE marked packet MUST normally be the same as
   that of a lost packet.  However there are a number of contexts where one
   may also be interested in more varied approaches.  We expand on this in
   Section 5 below.

4. Application Layer Congestion Response

   Whilst the congestion control algorithm may decide to alter the rate at
   which the application should operate, in the case of media applications
   this process is not as straightforward as the case of bulk data.  The
   different media engines and codecs in use may only have limited
   adaptation ranges, thus, this limitation needs to be a consideration
   when adapting the rate.  Furthermore the application needs to be aware
   of the capability of the specific codecs in terms of their ability to
   switch configuration mid-stream (without loss of fidelity), which may
   impose further limits on the modes of operation.

   One approach for achieving a lower generation of data is through reduced



Carlberg & O'Hanlon                Expires September 12, 2012   [Page 5]

Internet Drafts      Reactions to ECN for RTP/RTCP        March 12, 2012


   sampling of the media (e.g., voice or video).  In the case of video,
   this may also involve slower frame rates.  Specific recommendations that
   describe how applications should respond to congestion in the context of
   supporting the algorithmic characteristics of a congestion control
   algorithm are outside the scope of this document.

5. Other Reactions

   In addition to the activation of congestion control algorithm, other
   reactions can be used or leveraged by an application in response to CE.
   We divide these other potential reactions into two categories: signaling
   and fault tolerance.  We note that these other reactions are considered
   symmetric because they require downstream peer support.  We also point
   out that activation of other reactions represents an example of an
   on-demand and as-needed approach in responding to CE.

5.1 Signaling

5.1.1  RSVP

   The resource Reservation Protocol (RSVP) can be used to signal a desired
   set of path characteristics (e.g., bandwidth, delay) in response to CE
   feedback [rfc2205].  Its operation is based on the use of PATH messages
   sent downstream hop-by-hop from the source to a destination that specify
   requested forwarding characteristics.  In return, the destination sends
   a hop-by-hop RESV message upstream towards the source confirming the
   resources that have been reserved for that flow.

   [rfc3181] defines a priority policy element that specifies both an
   allocation and defending priority.  This dual specification supports the
   use of preemption of existing reservations.  [draft-priority-rsvp] is a
   work-in-progress that defines a new policy element that only conveys
   priority during reservation establishment.  This latter effort also
   presents several reservation models, including one that describes
   engineered resources set aside for priority users.

5.1.2 Differentiated Services

   Unlike RSVP and its use of a separate signaling mechanism to reserve
   resources, Differentiated Services (diff-serv) uses code points within
   the IP header to convey the forwarding behavior of that packet
   [rfc2474].  This may range from various drop precedence values to a code
   point that signifies low delay and low loss (i.e., characteristics
   attributed to real time flows).

   As in the case of RSVP, applications could rely on the reception of CE
   feedback to initiate a subsequent setting of diff-serv code points to
   provide additional protection or explicit association of forwarding



Carlberg & O'Hanlon                Expires September 12, 2012   [Page 6]

Internet Drafts      Reactions to ECN for RTP/RTCP        March 12, 2012


   characteristics of a given flow of packets.  In addition, the setting of
   diff-serv code points would be done on an as-needed basis in reaction to
   CE feedback.  Recommendations concerning specific diff-serv values are
   outside the scope of this document.

5.2 Fault Tolerance

   Fault tolerance is another category of reactions that may be used by
   applications in response to CE feedback.  In some cases, these efforts
   may contribute to an increase in traffic load in order to add protection
   and resiliency to a flow.

   Redundant Transmissions: This approach is based on a source sending
   duplicate payloads that can be used to compensate for lost packets.
   Given that ECN marks the packet and forwards it towards the destination
   (instead of dropping it), this approach can be considered extreme in
   terms of being network unfriendly.  Its positive value may emerge in
   cases where a path has several downstream congestion points.  However,
   its actions of producing redundant packets still associates a high
   measure of greedy use of resources.

   Application Layer Forward Error Correction (FEC): This approach also
   adds additional overhead to the flow in order to compensate for
   potential packet loss.  And as the case of redundant transmissions, the
   value of this approach is probably better realized when there exists
   multiple downstream congestion points.  However, the impact of the
   overhead is minimized by having one (or a few) additional packet(s) used
   to compensate for the loss of a set of packets.

   Codec Swapping: This approach involves changing codecs to either reduce
   load or achieve an improvement in compensating for lost packets.

5.3  Alternative Reaction for Emergency Communications

   As mentioned in [rtp-ecn], the default reaction on the reception of these
   ECN-CE marked packets MUST be to provide the congestion control algorithm with
   a congestion notification that triggers the algorithm to react as if packet
   loss had occurred.  There MAY be an alternative reaction if it is considered
   safe for deployment.  An example of the need for an alternative reaction would
   be the case of Emergency Telecommunications Service (ETS) [rfc3689, rfc4190],
   where an improvement in QoS or a higher probability of session establishment
   and forwarding of traffic is of high interest.

   It is proposed that certain authorized ETS flows may be permitted to employ
   either a substantially less aggressive back-off algorithm than the default
   algorithm, or some level of exemption from reacting to ECN marked packets.
   This alternative reaction will benefit these flows as the marks would normally
   be considered as equivalent to lost packets, which would effectively increase



Carlberg & O'Hanlon                Expires September 12, 2012   [Page 7]

Internet Drafts      Reactions to ECN for RTP/RTCP        March 12, 2012


   the loss level, which in turn will generally result in the reduction of flow
   rate. This applies to all flows that utilize some form of the rate control that
   is inversely proportional to the loss rate, which includes TCP-like algorithms
   or equation-based approaches.

   Simulations of the use of ECN exemption with TFRC and have found that it has
   limited effect on the normal flows with low numbers of exempt flows. A
   half-dumbbell network was used with a RED router queue configured using the
   settings recommended by Sally Floyd. The candidate flows are 1Mbit/s each with
   a backhaul 100Mbit/s link. In the standard case where 1% of flows would be
   exempt the remaining flows achieve 99.99% of the bandwidth that they would
   achieve without the presence of the exempt flows. This is what would be
   expected from the simple calculation of the allocation, given that the exempt
   flows achieve their full rate (1Mbit/s); With 100 normal plus 1 exempt flow,
   assuming that the except flow uses 1Mbit/s, the remaining capacity is 99Mbit/s
   which is divided between the 100 normal flows.  Whilst when 101 normal flows
   are run over the 100Mbit/s link they would have to share it evenly, so it works
   out thus: ((99/100)/(100/101))*100=99.99%. In the case of 5% exempt flows then
   the proportion is very slightly lower at ((95/100)/(100/105))*100=99.75%.  Both
   these calculations are borne out in the simulation runs.

   The level of exemption employed can be altered in a number of ways. Two simple
   approaches would be to either set a threshold number of ECN marked packets that
   could be considered as a loss, and another approach would be to set a
   percentage threshold of ECN marked packet that would be considered as a loss.

   It should be noted that in the simulations the end-to-end delay of the packets
   within the flows was monitored and the relative delay of the exempt flows
   apparently rises somewhat when exemption is enacted. However what is actually
   occurring is that the 'normal' flows are reducing their throughput and are thus
   reducing their latency somewhat. There is normally some limited latency when
   using loss-based techniques such as TFRC because it fills the queues to
   ascertain the link capacity and maintains that level of delay throughout a
   session. However the level of latency is clearly limited by the queue sizes in
   the network and on media specific links these queue sizes are typically quite
   small, so the resulting latency is limited.

   Furthermore in the case where media flows employing TFRC, or any other
   congestion control algorithm (e.g. delay-based), are sharing a bottleneck
   link with TCP flows then the queues will be filled by the TCP flows and
   the latency will be kept near or at a their maximum despite any other flows.

6.  IANA Considerations

   This document requires no actions from IANA.






Carlberg & O'Hanlon                Expires September 12, 2012   [Page 8]

Internet Drafts      Reactions to ECN for RTP/RTCP        March 12, 2012


7.  Security Considerations

   The reliance on accurate and un-modified RTCP information means that
   SRTP needs to be used, or any other mechanism that helps prevent
   modification of RTCP feedback packets.

8. Acknowledgements

   TBD

9.  References

9.1 Normative

   [draft-rtp-ecn] Westerlund, M., et. al., "Explicit Congestion
                   Notification (ECN) for RTP over UDP", Work In
                   Progress, IETF, July 2011

   [rfc2119] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
             Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.


   [rfc2205] Braden, B., et. al., "Resource ReSerVation Protocol (RSVP)
             -- Version 1 Functional Specification", RFC 2205, September
             1997

   [rfc2209] Braden, R., L. Zhang, "Resource Reservation Protocol
             (RSVP) -- Version 1 Message Processing Rules", RFC2209
             September 1997

   [rfc2474] Nichols, K., et. al., "Definition of the Differentiated
             Services Field in the IPv4 and IPv6 Headers", RFC 2474,
             December 1998

   [rfc3168] Ramakrishnan, K,. et. al., "The Addition of Explicit
             Congestion Notification (ECN) to IP", RFC 3168,
             September, 2001

   [rfc3181] Herzog, S., "Signaled Preemption Priority Policy Element",
             RFC 3181, October 2001

   [rfc3448] Handley, M., et. al., "TCP Friendly Rate Control (TFRC):
             Protocol Specification", RFC 3448, January 2003

   [rfc4867] Sjoberg, J., et. al., "RTP Payload Format and File Storage
             Format for the AMR and AMR-WB Audio Codecs", RFC 4867,
             April 2007




Carlberg & O'Hanlon                Expires September 12, 2012   [Page 9]

Internet Drafts      Reactions to ECN for RTP/RTCP        March 12, 2012


   [rfc5104] Wenger, S., et. al., "Codec Control Messages in the RTP
             Audio-Visual Profile with Feedback (AVPF)", RFC 5104,
             February 2008

9.2 Informative

   [draft-rtp-tfrc] Gharai, L., C. Perkins, "RTP with TCP Friendly Rate
                    Control", work-in-progress, Sept 2011

   [Goog1] http://code.google.com/apis/talk/call_signaling.html

   [tr26.114] "IMS; Multimedia telephony; Media Handling and
              Interaction", 3GPP, version 10, April 2011

   [ts36.300] "E-UTRA and E-UTRAN Overall Description, Stage 2",
              3GPP, Release 10, September, 2011

   [RFC4340] Kohler, E., et. al, Datagram Congestion Control
             Protocol (DCCP), RFC4340, March 2006

   [RFC4342] Floyd, S., et. al., "Profile for DCCP Congestion
             Control ID 3: TFRC", RFC 4342, March 2006

   [RFC4828] Floyd, S., E. Kohler, "TFRC: The Small Packet
             Variant", RFC 4828, April 2007

   [rfc3689] Carlberg, K., Atkinson, R., "General Requirements for
             Emergency Telecommunications Service (ETS)", RFC 3689,
             February 2004

   [rfc4190] Carlberg, K. et, al., "Framework for Supporting
             Emergency Telecommunications Service (ETS) in
             IP Telephony", RFC 4190, November 2005

   [rfc3714] Floyd, S., Kempf, J., "IAB Concerns Regarding Congestion
             Control for Voice Traffic in the Internet", RFC 3714,
             March 2004

   [bcp145]  Eggert, L., Fairhurst, G., "Unicast UDP Usage Guidelines
             for Application Designers", RFC 5405, BCP 145, November 2008

Author's Addresses

   Piers O'Hanlon
   University College London
   Computer Science Department
   Gower Street
   London  WC1E 6BT



Carlberg & O'Hanlon                Expires September 12, 2012  [Page 10]

Internet Drafts      Reactions to ECN for RTP/RTCP        March 12, 2012


   United Kingdom

   Email: p.ohanlon@cs.ucl.ac.uk


   Ken Carlberg
   G11
   1600 Clarendon Blvd
   Arlington  VA
   USA

   Email: carlberg@g11.org.uk







































Carlberg & O'Hanlon                Expires September 12, 2012  [Page 11]
