


Atoca WG                                                    Gabor Bajko 
Internet Draft                                                    Nokia 
Intended Status: Informational                         October 31, 2011 
Expires: April 30, 2012                                                 
                                                                        
    
    
        Emergency Alert Service support in IEEE 802.11 networks 
                     draft-bajko-atoca-wlan-eas-01 
 
 
Abstract 
    
    
   The IEEE 802.11 specification is evolving by defining new amendments 
   to it, which are then rolled into the base spec. The 802.11u 
   amendment, published in November 2010, contains support for Citizen 
   to Authority type of Emergency Calls and Authority to Citizen type 
   of Alerts.  
   This document attempts to explain what level of support for 
   Authority to Citizen type of Emergency Alerts has been defined for 
   IEEE 802.11 protocol. 
    
    
    
    
    
 
Status of this Memo 
    
    
   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the 
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF). Note that other groups may also distribute 
   working documents as Internet-Drafts. The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents 
   at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 30, 2012. 
    
Copyright Notice 
    
   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the 
   document authors. All rights reserved. 
    


 
Bajko                   Expires April 30, 2012               [Page 1] 
 
 
EAS in wlan                                           October 31, 2011 
    
   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal 
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents 
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of 
   publication of this document. Please review these documents 
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with 
   respect to this document. Code Components extracted from this 
   document must include Simplified BSD License text as described in 
   Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without 
   warranty as described in the Simplified BSD License. 
    
    
Table of Content 
    
   1. Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  2 
   2. Conventions and Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 
   3. Emergency Alert Service indication at a wifi AP . . . . . . . . 3 
   4. Retrieving an EAS message . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5 
   5.  


































 
Bajko                   Expires April 30, 2012               [Page 2] 
 
 
EAS in wlan                                           October 31, 2011 
    
1. Introduction 
    
   This document assumes the reader is familiar with the basics of the 
   802.11 protocol. 
   A STA first listens in a channel to see if there are any APs 
   operating in that channel. If there are, then the STA will receive a 
   beacon. This is the so-called passive scanning procedure. The STA 
   may also choose to send a Probe Request in the channel and wait for 
   a Probe Response. The Probe Request is sent to a broadcast address 
   and contains conditions which an answering AP must satisfy. This is 
   called active scanning. 
   A STA can only exchange data frames with an AP after the so-called 
   association and authentication (if required) procedure. Management 
   frames however, can be exchanged even before the association and 
   authentication procedure, which the 802.11 specification calls pre-
   association frame exchange. 
    
2. Conventions and Terminology 
    
    
2.1 Conventions used in This Document 
    
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in 
   this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [1]. 
    
2.2 Terminology 
    
   STA  station, a device communicating with an 802.11 access point 
   GAS  Generic Advertisement Service Protocol, defined in 802.11 
    
    
3. Emergency Alert Service indication at a wifi AP 
 
   An AP compliant with the IEEE 802.11-2011 specification will have a 
   MIB variable called dot11EASActivated which has the following 
   definition: 
    
   dot11EASActivated OBJECT-TYPE 
   SYNTAX TruthValue 
   MAX-ACCESS read-write 
   STATUS current 
   DESCRIPTION 
   "This is a control variable. 
   It is written by an external management entity or the SME. Changes 
   take effect as soon as practical in the implementation. This 
   attribute when true, indicates the STA is capable of supporting 
   emergency alert system. The capability is disabled otherwise. " 
   DEFVAL {false} 
   ::= { dot11StationConfigEntry 128 } 
    

 
Bajko                   Expires April 30, 2012               [Page 3] 
 
 
EAS in wlan                                           October 31, 2011 
    
   When this MIB variable is set to TRUE, then the AP supports this 
   feature. Else the AP does not support this feature. 
    
   When this MIB variable is set to true and there are emergency alert 
   messages in the network, then the beacon will contain one Emergency 
   Alert Information Element for each active alert message, in the 
   beacon. These Emergency Alert Information Elements have to also be 
   included in the Probe Response Frames, when a STA asks for it in a 
   Probe Request Frame. 
    
   The Emergency Alert Identifier element provides a hash to identify 
   instances of the active EAS messages that are currently available 
   from the network. The hash allows the STA to assess whether an EAS 
   message advertised by an AP has been previously received and 
   therefore whether it is necessary to download from the network. The 
   format of the Emergency Alert Identifier element is: 
    
            0              7           13                       79 
            +---------------------------------------------------+ 
            |  Element ID  |   Length   |  Alert Identifier Hash| 
            +---------------------------------------------------+ 
    
   The Length is a 1-octet field whose value is equal to 8. 
   The Alert Identifier Hash (AIH) is an 8-octet field. It is a unique 
   value used to indicate an instance of an EAS message. The value of 
   this field is the hash produced by the HMAC-SHA1-64 hash algorithm 
   operating on the EAS message. 
    
        AIH =HMAC-SHA1-64("ES_ALERT", Emergency_Alert_Message) 
    
   where AIH is then truncated to the first 64 bits of this function. 
   The Emergency_Alert_Message is the EAS message itself. 
    
   NOTE: The same value of hash will be computed by each AP in an ESS 
   and by each AP in different ESSs. Thus a STA, which can download 
   emergency alert messages when in a pre-associated state, can 
   unambiguously determine that it has already downloaded the message, 
   avoiding unnecessary duplicates. 
    
4. Retrieving an EAS message 
    
   The STA can find out whether there are any EAS messages in the 
   network by looking for Emergency Alert Information Elements in the 
   beacon or Probe Response messages. 
    
   When the STA finds out that there are EAS messages in the network, 
   it can access those messages with the protocol defined in 802.11-
   2011.  
    
   The STA can check if it had previously downloaded that alert message 
   by computing a hash of the message and comparing it with the hash 

 
Bajko                   Expires April 30, 2012               [Page 4] 
 
 
EAS in wlan                                           October 31, 2011 
    
   value present in the Emergency Alert Information Element of the 
   beacon or probe response frame. 
    
   The STA does not have to be associated with an AP in order to access 
   and download the EAS message, it can do that in the pre-associated 
   state as well. The STA needs to send a GAS Request public action 
   frame to the AP by setting the Element-ID of the request to the EAS 
   value and including the hash of the EAS message into the Query 
   Request field. Then, in the GAS Response frame, the AP will deliver 
   the requested EAS message to the STA. 
   According to the 802.11 specifications, the EAS message in the GAS 
   Response frame is expected to be formatted in accordance with OASIS 
   EDXL. 
    
   A STA which is already associated and authenticated with an AP, can 
   also use GAS ANQP protocol to download the URI of a local Emergency 
   Alert Server. The STA can then retrieve the EAS message using a URI 
   formed by concatenating the downloaded local Emergency Alert Server 
   URI with the hexadecimal numerals of the Alert Identifier Hash 
   converted to UTF-8 encoded characters and the ".xml" file extension. 
   For example, if the Emergency Alert Server URI is 
   http://eas.server.org and the Alert Identifier Hash is 
   "0x1234567890abcdef", then the URI would be 
   http://eas.server.org/1234567890abcdef.xml 
   The XML file is expected to be formatted in accordance with OASIS 
   EDXL. 
    
   The mechanism by which the EAS message is retrieved from the formed 
   URI is not specified in the 802.11 specification.  
    
   When an EAS Message has expired, an AP with dot11EASActivated set to 
   TRUE shall remove the corresponding instance of an Emergency Alert 
   Identifier element from its Beacon and Probe Response frames. 
    
    
    
5. Protocol considerations 
    
   An Emergency Alert distribution protocol intended to work with WiFi 
   Access Points will need to deliver the Alert message to the AP, 
   which in turn will need to save it in a MIB variable. Currently 
   there are no MIB variables defined in the 802.11 standard to store 
   Alert messages. 
   Once the AP, which has EAS implemented and enabled, receives an 
   Alert message, it needs to include an Emergency Alert Information 
   Element into the beacon and probe responses, and remove it once the 
   Alert message expires.  
   The AP would probably need to register itself to an Alert 
   Distribution Server in order to receive the Alerts. 
    
    
6. IANA considerations 
 
Bajko                   Expires April 30, 2012               [Page 5] 
 
 
EAS in wlan                                           October 31, 2011 
    
    
   None. 
    
7. Security considerations 
    
   This document is provided for information to the IETF community. The 
   protocol described here relies on the existence of a protocol which 
   can distribute emergency alert messages to the wifi access points. 
   As described here, the STAs can access an alert message in pre-
   associated state as well, when the STA did not authenticate the AP 
   or the network behind the AP. Careful consideration should be taken 
   on when such an alert message can be trusted and be displayed on the 
   screen of a wifi device. 
    
8. Normative References 
    
    
    
9. Informative References 
    
   http://standards.ieee.org/getieee802/download/802.11-2007.pdf 
   http://standards.ieee.org/getieee802/download/802.11-2011.pdf (to be 
   available in 2012) 
    
10. Author's Addresses 
    
   Gabor Bajko 
   gabor.bajko@nokia.com 
    
 
 





















 
Bajko                   Expires April 30, 2012               [Page 6] 
 