A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3253

        Title:      Versioning Extensions to WebDAV
                    (Web Distributed Authoring and Versioning)
        Author(s):  G. Clemm, J. Amsden, T. Ellison, C. Kaler,
                    J. Whitehead 
        Status:     Standards Track
        Date:       March 2002
        Mailbox:    geoffrey.clemm@rational.com, jamsden@us.ibm.com,
                    tim_ellison@uk.ibm.com, ckaler@microsoft.com,
                    ejw@cse.ucsc.edu 
        Pages:      118
        Characters: 245514
        Updates/Obsoletes/SeeAlso:  None

        I-D Tag:    draft-ietf-deltav-versioning-20.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3253.txt


This document specifies a set of methods, headers, and resource types
that define the WebDAV (Web Distributed Authoring and Versioning)
versioning extensions to the HTTP/1.1 protocol.  WebDAV versioning
will minimize the complexity of clients that are capable of
interoperating with a variety of versioning repository managers, to
facilitate widespread deployment of applications capable of utilizing
the WebDAV Versioning services.  WebDAV versioning includes automatic
versioning for versioning-unaware clients, version history management,
workspace management, baseline management, activity management, and
URL namespace versioning.

This document is a product of the Web Versioning and Configuration
Management Working Group of the IETF.

This is now a Proposed Standard Protocol.

This document specifies an Internet standards track protocol for
the Internet community, and requests discussion and suggestions
for improvements.  Please refer to the current edition of the
"Internet Official Protocol Standards" (STD 1) for the
standardization state and status of this protocol.  Distribution
of this memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.
