


Network Working Group                                       Y. Pettersen
Internet-Draft                                        Opera Software ASA
Intended status: Standards Track                           March 7, 2010
Expires: September 8, 2010


       Adding Multiple TLS Certificate Status Extension requests
                draft-pettersen-tls-ext-multiple-ocsp-01

Abstract

   This document introduces a replacement of the TLS Certificate Status
   Extension to allow clients to specify and support multiple
   certificate status methods.  Also being introduced is a new OCSP
   based method that servers can use to provide status information not
   just about the server's own certificate, but also the status of
   intermediate certificates in the chain.

Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 8, 2010.

Copyright Notice



Pettersen               Expires September 8, 2010               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft    Multiple Certificate Status Extension       March 2010


   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the BSD License.

   This document may contain material from IETF Documents or IETF
   Contributions published or made publicly available before November
   10, 2008.  The person(s) controlling the copyright in some of this
   material may not have granted the IETF Trust the right to allow
   modifications of such material outside the IETF Standards Process.
   Without obtaining an adequate license from the person(s) controlling
   the copyright in such materials, this document may not be modified
   outside the IETF Standards Process, and derivative works of it may
   not be created outside the IETF Standards Process, except to format
   it for publication as an RFC or to translate it into languages other
   than English.



























Pettersen               Expires September 8, 2010               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft    Multiple Certificate Status Extension       March 2010


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Multiple Certificate Status Extension . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
     2.1.  New extension . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
     2.2.  Multiple Certificate Status Request record  . . . . . . . . 4
   3.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   4.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
     4.1.  Security Considerations for status_request  . . . . . . . . 8
   5.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   6.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9







































Pettersen               Expires September 8, 2010               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft    Multiple Certificate Status Extension       March 2010


1.  Introduction

   The Transport Layer Security Extension [I-D.ietf-tls-rfc4366-bis]
   framework defines, among other extensions, the Certificate Status
   Extension that clients can use to request the server's copy of the
   current status of its certificate.  The benefits of this extension
   include a reduced number of roundtrips and network delays for the
   client to verify the status of the server's certificate using other
   retrieval methods, and a reduced load on the certificate issuer's
   status response servers, thus solving a problem that can become
   significant when the issued certificate is presented by a frequently
   visited server.

   There are two problems with the existing Certificate Status extension
   as it is currently defined.  First, it does not provide functionality
   to request the status information about intermediate CA certificates,
   which means the client has to request this through other retrieval
   methods, like CRLs, which can cause significant delays when the
   revocation list has to be refreshed.  Second, the current format of
   the extension and requirements in the TLS protocol prevents a client
   from offering the server multiple status methods.

   Many Certificate Authorities are now issuing intermediate CA
   certificates that not only specify a CRL Distribution Point[RFC5280],
   but a URL for OCSP [RFC2560] Certificate Status requests.  Given that
   CRLs, particularly those cached by the client, are frequently less
   up-to-date than is possible for an OCSP responder, using OCSP to
   access up-to-date status information about intermediate CA
   certificates will be of great benefit to clients.  The benefit to the
   issuing CA is less clear as providing the bandwidth for the OCSP
   responder can be costly, especially for CAs with many subscriber
   sites.  The author is aware that the cost of providing this bandwidth
   just for site certificates has been a concern to some CAs,
   particularly the smaller ones, and it follows naturally that doubling
   or tripling this cost could be problematic for the CAs.  The author
   is also aware of at least one case when OCSP requests for a high
   traffic site caused significant network problems for the issuing CA.

   For these reasons it will be beneficial to use the TLS server to
   provide the certificate status information not just for the server
   certificate, but also for the intermediate CA certificates.  This
   will reduce the roundtrips needed to complete the handshake by the
   client to just those needed for negotiating the TLS connection.
   Also, for the Certificate Authorities, the load on their servers will
   depend on the number of certificates they have issued, not on the
   number of visitors to those sites.

   For such a new system to be introduced seamlessly it must be possible



Pettersen               Expires September 8, 2010               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft    Multiple Certificate Status Extension       March 2010


   for clients to indicate support for the existing OCSP Certificate
   Status method, and a new multiple OCSP mode.

   Unfortunately, the definition of the Certificate Status extension
   only allows a single Certificate Status extension to be defined in a
   single extension record in the handshake, and the TLS Protocol only
   allows a single record in the extension list for any given extension.
   This means that it is not possible for clients to indicate support
   for new methods while still supporting older methods, which would
   cause problems for interoperability between newer clients and older
   servers.  This will not just be an issue for the multiple status
   request mode proposed above, but also for any other future status
   methods that might be introduced.  This will be true not just for the
   current PKIX infrastructure, but also for alternative PKI structures.

   The solution to this problem is to define a new extension,
   status_request_v2, with an extended format that allows the client to
   indicate support for multiple status request methods.  This is
   implemented by using a list of CeritficateStatusRequest records in
   the extension record.  As the server will select the single status
   method based on the selected cipher suite and the certificate
   presented, no significant changes are needed in the server's
   extension format.


2.  Multiple Certificate Status Extension

2.1.  New extension

   The extension added by this document is indicated by the
   "status_request_v2" in the ExtensionType enum, which is updated with
   this value:
   enum {
       status_request_v2(XX) (65535)
   } ExtensionType;

   [[ EDITOR: The value used for status_request_v2 has been left as XX.
   This value will be assigned when this draft progresses to RFC.]]

2.2.  Multiple Certificate Status Request record

   Clients that support a certificate status protocol like OCSP may send
   the status_request_v2 extension to the server in order to use the TLS
   handshake to transfer such data instead of downloading it through
   separate connections.  When using this extension the "extension_data"
   field of the extension SHALL contain a CertificateStatusRequestList
   where:




Pettersen               Expires September 8, 2010               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft    Multiple Certificate Status Extension       March 2010


       struct {
         CertificateStatusType status_type;
         select (status_type) {
           case ocsp: OCSPStatusRequest;
           case ocsp_multi: OCSPStatusRequest;
         } request;
       } CertificateStatusRequest;

       enum { ocsp(1), ocsp_multi(YY), (255) } CertificateStatusType;

       struct {
         ResponderID responder_id_list<0..2^16-1>;
         Extensions request_extensions;
       } OCSPStatusRequest;

       opaque ResponderID<1..2^16-1>;
       opaque Extensions<0..2^16-1>;

       struct {
         CertificateStatusRequest certificate_status_req_list<1..2^16-1>
       } CertificateStatusRequestList


   [[ EDITOR: The value used for ocsp_multi has been left as YY.  This
   value will be assigned when this draft progresses to RFC.]]

   In the OCSPStatusRequest, the "ResponderIDs" provides a list of OCSP
   responders that the client trusts.  A zero-length "responder_id_list"
   sequence has the special meaning that the responders are implicitly
   known to the server, e.g., by prior arrangement, or are identfied by
   the certificates used by the server.  "Extensions" is a DER encoding
   of OCSP request extensions.

   Both "ResponderID" and "Extensions" are DER-encoded ASN.1 types as
   defined in [RFC2560].  "Extensions" is imported from [RFC5280].  A
   zero-length "request_extensions" value means that there are no
   extensions (as opposed to a zero-length ASN.1 SEQUENCE, which is not
   valid for the "Extensions" type).

   In the case of the "id-pkix-ocsp-nonce" OCSP extension, [RFC2560] is
   unclear about its encoding; for clarification, the nonce MUST be a
   DER-encoded OCTET STRING, which is encapsulated as another OCTET
   STRING (note that implementations based on an existing OCSP client
   will need to be checked for conformance to this requirement).

   The list of CertificateStatusRequest entries MUST be in order of
   preference.




Pettersen               Expires September 8, 2010               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft    Multiple Certificate Status Extension       March 2010


   Servers that receive a client hello containing the "status_request"
   extension MAY return a suitable certificate status response to the
   client along with their certificate.  If OCSP is requested, they
   SHOULD use the information contained in the extension when selecting
   an OCSP responder and SHOULD include request_extensions in the OCSP
   request.

   Servers return a certificate response along with their certificate by
   sending a "CertificateStatus" message immediately after the
   "Certificate" message (and before any "ServerKeyExchange" or
   "CertificateRequest" messages).  If a server returns a
   "CertificateStatus" message in response to a status_request_v2
   request, then the server MUST have included an extension of type
   "status_request_v2" with empty "extension_data" in the extended
   server hello.  The "CertificateStatus" message is conveyed using the
   handshake message type "certificate_status" as follows (see also
   [I-D.ietf-tls-rfc4366-bis]):

         struct {
           CertificateStatusType status_type;
           select (status_type) {
             case ocsp: OCSPResponse;
             case ocsp_multi: OCSPResponseList;
           } response;
         } CertificateStatus;

         opaque OCSPResponse<0..2^24-1>;

         struct {
           OCSPResponse ocsp_response_list<1..2^24-1>
         } OCSPResponseList


   An "OCSPResponse" element contains a complete, DER-encoded OCSP
   response (using the ASN.1 type OCSPResponse defined in [RFC2560]) .
   Only one OCSP response, with a length of at least one byte, may be
   sent for status_type "ocsp".

   An "ocsp_response_list" contains a list of "OCSPResponse" elements,
   as specified above, each containing the OCSP response for the
   matching corresponding certificate in the server's Certificate TLS
   handshake message. that is, the first entry is the OCSP response for
   the first certificate in the Certificate list, the second entry is
   the response for the second certificate, and so on.  The list MAY
   contain fewer OCSP responses than there was certificates in the
   Certificate handshake message, but there MUST NOT be more responses
   than there were certificates in the list.  Individual elements of the
   list MAY have a length of 0 (zero) bytes, if the server does not have



Pettersen               Expires September 8, 2010               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft    Multiple Certificate Status Extension       March 2010


   the OCSP response for that particular certificate stored, in which
   case the client MUST act as if a response was not received for that
   particular certificate.  If the client receives a
   "ocsp_response_list" that does not contain a response for one or more
   of the certificates in the completed certificate chain, the client
   SHOULD attempt to validate the certificate using an alternative
   retrieval method, such as downloading the relevant CRL, OCSP SHOULD
   in this situation only be used for the end entity certificate, not
   intermediate CA certificates, for reasons stated above.

   Note that a server MAY also choose not to send a "CertificateStatus"
   message, even if has received a "status_request_v2" extension in the
   client hello message and has sent a "status_request_v2" extension in
   the server hello message.  Additionly, note that that a server MUST
   NOT send the "CertificateStatus" message unless it received either a
   "status_request" or "status_request_v2" extension in the client hello
   message and sent a corresponding "status_request" or
   "status_request_v2" extension in the server hello message.

   Clients requesting an OCSP response and receiving one or more OCSP
   responses in a "CertificateStatus" message MUST check the OCSP
   response(s) and abort the handshake if the response is a revoked
   status or is otherwise not satisfactory with a
   bad_certificate_status_response(113) alert.  This alert is always
   fatal.

   [[Open issue: At least one reviewer have suggested that the client
   should treat an unsatisfactory (non-revoked) response as an empty
   response for that particular response and fall back to the
   alternative method described above]]


3.  IANA Considerations

   Section 2.1 defines the new TLS Extension status_request_v2 enum,
   which should be added to the ExtensionType Values list in the IANA
   TLS category after IETF Concensus has decided to add the value.

   Section 2.2 describes a TLS CertificateStatusType Registry to be
   maintained by the IANA.  CertificateStatusType values are to be
   assigned via IETF Review as defined in [RFC5226].  The initial
   registry corresponds to the definition of "ExtensionType" in
   Section 2.2.


4.  Security Considerations

   General Security Considerations for TLS Extensions are covered in



Pettersen               Expires September 8, 2010               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft    Multiple Certificate Status Extension       March 2010


   [RFC5246].  Security Considerations for the particular extension
   specified in this document are given below.  In general, implementers
   should continue to monitor the state of the art, and address any
   weaknesses identified.

4.1.  Security Considerations for status_request

   If a client requests an OCSP response, it must take into account that
   an attacker's server using a compromised key could (and probably
   would) pretend not to support the extension.  In this case, a client
   that requires OCSP validation of certificates SHOULD either contact
   the OCSP server directly or abort the handshake.

   Use of the OCSP nonce request extension (id-pkix-ocsp-nonce) may
   improve security against attacks that attempt to replay OCSP
   responses; see Section 4.4.1 of [RFC2560] for further details.


5.  Acknowledgements

   This document is based on [I-D.ietf-tls-rfc4366-bis] authored by
   Donald Eastlake 3rd.


6.  Normative References

   [I-D.ietf-tls-rfc4366-bis]
              3rd, D., "Transport Layer Security (TLS) Extensions:
              Extension Definitions", draft-ietf-tls-rfc4366-bis-05
              (work in progress), June 2009.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC2560]  Myers, M., Ankney, R., Malpani, A., Galperin, S., and C.
              Adams, "X.509 Internet Public Key Infrastructure Online
              Certificate Status Protocol - OCSP", RFC 2560, June 1999.

   [RFC5226]  Narten, T. and H. Alvestrand, "Guidelines for Writing an
              IANA Considerations Section in RFCs", BCP 26, RFC 5226,
              May 2008.

   [RFC5246]  Dierks, T. and E. Rescorla, "The Transport Layer Security
              (TLS) Protocol Version 1.2", RFC 5246, August 2008.

   [RFC5280]  Cooper, D., Santesson, S., Farrell, S., Boeyen, S.,
              Housley, R., and W. Polk, "Internet X.509 Public Key
              Infrastructure Certificate and Certificate Revocation List



Pettersen               Expires September 8, 2010               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft    Multiple Certificate Status Extension       March 2010


              (CRL) Profile", RFC 5280, May 2008.


Author's Address

   Yngve N. Pettersen
   Opera Software ASA

   Email: yngve@opera.com










































Pettersen               Expires September 8, 2010              [Page 10]


