





Network Working Group                                        DeKok, Alan
INTERNET-DRAFT                                                FreeRADIUS
Obsoletes: 4282
Category: Standards Track
<draft-dekok-radext-nai-02.txt>
28 August 2012


                     The Network Access Identifier
                       draft-dekok-radext-nai-02

Abstract

   In order to provide roaming services, it is necessary to have a
   standardized method for identifying users.  This document defines the
   syntax for the Network Access Identifier (NAI), the user identity
   submitted by the client during network authentication.  "Roaming" may
   be loosely defined as the ability to use any one of multiple Internet
   Service Providers (ISPs), while maintaining a formal, customer-vendor
   relationship with only one.  Examples of where roaming capabilities
   might be required include ISP "confederations" and ISP-provided
   corporate network access support.  This document is a revised version
   of RFC 4282 [RFC4282], which addresses issues with international
   character sets, as well as a number of other corrections to the
   previous document.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on February 28, 2013.



DeKok, Alan                  Standards Track                    [Page 1]

INTERNET-DRAFT        The Network Access Identifier       28 August 2012


Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2012 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors. All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document. Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document. Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.





































DeKok, Alan                  Standards Track                    [Page 2]

INTERNET-DRAFT        The Network Access Identifier       28 August 2012


Table of Contents

Appendix A - Changes from RFC4282 ............................    3
1.  Introduction .............................................    4
   1.1.  Terminology .........................................    4
   1.2.  Requirements Language ...............................    5
   1.3.  Purpose .............................................    6
   1.4.  Motivation ..........................................    6
2.  NAI Definition ...........................................    7
   2.1.  UTF-8 Syntax and Normalization ......................    7
   2.2.  Formal Syntax .......................................    7
   2.3.  NAI Length Considerations ...........................    8
   2.4.  Support for Username Privacy ........................    8
   2.5.  International Character Sets ........................    9
   2.6.  The Normalization Process ...........................   10
   2.7.  Routing inside of AAA Systems .......................   10
   2.8.  Compatibility with Email Usernames ..................   11
   2.9.  Compatibility with DNS ..............................   11
   2.10.  Realm Construction .................................   12
      2.10.1.  Historical Practices ..........................   13
   2.11.  Examples ...........................................   13
3.  Security Considerations ..................................   14
4.  IANA Considerations ......................................   15
5.  References ...............................................   15
   5.1.  Normative References ................................   15
   5.2.  Informative References ..............................   16
Appendix A - Changes from RFC4282 ............................   18
























DeKok, Alan                  Standards Track                    [Page 3]

INTERNET-DRAFT        The Network Access Identifier       28 August 2012


1.  Introduction

   Considerable interest exists for a set of features that fit within
   the general category of "roaming capability" for network access,
   including dialup Internet users, Virtual Private Network (VPN) usage,
   wireless LAN authentication, and other applications.  Interested
   parties have included the following:

   o  Regional Internet Service Providers (ISPs) operating within a
      particular state or province, looking to combine their efforts
      with those of other regional providers to offer dialup service
      over a wider area.

   o  National ISPs wishing to combine their operations with those of
      one or more ISPs in another nation to offer more comprehensive
      dialup service in a group of countries or on a continent.

   o  Wireless LAN hotspots providing service to one or more ISPs.

   o  Businesses desiring to offer their employees a comprehensive
      package of dialup services on a global basis.  Those services may
      include Internet access as well as secure access to corporate
      intranets via a VPN, enabled by tunneling protocols such as the
      Point-to-Point Tunneling Protocol (PPTP) [RFC2637], the Layer 2
      Forwarding (L2F) protocol [RFC2341], the Layer 2 Tunneling
      Protocol (L2TP) [RFC2661], and the IPsec tunnel mode [RFC4301].

   In order to enhance the interoperability of roaming services, it is
   necessary to have a standardized method for identifying users.  This
   document defines syntax for the Network Access Identifier (NAI).
   Examples of implementations that use the NAI, and descriptions of its
   semantics, can be found in [RFC2194].

   This document is a revised version of [RFC4282], which originally
   defined internationalized NAIs.  Differences and enhancements
   compared to that document are listed in Appendix A.

1.1.  Terminology

   This document frequently uses the following terms:

   Network Access Identifier

      The Network Access Identifier (NAI) is the user identity submitted
      by the client during network access authentication.  In roaming,
      the purpose of the NAI is to identify the user as well as to
      assist in the routing of the authentication request.  Please note
      that the NAI may not necessarily be the same as the user's email



DeKok, Alan                  Standards Track                    [Page 4]

INTERNET-DRAFT        The Network Access Identifier       28 August 2012


      address or the user identity submitted in an application layer
      authentication.

   Network Access Server

      The Network Access Server (NAS) is the device that clients connect
      to in order to get access to the network.  In PPTP terminology,
      this is referred to as the PPTP Access Concentrator (PAC), and in
      L2TP terminology, it is referred to as the L2TP Access
      Concentrator (LAC).  In IEEE 802.11, it is referred to as an
      Access Point.

   Roaming Capability

      Roaming capability can be loosely defined as the ability to use
      any one of multiple Internet Service Providers (ISPs), while
      maintaining a formal, customer-vendor relationship with only one.
      Examples of cases where roaming capability might be required
      include ISP "confederations" and ISP-provided corporate network
      access support.

   Tunneling Service

      A tunneling service is any network service enabled by tunneling
      protocols such as PPTP, L2F, L2TP, and IPsec tunnel mode.  One
      example of a tunneling service is secure access to corporate
      intranets via a Virtual Private Network (VPN).

1.2.  Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].


















DeKok, Alan                  Standards Track                    [Page 5]

INTERNET-DRAFT        The Network Access Identifier       28 August 2012


1.3.  Purpose

   As described in [RFC2194], there are a number of providers offering
   network access services, and the number of Internet Service Providers
   involved in roaming consortia is increasing rapidly.

   In order to be able to offer roaming capability, one of the
   requirements is to be able to identify the user's home authentication
   server.  For use in roaming, this function is accomplished via the
   Network Access Identifier (NAI) submitted by the user to the NAS in
   the initial network authentication.  It is also expected that NASes
   will use the NAI as part of the process of opening a new tunnel, in
   order to determine the tunnel endpoint.

1.4.  Motivation

   The changes from [RFC4282] are listed in detail in Appendix A.
   However, some additional discussion is appropriate to motivate those
   changes.

   The motivation to revise [RFC4282] began with internationalization
   concerns raised in the context of [EDUROAM].  Section 2.1 of
   [RFC4282] defines ABNF for realms which limits the realm grammar to
   English letters, digits, and the hyphen "-" character.  The intent
   appears to have been to encode, compare, and transport realms with
   the ToASCII operation defined in [RFC5890].  There are a number of
   problems with this approach:

   o  The requirement in Section 2.1 that realms are ASCII conflicts
      with the Extensible Authentication Protocol (EAP) and RADIUS,
      which are both 8-bit clean, and which both recommend the use of
      UTF-8 for identities.

   o  Section 2.4 required mappings that are language-specific,
      and which are nearly impossible for intermediate nodes to perform
      correctly without information about that language.

   o  Section 2.4 requires normalization of user names, which
      may conflict with local system or administrative requirements.

   o  The recommendations in Section 2.4 for treatment of
      bidirectional characters have proven to be unworkable.

   o  The prohibition against use of unassigned code points in
      Section 2.4 effectively prohibits support for new scripts.

   o  No Authentication, Authorization, and Accounting (AAA)
      client, proxy, or server has implemented any of the requirements



DeKok, Alan                  Standards Track                    [Page 6]

INTERNET-DRAFT        The Network Access Identifier       28 August 2012


      in [RFC4282] Section 2.4, among other sections.

   With international roaming growing in popularity, it is important for
   these issues to be corrected in order to provide robust and inter-
   operable network services.

2.  NAI Definition


2.1.  UTF-8 Syntax and Normalization

   UTF-8 characters can be defined in terms of octets using the
   following ABNF [RFC5234], taken from [RFC3629]:

   UTF8-xtra-char  =   UTF8-2 / UTF8-3 / UTF8-4

   UTF8-2          =   %xC2-DF UTF8-tail

   UTF8-3          =   %xE0 %xA0-BF UTF8-tail /
                       %xE1-EC 2(UTF8-tail) /
                       %xED %x80-9F UTF8-tail /
                       %xEE-EF 2(UTF8-tail)

   UTF8-4          =   %xF0 %x90-BF 2( UTF8-tail ) /
                       %xF1-F3 3( UTF8-tail ) /
                       %xF4 %x80-8F 2( UTF8-tail )

   UTF8-tail       =   %x80-BF

   These are normatively defined in [RFC3629], but are repeated in this
   document for reasons of convenience.

   See [RFC5198] for a discussion of normalization; implementations of
   this specification MUST use the Normal Form Composed (NFC) for NAIs.

2.2.  Formal Syntax

   The grammar for the NAI is given below, described in Augmented
   Backus-Naur Form (ABNF) as documented in [RFC5234].

   nai            =   utf8-username
   nai            =/  "@" utf8-realm
   nai            =/  utf8-username "@" utf8-realm

   utf8-username  =  dot-string
   dot-string     =  string
   dot-string     =/ dot-string "." string
   string         =  utf8-atext



DeKok, Alan                  Standards Track                    [Page 7]

INTERNET-DRAFT        The Network Access Identifier       28 August 2012


   string         =/ string utf8-atext

   utf8-atext     =  ALPHA / DIGIT /
                     "!" / "#" /
                     "$" / "%" /
                     "&" / "'" /
                     "*" / "+" /
                     "-" / "/" /
                     "=" / "?" /
                     "^" / "_" /
                     "`" / "{" /
                     "|" / "}" /
                     "~" /
                     UTF8-xtra-char

   utf8-realm     =  1*( label "." ) label

   label          =  utf8-rtext *(ldh-str)
   ldh-str        =  *( utf8-rtext / "-" ) utf8-rtext
   utf8-rtext     =  ALPHA / DIGIT / UTF8-xtra-char

2.3.  NAI Length Considerations

   Devices handling NAIs MUST support an NAI length of at least 72
   octets.  Devices SHOULD support an NAI length of 253 octets.
   However, the following implementation issues should be considered:

   o  NAIs are often transported in the User-Name attribute of the
      Remote Authentication Dial-In User Service (RADIUS) protocol.
      Unfortunately, RFC 2865 [RFC2865], Section 5.1, states that "the
      ability to handle at least 63 octets is recommended."  As a
      result, it may not be possible to transfer NAIs beyond 63 octets
      through all devices.  In addition, since only a single User-Name
      attribute may be included in a RADIUS message and the maximum
      attribute length is 253 octets; RADIUS is unable to support NAI
      lengths beyond 253 octets.

   o  NAIs can also be transported in the User-Name attribute of
      Diameter [RFC3588], which supports content lengths up to 2^24 - 9
      octets.  As a result, NAIs processed only by Diameter nodes can be
      very long.  However, an NAI transported over Diameter may
      eventually be translated to RADIUS, in which case the above
      limitations will apply.

2.4.  Support for Username Privacy

   Interpretation of the username part of the NAI depends on the realm
   in question.  Therefore, the utf8-username portion SHOULD be treated



DeKok, Alan                  Standards Track                    [Page 8]

INTERNET-DRAFT        The Network Access Identifier       28 August 2012


   as opaque data when processed by nodes that are not a part of the
   authoritative domain (in the sense of Section 4) for that realm.

   In some situations, NAIs are used together with a separate
   authentication method that can transfer the username part in a more
   secure manner to increase privacy.  In this case, NAIs MAY be
   provided in an abbreviated form by omitting the username part.
   Omitting the username part is RECOMMENDED over using a fixed username
   part, such as "anonymous", since it provides an unambiguous way to
   determine whether the username is intended to uniquely identify a
   single user.

   For roaming purposes, it is typically necessary to locate the
   appropriate backend authentication server for the given NAI before
   the authentication conversation can proceed.  As a result, the realm
   portion is typically required in order for the authentication
   exchange to be routed to the appropriate server.

2.5.  International Character Sets

   This specification allows both international usernames and realms.
   International usernames are based on the use of Unicode characters,
   encoded as UTF-8.  Internationalization of the realm portion of the
   NAI is based on "Internationalized Email Headers" [RFC5335].

   In order to ensure a canonical representation, characters of the
   username portion in an NAI MUST match the ABNF in this specification
   as well as the requirements specified in [RFC5891].  In practice,
   these requirements consist of the following item:

   o  Realms MUST be of the form that can be registered as a
      Fully Qualified Domain Name (FQDN) within the DNS name system.

   This list is significantly shorter and simpler than the list in
   Section 2.4 of [RFC4282].  The form suggested in [RFC4282] depended
   on intermediate nodes performing canonicalizations based on
   insufficient information, which meant that the form was not
   canonical.  This document instead suggests (Section 2.10) that the
   realm owner provide a canonical form of the realm, and that all
   intermediate nodes use that form without modification.

   Specifying the realm requirement as above means that the requirements
   depend on specifications that are referenced here, rather than copied
   here.  This allows the realm definition to be updated when the
   referenced documents change, without requiring a revision of this
   specification.

   In general, the above requirement means following the requirements as



DeKok, Alan                  Standards Track                    [Page 9]

INTERNET-DRAFT        The Network Access Identifier       28 August 2012


   specified in [RFC5891].  However, that document is in flux at the
   time of this writing, and the issues with [RFC4282] mandate a timely
   update to it.

2.6.  The Normalization Process

   All normalization MUST be performed by end systems that take "local"
   text as input.  That is, text that is in an encoding other than
   UTF-8, or that has locale-specific variations.  In a network access
   setting, such systems are typically the client (e.g. EAP supplicant)
   and the Authentication, Authorization, and Accounting (AAA) server.

   All other AAA systems (proxies, etc.)  MUST NOT perform
   normalization.  These other systems do not have access to locale and
   character set information that is available to end systems.

   That is, all processing of NAIs from "local" character sets and
   locales to UTF-8 is performed by edge systems, prior to the NAIs
   entering the AAA system.  Inside of an AAA system, NAIs are sent over
   the wire in their canonical form, and this canonical form is used for
   all NAI and/or realm comparisons.

   In contrast to the comments in [RFC4282] Section 2.4, we expect AAA
   systems to perform NAI comparisons, matching, and AAA routing based
   on the NAI as it is received.  This specification provides a
   canonical representation, ensures that intermediate systems such as
   AAA proxies do not need to perform translations, and can be expected
   to work through systems that are unaware of international character
   sets.

   For example, much of the common realm routing can be done on the
   "utf8-realm" portion of NAI, through simple checks for equality.
   This routing can be done even if the AAA proxy is unaware of
   internalized domain names.  All that is required is for the AAA proxy
   to be able to enter, store, and compare 8-bit data.

   EAP supplicants MUST normalize user names that get placed in the EAP-
   Response/Identity field.  They MUST NOT copy localized text into that
   field.  This normalization SHOULD be performed once, and then cached
   for subsequent use.

2.7.  Routing inside of AAA Systems

   Many systems require that the "utf8-realm" portion of the NAI be used
   to route requests within a AAA proxy network.  The semantics of this
   operation involves a logical AAA routing table, where the
   "utf8-realm" portion acts as a key, and the values stored in the
   table are one or more "next hop" AAA servers.



DeKok, Alan                  Standards Track                   [Page 10]

INTERNET-DRAFT        The Network Access Identifier       28 August 2012


   Intermediate nodes MUST use the "utf8-realm" portion of the NAI
   without modification to perform this lookup.  Comparisons between the
   NAI as given in a AAA packet, and as provisioned in a logical AAA
   routing table SHOULD be done as a byte-for-byte equality test.  The
   "utf8-realm" provisioned in the logical AAA routing table SHOULD be
   provisioned prior to the proxy receiving any AAA traffic, and SHOULD
   be supplied by the "next hop" system that also supplies the other
   information about the next hop.

   This "next hop" information may be IP address, port, RADIUS shared
   secret, TLS certificates, or a DNS host name.

2.8.  Compatibility with Email Usernames

   As proposed in this document, the Network Access Identifier is of the
   form user@realm.  Please note that while the user portion of the NAI
   is based on the BNF described in [RFC5198], it has been modified for
   the purposes of Section 2.2.  It does not permit quoted text along
   with "folding" or "non-folding" whitespace that is commonly used in
   email addresses.  As such, the NAI is not necessarily equivalent to
   usernames used in e-mail.

   However, it is a common practice to use email addresses as user
   identifiers in AAA systems.  The ABNF in Section 2.2 is defined to be
   close to the "utf8-addr-spec" portion of [RFC5335], while still being
   compatible with [RFC4282].

   In contrast to the comments in [RFC4282] Section 2.5, we state that
   the internationalization requirements for NAIs and email addresses
   are substantially similar.  The NAI and email identifiers may be the
   same, and both need to be entered by the user and/or the operator
   supplying network access to that user.  There is therefore good
   reason for the internationalization requirements to be similar.

2.9.  Compatibility with DNS

   The "realm" portion of the NAI is intended to be compatible with
   domain names used in DNS systems.  However, the "realm" portion
   within AAA systems is intended to be a UTF-8 string, not an ASCII
   string as with the DNS protocol.  Therefore, AAA systems transporting
   NAIs in an AAA protocol MUST NOT encode the "utf8-realm" portion
   using the ToAscii function.  That function creates strings that may
   be transported over DNS, and it is not appropriate for use within an
   AAA protocol.

   When the realm portion of the NAI is used as the basis for name
   lookups within the DNS system, the ToASCII operation defined in
   [RFC5890] MAY be used to convert internationalized realm names to



DeKok, Alan                  Standards Track                   [Page 11]

INTERNET-DRAFT        The Network Access Identifier       28 August 2012


   ASCII.  This function is normally handled by a DNS resolver library
   on the local system.  When this function is not handled by a DNS
   resolver library, the AAA system MAY perform the ToAscii conversion
   itself, before passing the modified realm name to the DNS resolver
   library.

   There is, however, a problem with this approach.  A AAA proxy may not
   have sufficient information in order to perform the ToAscii
   conversion properly.  We therefore RECOMMEND that only the owner of
   the realm perform the ToAscii conversion.  We RECOMMEND that the
   owner of the realm pre-provision all proxies with the "utf8-realm"
   portion of the NAI, along with the value returned from passing the
   "utf8-realm" to the ToAscii function.  This key-value pair can then
   be placed into logical AAA routing table discussed above.  Having
   only one entity run the ToAscii function ensures that the result
   returned by that function are considered as canonical form by all
   other participants in a AAA network.

   The paragraph above does not negate all of the benefits of using DNS
   to automatically discover the location of a "next hop" AAA server.
   Many AAA proxies require a business or legal relationship prior to
   routing any traffic.  This relationship can be leveraged to bootstrap
   the DNS information located in the logical AAA routing table.

2.10.  Realm Construction

   The home realm usually appears in the realm portion of the NAI, but
   in some cases a different realm can be used.  This may be useful, for
   instance, when the home realm is reachable only via intermediate
   proxies.

   Such usage may prevent interoperability unless the parties involved
   have a mutual agreement that the usage is allowed.  In particular,
   NAIs MUST NOT use a different realm than the home realm unless the
   sender has explicit knowledge that (a) the specified other realm is
   available and (b) the other realm supports such usage.  The sender
   may determine the fulfillment of these conditions through a database,
   dynamic discovery, or other means not specified here.  Note that the
   first condition is affected by roaming, as the availability of the
   other realm may depend on the user's location or the desired
   application.

   The use of the home realm MUST be the default unless otherwise
   configured.







DeKok, Alan                  Standards Track                   [Page 12]

INTERNET-DRAFT        The Network Access Identifier       28 August 2012


2.10.1.  Historical Practices

   Some systems have historically used NAI modifications with multiple
   "prefix" and "suffix" decorations to perform explicit routing through
   multiple proxies inside of a AAA network.  This practice is NOT
   RECOMMENDED for the following reasons:

   o  Using explicit routing paths is fragile, and is unresponsive to
      changes in the network due to servers going up or down, or to
      changing business relationships.

   o  There is no RADIUS routing protocol, meaning that routing paths
      have to be communicated "out of band" to all intermediate AAA
      nodes, and also to all end-user systems (supplicants) expecting to
      obtain network access.

   o  Using explicit routing paths requires thousands, if not
      millions of end-user systems to be updated with new path
      information when a AAA routing path changes.  This adds huge
      expense for updates that would be better done at only a few AAA
      systems in the network.

   o  Manual updates to RADIUS paths are expensive, time-consuming,
      and prone to error.

   o  Re-writing of the User-Name in AAA servers means that it may not
      match the EAP-Response/Identity fields.  This mismatch may cause
       the home AAA server to reject the request as being malformed.

   o  Creating compatible formats for the NAI is difficult
      when locally-defined "prefixes" and "suffixes" conflict with
      similar practices elsewhere in the network.  These conflicts mean
      that connecting two networks may be impossible in some cases, as
      there is no way for packets to be routed properly in a way that
      meets all requirements at all intermediate proxies.

   o  Leveraging the DNS name system for realm names establishes
      a globally unique name space for realms.

   In summary, network practices and capabilities have changed
   significantly since NAIs were first overloaded to define AAA routes
   through a network.  While explicit path routing was once useful, the
   time has come for better methods to be used.

2.11.  Examples

   Examples of valid Network Access Identifiers include the following:




DeKok, Alan                  Standards Track                   [Page 13]

INTERNET-DRAFT        The Network Access Identifier       28 August 2012


           bob
           joe@example.com
           fred@foo-9.example.com
           jack@3rd.depts.example.com
           fred.smith@example.com
           fred_smith@example.com
           fred$@example.com
           fred=?#$&*+-/^smith@example.com
           nancy@eng.example.net
           eng.example.net!nancy@example.net
           eng%nancy@example.net
           @privatecorp.example.net
           \(user\)@example.net

   Examples of invalid Network Access Identifiers include the following:

           fred@example
           fred@example_9.com
           fred@example.net@example.net
           fred.@example.net
           eng:nancy@example.net
           eng;nancy@example.net
           (user)@example.net
           <nancy>@example.net

   One example given in [RFC4282] is still permitted by the ABNF, but it
   is NOT RECOMMMENDED because of the use of the ToAscii function to
   create an ASCII encoding from what is now a valid UTF-8 string.

           alice@xn--tmonesimerkki-bfbb.example.net

3.  Security Considerations

   Since an NAI reveals the home affiliation of a user, it may assist an
   attacker in further probing the username space.  Typically, this
   problem is of most concern in protocols that transmit the username in
   clear-text across the Internet, such as in RADIUS, described in
   [RFC2865] and [RFC2866].  In order to prevent snooping of the
   username, protocols may use confidentiality services provided by
   protocols transporting them, such as RADIUS protected by IPsec
   [RFC3579] or Diameter protected by TLS [RFC3588].

   This specification adds the possibility of hiding the username part
   in the NAI, by omitting it.  As discussed in Section 2.4, this is
   possible only when NAIs are used together with a separate
   authentication method that can transfer the username in a secure
   manner.  In some cases, application-specific privacy mechanism have
   also been used with NAIs.  For instance, some EAP methods apply



DeKok, Alan                  Standards Track                   [Page 14]

INTERNET-DRAFT        The Network Access Identifier       28 August 2012


   method-specific pseudonyms in the username part of the NAI [RFC3748].
   While neither of these approaches can protect the realm part, their
   advantage over transport protection is that privacy of the username
   is protected, even through intermediate nodes such as NASes.

4.  IANA Considerations

   In order to avoid creating any new administrative procedures,
   administration of the NAI realm namespace piggybacks on the
   administration of the DNS namespace.

   NAI realm names are required to be unique, and the rights to use a
   given NAI realm for roaming purposes are obtained coincident with
   acquiring the rights to use a particular Fully Qualified Domain Name
   (FQDN).  Those wishing to use an NAI realm name should first acquire
   the rights to use the corresponding FQDN.  Using an NAI realm without
   ownership of the corresponding FQDN creates the possibility of
   conflict and is therefore discouraged.

   Note that the use of an FQDN as the realm name does not require use
   of the DNS for location of the authentication server.  While Diameter
   [RFC3588] supports the use of DNS for location of authentication
   servers, existing RADIUS implementations typically use proxy
   configuration files in order to locate authentication servers within
   a domain and perform authentication routing.  The implementations
   described in [RFC2194] did not use DNS for location of the
   authentication server within a domain.  Similarly, existing
   implementations have not found a need for dynamic routing protocols
   or propagation of global routing information.  Note also that there
   is no requirement that the NAI represent a valid email address.

5.  References

5.1.  Normative References

[RFC2119]
     Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
     Levels", RFC 2119, March, 1997.

[RFC3629]
     Yergeau, F., "UTF-8, a transformation format of ISO 10646", STD 63,
     RFC 3629, November 2003.

[RFC5198]
     Klensin J., and Padlipsky M., "Unicode Format for Network
     Interchange", RFC 5198, March 2008





DeKok, Alan                  Standards Track                   [Page 15]

INTERNET-DRAFT        The Network Access Identifier       28 August 2012


[RFC5234]
     Crocker, D. and P. Overell, "Augmented BNF for Syntax
     Specifications: ABNF", RFC 5234, January 2008.

[RFC5890]
     Faltstrom, P., Hoffman, P., and A. Costello, "Internationalizing
     Domain Names in Applications (IDNA)", RFC 5890

5.2.  Informative References

[RFC2194]
     Aboba, B., Lu, J., Alsop, J., Ding, J., and W. Wang, "Review of
     Roaming Implementations", RFC 2194, September 1997.

[RFC2341]
     Valencia, A., Littlewood, M., and T. Kolar, "Cisco Layer Two
     Forwarding (Protocol) "L2F"", RFC 2341, May 1998.

[RFC2637]
     Hamzeh, K., Pall, G., Verthein, W., Taarud, J., Little, W., and G.
     Zorn, "Point-to-Point Tunneling Protocol", RFC 2637, July 1999.

[RFC2661]
     Townsley, W., Valencia, A., Rubens, A., Pall, G., Zorn, G., and B.
     Palter, "Layer Two Tunneling Protocol "L2TP"", RFC 2661, August
     1999.

[RFC2865]
     Rigney, C., Willens, S., Rubens, A. and W. Simpson, "Remote
     Authentication Dial In User Service (RADIUS)", RFC 2865, June 2000.

[RFC2866]
     Rigney, C., "RADIUS Accounting", RFC 2866, June 2000.

[RFC3579]
     Aboba, B. and P. Calhoun, "RADIUS (Remote Authentication Dial In
     User Service) Support For Extensible Authentication Protocol
     (EAP)", RFC 3579, September 2003.

[RFC3588]
     Calhoun, P., Loughney, J., Guttman, E., Zorn, G., and J. Arkko,
     "Diameter Base Protocol", RFC 3588, September 2003.

[RFC3748]
     Aboba, B., Blunk, L., Vollbrecht, J., Carlson, J., and H.
     Levkowetz, "Extensible Authentication Protocol (EAP)", RFC 3748,
     June 2004.




DeKok, Alan                  Standards Track                   [Page 16]

INTERNET-DRAFT        The Network Access Identifier       28 August 2012


[RFC4282]
     Aboba, B. et al., "The Network Access Identifier", RFC 4282,
     December 2005.

[RFC4301]
     Kent, S. and S. Keo, "Security Architecture for the Internet
     Protocol", RFC 4301, December 2005.

[RFC5335]
     Y. Abel, Ed., "Internationalized Email Headers", RFC 5335,
     September 2008.

[EDUROAM]
     http://eduroam.org, "eduroam (EDUcational ROAMing)"

[RFC5891]
     Klensin, J., "Internationalized Domain Names in Applications
     (IDNA): Protocol", RFC 5891

Acknowledgments

   The initial text for this document was [RFC4282], which was then
   heavily edited.  The original authors of [RFC4282] were Bernard
   Aboba, Mark A. Beadles, Jari Arkko, and Pasi Eronen.

   The ABNF validator at http://www.apps.ietf.org/abnf.html was used to
   verify the syntactic correctness of the ABNF in Section 2.
























DeKok, Alan                  Standards Track                   [Page 17]

INTERNET-DRAFT        The Network Access Identifier       28 August 2012


Appendix A - Changes from RFC4282

   This document contains the following updates with respect to the
   previous NAI definition in RFC 4282 [RFC4282]:

   o  The formal syntax in Section 2.1 has been updated to forbid
      non-UTF8 characters.  e.g. characters with the "high bit" set.

   o  The formal syntax in Section 2.1 has been updated to allow
      UTF-8 in the "realm" portion of the NAI.

   o  The formal syntax in [RFC4282] Section 2.1 applied to the
      NAI after it was "internationalized" via the ToAscii function.
      The contents of the NAI before it was "internationalized" were
      left indeterminate.  This document updates the formal syntax to
      define an internationalized form of the NAI, and forbids the use
      of the ToAscii function for NAI "internationalization".

   o The grammar for the user and realm portion is based on a
   combination
      of the "nai" defined in [RFC4282] Section 2.1, and the "utf8-addr-
      spec" defined in [RFC5335] Section 4.4.

   o  All use of the ToAscii function has been moved to normal
      requirements on DNS implementations when realms are used as the
      basis for DNS lookups.  This involves no changes to the existing
      DNS infrastructure.

   o  The discussions on internationalized character sets in Section 2.4
      have been updated.  The suggestion to use the ToAscii function for
      realm comparisons has been removed.  No AAA system implemented the
      suggestion, so this change should have no operational impact.

   o The section "Routing inside of AAA Systems" section is new in this
      document.  The concept of a "local AAA routing table" is also new,
      although it accurately describes the functionality of wide-spread
      implementations.

   o  The "Compatibility with EMail Usernames" and "Compatibility
      with DNS" sections have been revised and updated.  We now note
      that the ToAscii function is required to be used only when a realm
      name is used for DNS lookups, and even then the function is only
      used by a DNS resolving library on the local system, and even then
      we recommend that only the home network perform this conversion.

   o  The "Realm Construction" section has been updated to note
      that editing of the NAI is NOT RECOMMENDED.




DeKok, Alan                  Standards Track                   [Page 18]

INTERNET-DRAFT        The Network Access Identifier       28 August 2012


   o The "Examples" section has been updated to remove the instance
      of the IDN being converted to ASCII.  This behavior is now
      forbidden.

Authors' Addresses

   Alan DeKok
   The FreeRADIUS Server Project

   Email: aland@freeradius.org









































DeKok, Alan                  Standards Track                   [Page 19]

