
A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3077

        Title:      A Link-Layer Tunneling Mechanism for
                    Unidirectional Links
        Author(s):  E. Duros, W. Dabbous, H. Izumiyama, N. Fujii,
                    Y. Zhang 
        Status:     Standards Track
        Date:       March 2001
        Mailbox:    Emmanuel.Duros@UDcast.com, Walid.Dabbous@inria.fr,
                    izu@jsat.net, fujii@dct.sony.co.jp, ygz@hrl.com 
        Pages:      25
        Characters: 52410
        Updates/Obsoletes/SeeAlso:    None

        I-D Tag:    draft-ietf-udlr-lltunnel-06.txt
        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3077.txt


This document describes a mechanism to emulate full bidirectional
connectivity between all nodes that are directly connected by a
unidirectional link.  The "receiver" uses a link-layer tunneling
mechanism to forward datagrams to "feeds" over a separate
bidirectional IP (Internet Protocol) network.  As it is implemented at
the link-layer, protocols in addition to IP may also be supported by
this mechanism.

This document is a product of the UniDirectional Link Routing Working
Group of the IETF.

This document specifies an Internet standards track protocol for
the Internet community, and requests discussion and suggestions
for improvements.  Please refer to the current edition of the
"Internet Official Protocol Standards" (STD 1) for the
standardization state and status of this protocol.  Distribution
of this memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.

