





L3VPN Working Group                                        Jeffrey Zhang
Internet Draft                                            Lenny Giuliano
Intended Status: Standards Track                  Juniper Networks, Inc.
Expires: April 18, 2014
                                                           Eric C. Rosen
                                                     Karthik Subramanian
                                                     Cisco Systems, Inc.

                                                        Dante J. Pacella
                                                                 Verizon

                                                          Jason Schiller
                                                                  Google

                                                        October 18, 2013


            Global Table Multicast with BGP-MVPN Procedures


           draft-zzhang-l3vpn-mvpn-global-table-mcast-01.txt

Abstract

   RFC6513, RFC6514, and other RFCs describe protocols and procedures
   which a Service Provider (SP) may deploy in order offer Multicast
   Virtual Private Network (Multicast VPN or MVPN) service to its
   customers.  Some of these procedures use BGP to distribute VPN-
   specific multicast routing information across a backbone network.
   With a small number of relatively minor modifications, the very same
   BGP procedures can also be used to distribute multicast routing
   information that is not specific to any VPN.  Multicast that is
   outside the context of a VPN is known as "Global Table Multicast", or
   sometimes simply as "Internet multicast".  In this document, we
   describe the modifications that are needed to use the MVPN BGP
   procedures for Global Table Multicast.


Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.




Zhang, et al.                                                   [Page 1]


Internet Draft zzhang-l3vpn-mvpn-global-table-mcast-01.txt  October 2013


   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.


Copyright and License Notice

   Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors. All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document. Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document. Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

























Zhang, et al.                                                   [Page 2]


Internet Draft zzhang-l3vpn-mvpn-global-table-mcast-01.txt  October 2013


Table of Contents

 1          Introduction  ..........................................   4
 2          Adapting MVPN Procedures to GTM  .......................   6
 2.1        Use of Route Distinguishers  ...........................   7
 2.2        Use of Route Targets  ..................................   7
 2.3        UMH-eligible Routes  ...................................   9
 2.3.1      Routes of SAFI 1, 2 or 4 with MVPN ECs  ................  11
 2.3.2      MVPN ECs on the Route to the Next Hop  .................  11
 2.3.3      Non-BGP Routes as the UMH-eligible Routes  .............  12
 2.4        Inclusive and Selective Tunnels  .......................  13
 2.5        I-PMSI A-D Routes  .....................................  13
 2.5.1      Intra-AS I-PMSI A-D Routes  ............................  13
 2.5.2      Inter-AS I-PMSI A-D Routes  ............................  14
 2.6        S-PMSI A-D Routes  .....................................  14
 2.7        Leaf A-D Routes  .......................................  14
 2.8        Source Active A-D Routes  ..............................  14
 2.9        C-multicast Source/Shared Tree Joins  ..................  15
 3          Differences from other MVPN-like GTM Procedures  .......  16
 4          IANA Considerations  ...................................  17
 5          Security Considerations  ...............................  17
 6          Acknowledgments  .......................................  18
 7          Authors' Addresses  ....................................  18
 8          References  ............................................  19
 8.1        Normative References  ..................................  19
 8.2        Informative References  ................................  19























Zhang, et al.                                                   [Page 3]


Internet Draft zzhang-l3vpn-mvpn-global-table-mcast-01.txt  October 2013


1. Introduction

   [RFC4364] specifies architecture, protocols, and procedures that a
   Service Provider (SP) can use to provide Virtual Private Network
   (VPN) service to its customers.  In that architecture, one or more
   Customer Edge (CE) routers attach to a Provider Edge (PE) router.
   Each CE router belongs to a single VPN, but CE routers from several
   VPNs may attach to the same PE router.  In addition, CEs from the
   same VPN may attach to different PEs.  BGP is used to carry VPN-
   specific information among the PEs.  Each PE router maintains a
   separate Virtual Routing and Forwarding table (VRF) for each VPN to
   which it is attached.

   [RFC6513] and [RFC6514] extend the procedures of [RFC4364] to allow
   the SP to provide multicast service to its VPN customers.  The
   customer's multicast routing protocol (e.g., PIM) is used to exchange
   multicast routing information between a CE and a PE.  The PE stores a
   given customer's multicast routing information in the VRF for that
   customer's VPN.  BGP is used to distribute certain multicast-related
   control information among the PEs that attach to a given VPN, and BGP
   may also be used to exchange the customer multicast routing
   information itself among the PEs.

   While this multicast architecture was originally developed for VPNs,
   it can also be used (with a small number of modifications to the
   procedures) to distribute multicast routing information that is not
   specific to VPNs.  The purpose of this document is to specify the way
   in which BGP MVPN procedures can be adapted to support non-VPN
   multicast.

   Multicast routing information that is not specific to VPNs is stored
   in a router's "global table", rather than in a VRF; hence it is known
   as "Global Table Multicast" (GTM).  GTM is sometimes more simply
   called "Internet multicast".  However, we will avoid that term
   because it suggests that the multicast data streams are available on
   the "public" Internet.  The procedures for GTM can certainly be used
   to support multicast on the public Internet, but they can also be
   used to support multicast streams that are not public, e.g., content
   distribution streams offered by content providers to paid
   subscribers.  For the purposes of this document, all that matters is
   that the multicast routing information is maintained in a global
   table rather than in a VRF.

   This architecture does assume that the network over which the
   multicast streams travel can be divided into a "core network" and one
   or more non-core parts of the network, which we shall call
   "attachment networks".  The multicast routing protocol used in the
   attachment networks may not be the same as the one used in the core,



Zhang, et al.                                                   [Page 4]


Internet Draft zzhang-l3vpn-mvpn-global-table-mcast-01.txt  October 2013


   so we consider there to be a "protocol boundary" between the core
   network and the attachment networks.  We will use the term "Protocol
   Boundary Router" (PBR) to refer to the core routers that are at the
   boundary.  We will use the term "Attachment Router" (AR) to refer to
   the routers that are not in the core but that attach to the PBRs.

   This document does not make any particular set of assumptions about
   the protocols that the ARs and the PBRs use to exchange unicast and
   multicast routing information with each other.  For instance,
   multicast routing information could be exchanged between an AR and a
   PBR via PIM, IGMP, or even BGP.  Multicast routing also depends on an
   exchange of routes that are used for looking up the path to the root
   of a multicast tree.  This routing information could be exchanged
   between an AR and a PBR via IGP, via EBGP, or via IBGP ([RFC6368]).
   Note that if IBGP is used, the [RFC6368] "push/pop procedures" are
   not necessary.

   The PBRs are not necessarily "edge" routers, in the sense of
   [RFC4364].  For example, they may be both be Autonomous System Border
   Routers (ASBR).  As another example, an AR may be an "access router"
   attached to a PBR that is an OSPF Area Border Router (ABR).  Many
   other deployment scenarios are possible.  However, the PBRs are
   always considered to be delimiting a "backbone" or "core" network.  A
   multicast data stream from an AR is tunneled over the core network
   from an Ingress PBR to one or more Egress PBRs.  Multicast routing
   information that a PBR learns from the ARs attached to it is stored
   in the PBR's global table.  The PBRs use BGP to distribute multicast
   routing and auto-discovery information among themselves.  This is
   done following the procedures of [RFC6513], [RFC6514], and other MVPN
   specifications, as modified in this document.

   In general, PBRs follow the same MVPN/BGP procedures that PE routers
   follow, except that these procedures are adapted to be applicable to
   the global table rather than to a VRF.  Details are provided in
   subsequent sections of this document.

   By supporting GTM using the BGP procedures designed for MVPN, one
   obtains a single control plane that governs the use of both VPN and
   non-VPN multicast.  Most of the features and characteristics of MVPN
   carry over automatically to GTM.  These include scaling, aggregation,
   flexible choice of tunnel technology in the SP network, support for
   both segmented and non-segmented tunnels, ability to use wildcards to
   identify sets of multicast flows, support for the Any Source
   Multicast (ASM), Single Source Multicast (SSM), and Bidirectional
   (bidir) multicast paradigms, support for both IPv4 and IPv6 multicast
   flows over either an IPv4 or IPv6 SP infrastructure, support for
   unsolicited flooded data (including support for BSR as RP-to-group
   mapping protocols), etc.



Zhang, et al.                                                   [Page 5]


Internet Draft zzhang-l3vpn-mvpn-global-table-mcast-01.txt  October 2013


   This document not only uses MVPN procedures for GTM, but also,
   insofar as possible, uses the same protocol elements, encodings, and
   formats.  The BGP Updates for GTM thus use the same Subsequent
   Address Family Identifier (SAFI), and have the same Network Layer
   Reachability Information (NLRI) format, as the BGP Updates for MVPN.

   The document [seamless-mcast] extends [RFC6514] by providing
   procedures that allow tunnels through the core to be "segmented" at
   ABRs within the core.  The ABR segmentation procedures are also
   applicable to GTM as defined in the current document.  In general,
   the MVPN procedures of [seamless-mcast], adapted as specified in the
   current document, are applicable to GTM.

   The document [seamless-mcast] also defines a set of procedures for
   GTM.  Those procedures are different from the procedures defined in
   the current document, and the two sets of procedures are not
   interoperable with each other.  The two sets of procedures can co-
   exist in the same network, as long as they are not applied to the
   same multicast flows or to the same multicast group addresses.  See
   section 3 for more details.

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].


2. Adapting MVPN Procedures to GTM

   In general, PBRs support Global Table Multicast by using the
   procedures that PE routers use to support VPN multicast.  For GTM,
   where [RFC6513] and [RFC6514] talk about the "PE-CE interface", one
   should interpret that to mean the interface between the AR and the
   PBR.  For GTM, where [RFC6513] and [RFC6514] talk about the
   "backbone" network, one should interpret that to mean the part of the
   network that is delimited by the PBRs.

   A few adaptations to the procedures of [RFC6513] and [RFC6514] need
   to be made.  Those adaptations are described in the following sub-
   sections.












Zhang, et al.                                                   [Page 6]


Internet Draft zzhang-l3vpn-mvpn-global-table-mcast-01.txt  October 2013


2.1. Use of Route Distinguishers

   The MVPN procedures require the use of BGP routes, defined in
   [RFC6514], that have a SAFI value of 5 ("MCAST-VPN").  We refer to
   these simply as "MCAST-VPN routes".  [RFC6514] defines the Network
   Layer Reachability Information (NLRI) format for MCAST-VPN routes.
   The NLRI field always begins with a "Route Type" octet, and,
   depending on the route type, may be followed by a "Route
   Distinguisher" (RD) field.

   When a PBR originates an MCAST-VPN route in support of GTM, the RD
   field (for those routes types where it is defined) of that route's
   NLRI MUST be set to zero (i.e., to 64 bits of zero).  Since no VRF
   may have an RD of zero, this allows "MCAST-VPN" routes that are
   "about" GTM to be distinguished from MCAST-VPN routes that are about
   VPNs.


2.2. Use of Route Targets

   The MVPN procedures require all MCAST-VPN routes to carry Route
   Targets (RTs).  When a PE router receives an MCAST-VPN route, it
   processes the route in the context of a particular VRF if and only if
   the route is carrying an RT that is configured as one of that VRF's
   "import RTs".

   There are two different "kinds" of RT used in MVPN.

     - One kind of RT is carried only by the following MCAST-VPN route
       types: C-multicast Shared Tree Joins, C-multicast Source Tree
       Joins, and Leaf A-D routes.  This kind of RT identifies the PE
       router that has been selected by the route's originator as the
       "Upstream PE" or as the "Upstream Multicast Hop" (UMH) for a
       particular (set of) multicast flow(s).  Per [RFC6514] and
       [RFC6515], this RT must be an IPv4-address-specific or
       IPv6-address-specific Extended Community (EC), whose "Global
       Administrator" field identifies the Upstream PE or the UMH.  If
       the Global Administrator field identifies the Upstream PE, the
       "Local Administrator" field identifies a particular VRF in that
       PE.

       The GTM procedures of this document require the use of this type
       of RT, in exactly the same situations where it is used in the
       MVPN specification.  However, one adaptation is necessary: the
       "Local Administrator" field of this kind of RT MUST always be set
       to zero, thus implicitly identifying the global table, rather
       than identifying a VRF.  We will refer to this kind of RT as a
       "PBR-identifying RT".



Zhang, et al.                                                   [Page 7]


Internet Draft zzhang-l3vpn-mvpn-global-table-mcast-01.txt  October 2013


     - The other kind of RT is the conventional RT first specified in
       [RFC4364]. It does not necessarily identify a particular router
       by address, but is used to constrain the distribution of VPN
       routes, and to ensure that a given VPN route is processed in the
       context of a given VRF if and only if the route is carrying an RT
       that has been configured as one of that VRF's "import RTs".

       Whereas every VRF must be configured with at least one import RT,
       there is heretofore no requirement to configure any RTs for the
       global table of any router.  As stated above, this document makes
       the use of PBR-identifying RTs mandatory for GTM.  This document
       makes the use of non-PBR-identifying RTs OPTIONAL for GTM.

   The procedures for the use of RTs in GTM are the following:

     - If the global table of a particular PBR is NOT configured with
       any import RTs, then a received MCAST-VPN route is processed in
       the context of the global table only if it is carrying no RTs, or
       if it is carrying a PBR-identifying RT whose Global Administrator
       field identifies that PBR.

     - The global table in each PBR MAY be configured with (a) a set of
       export RTs to be attached to MCAST-VPN routes that are originated
       to support GTM, and (b) with a set of import RTs for GTM.

       If the global table of a given PBR has been so configured, the
       PBR will process a received MCAST-VPN route in the context of the
       global table if and only if the route carries an RT that is one
       of the global table's import RTs, or if the route carries a PBR-
       identifying RT whose global administrator field identifies the
       PBR.

       If the global tables are configured with RTs, care must be taken
       to ensure that the RTs configured for the global table are
       distinct from any RTs used in support of MVPN (except in the case
       where it is actually intended to create an "extranet"
       [MVPN-extranet] in which some sources are reachable in global
       table context while others are reachable in VPN context.)

   The "RT Constraint" procedures of [RFC4684] MAY be used to constrain
   the distribution of MCAST-VPN routes (or other routes) that carry RTs
   that have been configured as import RTs for GTM.  (This includes the
   PBR-identifying RTs.)

   In [RFC6513], the UMH-eligible routes (see section 5.1 of [RFC6513],
   "Eligible Routes for UMH Selection") are generally routes of SAFI 128
   (Labeled VPN-IP routes) or 129 (VPN-IP multicast routes), and are
   required to carry RTs.  These RTs determine which VRFs import which



Zhang, et al.                                                   [Page 8]


Internet Draft zzhang-l3vpn-mvpn-global-table-mcast-01.txt  October 2013


   such routes.  However, for GTM, when the UMH-eligible routes may be
   routes of SAFI 1, 2, or 4, the routes are not required to carry RTs.
   This document does NOT specify any new rules for determine whether a
   SAFI 1, 2, or 4 route is to be imported into the global table of any
   PBR.


2.3. UMH-eligible Routes

   [RFC6513] section 5.1 defines procedures by which a PE router
   determines the "C-root", the "Upstream Multicast Hop" (UMH), the
   "Upstream PE", and the "Upstream RD" of a given multicast flow.  (In
   non-VPN multicast documents, the UMH of a multicast flow at a
   particular router is generally known as the "RPF neighbor" for that
   flow.)  It also defines procedures for determining the "Source AS" of
   a particular flow.  Note that in GTM, the "Upstream PE" is actually
   the "Upstream PBR".

   The definition of the C-root of a flow is the same for GTM as for
   MVPN.

   For MVPN, to determine the UMH, Upstream PE, Upstream RD, and Source
   AS of a flow, one looks up the C-root of the flow in a particular
   VRF, and finds the "UMH-eligible" routes (see section 5.1.1 of
   [RFC6513]) that "match" the C-root.  From among these, one is chosen
   as the "selected UMH route".

   For GTM, the C-root is of course looked up in the global table,
   rather than in a VRF.  For MVPN, the UMH-eligible routes are routes
   of SAFI 128 or 129.  For GTM, the UMH-eligible routes are routes of
   SAFI 1, SAFI 4, or SAFI 2.  If the global table has imported routes
   of SAFI 2, then these are the UMH-eligible routes.  Otherwise, routes
   of SAFI 1 or SAFI 4 are the UMH-eligible routes.  For the purpose of
   UMH determination, if a SAFI 1 route and a SAFI 4 route contain the
   same IP prefix in their respective NLRI fields, then the two routes
   are considered by the BGP bestpath selection process to be
   comparable.

   [RFC6513] defines procedures for determining which of the UMH-
   eligible routes that match a particular C-root is to become the
   "Selected UMH route".  With one exception, these procedures are also
   applicable to GTM.  The one exception is the following.  Section
   9.1.2 of [RFC6513] defines a particular method of choosing the
   Upstream PE, known as "Single Forwarder Selection" (SFS).  This
   procedure MUST NOT be used for GTM.

   To see why the SFS procedure cannot be applied to GTM, consider the
   following example scenario.  Suppose some multicast source S is homed



Zhang, et al.                                                   [Page 9]


Internet Draft zzhang-l3vpn-mvpn-global-table-mcast-01.txt  October 2013


   to both PBR1 and PBR2, and suppose that both PBRs export a route (of
   SAFI 1, 2, or 4) whose NLRI is a prefix matching the address of S.
   These two routes will be considered comparable by the BGP decision
   process.  A route reflector receiving both routes may thus choose to
   redistribute just one of the routes to S, the one chosen by the
   bestpath algorithm.  Different route reflectors may even choose
   different routes to redistribute (i.e., one route reflector may
   choose the route to S via PBR1 as the bestpath, while another chooses
   the route to S via PBR2 as the bestpath).  As a result, some PBRs may
   receive only the route to S via PBR1 and some may receive only the
   route to S via PBR2.  In that case, it is impossible to ensure that
   all PBRs will choose the same route to S.

   The SFS procedure works in VPN context as along the following
   assumption holds: if S is homed to VRF-x in PE1 and to VRF-y in PE2,
   then VRF-x and VRF-y have been configured with different RDs.  In VPN
   context, the route to S is of SAFI 128 or 129, and thus has an RD in
   its NLRI.  So the route to S via PE1 will not have the same NLRI as
   the route to S via PE2.  As a result, all PEs will see both routes,
   and the PEs can implement a procedure that ensures that they all pick
   the same route to S.

   That is, the SFS procedure of [RFC6513] relies on the UMH-eligible
   routes being of SAFI 128 or 129, and relies on certain VRFs being
   configured with distinct RDs.  Thus the procedure cannot be applied
   to GTM.

   In GTM, the "Upstream RD" of a multicast flow is always considered to
   be zero, and is NOT determined from the Selected UMH route.

   The MVPN specifications require that when BGP is used for
   distributing multicast routing information, the UMH-eligible routes
   MUST carry the VRF Route Import EC and the Source AS EC.  To
   determine the Upstream PE and Source AS for a particular multicast
   flow, the Upstream PE and Source AS are determined, respectively,
   from the VRF Route Import EC and the Source AS EC of the Selected UMH
   route for that flow.  These ECs are generally attached to the UMH-
   eligible routes by the PEs that originate the routes.

   In GTM, there are certain situations in which it is allowable to omit
   the VRF Route Import EC and/or the Source AS EC from the UMH-eligible
   routes.  The following sub-sections specify the various options for
   determining the Upstream PBR and the Source AS in GTM.

   The procedures in sections 2.3.1 and 2.3.2 MUST be implemented.  The
   procedures in sections 2.3.3 and 2.3.4 are OPTIONAL to implement.  It
   should be noted that while the optional procedures may be useful in
   particular deployment scenarios, there is always the potential for



Zhang, et al.                                                  [Page 10]


Internet Draft zzhang-l3vpn-mvpn-global-table-mcast-01.txt  October 2013


   interoperability problems when relying on OPTIONAL procedures.


2.3.1. Routes of SAFI 1, 2 or 4 with MVPN ECs

   If the UMH-eligible routes have a SAFI of 1, 2 or 4, then they MAY
   carry the VRF Route Import EC and/or the Source AS EC.  If the
   selected UMH route is a route of SAFI 1, 2 or 4 that carries the VRF
   Route Import EC, then the Upstream PBR is determined from that EC.
   Similarly, if the selected UMH route is a route of SAFI 1, 2, or 4
   route that carries the Source AS EC, the Source AS is determined from
   that EC.

   When the procedure of this section is used, a PBR that distributes a
   UMH-eligible route to other PBRs is responsible for ensuring that the
   VRF Route Import and Source AS ECs are attached to it.

   If the selected UMH-eligible route has a SAFI of 1, 2 or 4, but is
   not carrying a VRF Route Import EC, then the Upstream PBR is
   determined as specified in section 2.3.2 or 2.3.3 below.

   If the selected UMH-eligible route has a SAFI of 1, 2 or 4, but is
   not carrying a Source AS EC, then the Source AS is considered to be
   the local AS.


2.3.2. MVPN ECs on the Route to the Next Hop

   Some service providers may consider it to be undesirable to have the
   PBRs put the VRF Route Import EC on all the UMH-eligible routes.  Or
   there may be deployment scenarios in which the UMH-eligible routes
   are not advertised by the PBRs at all.  The procedures described in
   this section provide an alternative that can be used under certain
   circumstances.

   The procedures of this section are OPTIONAL.

   In this alternative procedure, each PBR MUST originate a BGP route of
   SAFI 1, 2 or 4 to itself.  This route MUST carry a VRF Route Import
   EC that identifies the PBR.  The address that appears in the Global
   Administrator field of that EC MUST be the same address that appears
   in the NLRI and in the Next Hop field of that route.  This route MUST
   also carry a Source AS EC identifying the AS of the PBR.

   Whenever the PBR distributes a UMH-eligible route for which it sets
   itself as next hop, it MUST use this same IP address as the Next Hop
   of the UMH-eligible route that it used in the route discussed in the
   prior paragraph.



Zhang, et al.                                                  [Page 11]


Internet Draft zzhang-l3vpn-mvpn-global-table-mcast-01.txt  October 2013


   When the procedure of his section is used, then when a PBR is
   determining the Selected UMH Route for a given multicast flow, it may
   find that the Selected UMH Route has no VRF Route Import EC. In this
   case, the PBR will look up (in the global table) the route to the
   Next Hop of the Selected UMH route.  If the route to the Next Hop has
   a VRF Route Import EC, that EC will be used to determine the Upstream
   PBR, just as if the EC had been attached to the Selected UMH Route.

   If recursive route resolution is required in order to resolve the
   next hop, the Upstream PBR will be determined from the first route
   with a VRF Route Import EC that is encountered during the recursive
   route resolution process.  (The recursive route resolution process
   itself is not modified by this document.)

   The same procedure can be applied to find the Source AS, except that
   the Source AS EC is used instead of the VRF Route Import EC.

   Note that this procedure is only applicable in scenarios where it is
   known that the Next Hop of the UMH-eligible routes is not be changed
   by any router that participates in the distribution of those routes;
   this procedure MUST NOT be used in any scenario where the next hop
   may be changed between the time one PBR distributes the route and
   another PBR receives it.  The PBRs have no way of determining
   dynamically whether the procedure is applicable in a particular
   deployment; this must be made known to the PBRs by provisioning.

   Some scenarios in which this procedure can be used are:

     - all PBRs are in the same AS, or

     - the UMH-eligible routes are distributed among the PBRs by a Route
       Reflector (that does not change the next hop), or

     - the UMH-eligible routes are distributed from one AS to another
       through ASBRs that do not change the next hop.

   If the procedures of this section are used in scenarios where they
   are not applicable, GTM will not function correctly.


2.3.3. Non-BGP Routes as the UMH-eligible Routes

   In particular deployment scenarios, there may be specific procedures
   that can be used, in those particular scenarios, to determine the
   Upstream PBR for a given multicast flow.

   Suppose the PBRs neither put the VRF Route Import EC on the UMH-
   eligible routes, nor do they distribute BGP routes to themselves.  It



Zhang, et al.                                                  [Page 12]


Internet Draft zzhang-l3vpn-mvpn-global-table-mcast-01.txt  October 2013


   may still be possible to determine the Upstream PBR for a given
   multicast flow, using specific knowledge about the deployment.

   For example, suppose it is known that all the PBRs are in the same
   OSPF area.  It may be possible to determine the Upstream PBR for a
   given multicast flow by looking at the link state database to see
   which router is attached to the flow's C-root.

   As another example, suppose it is known that the set of PBRs is fully
   meshed via Traffic Engineering (TE) tunnels.  When a PBR looks up, in
   its global table, the C-root of a particular multicast flow, it may
   find that the next hop interface is a particular TE tunnel.  If it
   can determine the identify of the router at the other end of that TE
   tunnel, it can deduce that that router is the Upstream PBR for that
   flow.

   This is not an exhaustive set of examples.  Any procedure that
   correctly determines the Upstream PBR in a given deployment scenario
   MAY be used in that scenario.


2.4. Inclusive and Selective Tunnels

   The MVPN specifications allow multicast flows to be carried on either
   Inclusive Tunnels or on Selective Tunnels.  When a flow is sent on an
   Inclusive Tunnel of a particular VPN, it is sent to all PEs in that
   VPN.  When sent on a Selective Tunnel of a particular VPN, it may be
   sent to only a subset of the PEs in that VPN.

   This document allows the use of either Inclusive Tunnels or Selective
   Tunnels for GTM.  However, any service provider electing to use
   Inclusive Tunnels for GTM should carefully consider whether sending a
   multicast flow to ALL its PBRs would result in problems of scale.
   There are potentially many more MBRs for GTM than PEs for a
   particular VPN.  If the set of PBRs is large and growing, but most
   multicast flows do not need to go to all the PBRs, the exclusive use
   of Selective Tunnels may be a better option.


2.5. I-PMSI A-D Routes

2.5.1. Intra-AS I-PMSI A-D Routes

   Per [MVPN-BGP}, there are certain conditions under which is it NOT
   required for a PE router implementing MVPN to originate one or more
   Intra-AS I-PMSI A-D routes.  These conditions apply as well to PBRs
   implementing GTM.




Zhang, et al.                                                  [Page 13]


Internet Draft zzhang-l3vpn-mvpn-global-table-mcast-01.txt  October 2013


   In addition, a PBR implementing GTM is NOT required to originate an
   Intra-AS I-PMSI A-D route if both of the following conditions hold:

     - The PBR is not using Inclusive Tunnels for GTM, and

     - The distribution of the C-multicast Shared Tree Join and C-
       multicast Source Tree Join routes is done in such a manner that
       the next hop of those routes does not change.

   Please see also the sections on RD and RT usage.


2.5.2. Inter-AS I-PMSI A-D Routes

   There are no GTM-specific procedures for the origination,
   distribution, and processing of these routes, other than those
   specified in the sections on RD and RT usage.


2.6. S-PMSI A-D Routes

   There are no GTM-specific procedures for the origination,
   distribution, and processing of these routes, other than those
   specified in the sections on RD and RT usage.


2.7. Leaf A-D Routes

   There are no GTM-specific procedures for the origination,
   distribution, and processing of these routes, other than those
   specified in the sections on RD and RT usage.


2.8. Source Active A-D Routes

   There are no MANDATORY GTM-specific procedures for the origination,
   distribution, and processing of these routes, other than those
   specified in the sections on RD and RT usage.

   However, this document defines an OPTIONAL procedure to allow
   additional constraints on the distribution of the Source Active A-D
   routes for GTM.  If some site has receivers for a particular ASM
   group G, then it is possible (by the procedures of [RFC6514]) that
   every PBR attached to site with a source for group G will originate a
   Source Active A-D route whose NLRI identifies that source and group.
   These Source Active A-D routes may be distributed to every PBR.  If
   only a relatively small number of PBRs are actually interested in
   traffic from group G, but there are many sources for group G, this



Zhang, et al.                                                  [Page 14]


Internet Draft zzhang-l3vpn-mvpn-global-table-mcast-01.txt  October 2013


   could result in a large number of (S,G) Source Active A-D routes
   being installed in a large number of PBRs that have no need of them.

   For GTM, it is possible to constrain the distribution of (S,G) Source
   Active A-D routes to those PBRs that are interested in GTM traffic to
   group G.  This can be done using the following OPTIONAL procedures:

     - If a PBR originates a C-multicast Shared Tree Join whose NLRI
       contains (RD=0,*,G), then it dynamically creates an import RT for
       its global table, where the Global Administrator field of the RT
       contains the group address G, and the Local Administrator field
       contains zero.  (Note that an IPv6-address-specific RT would need
       to be used if the group address is an IPv6 address.)

     - When a PBR creates such an import RT, it uses "RT Constraint"
       [RFC4684] procedures to advertise its interest in routes that
       carry this RT.

     - When a PBR originates a Source Active A-D route from its global
       table, it attaches the RT described above.

     - When the C-multicast Shared Tree Join is withdrawn, so is the
       corresponding RT constrain route, and the corresponding RT is
       removed as an import RT of its global table.

   These procedures enable a PBR to automatically filter all Source
   Active A-D routes that are about multicast groups in which the PBR
   has no interest.

   This procedure does introduce the overhead of distributing additional
   "RT Constraint" routes, and therefore may not be cost-effective in
   all scenarios, especially if the number of sources per ASM group is
   small.  This procedure may also result in increased join latency.


2.9. C-multicast Source/Shared Tree Joins

   [RFC6514] section 11.1.3 has the following procedure for determining
   the IP-address-specific RT that is attached to a C-multicast route:
   (a) determine the upstream PE, RD, AS, (b) find the proper Inter-AS
   or Intra-AS I-PMSI A-D route based on (a), (c) find the next hop of
   that A-D route, (d) base the RT on that next hop.

   However, for GTM, in environments where it is known a priori that
   that the next hop of the C-multicast Source/Shared Tree Joins does
   not change during the distribution of those routes, the proper
   procedure for creating the IP-address-specific RT is to just put the
   IP Address of the Upstream PBR in the Global Administrator field of



Zhang, et al.                                                  [Page 15]


Internet Draft zzhang-l3vpn-mvpn-global-table-mcast-01.txt  October 2013


   the RT.  In other scenarios, the procedure of the previous paragraph
   (as modified by this document's sections on "RD usage" and "RT
   usage") is applied by the PBRs.


3. Differences from other MVPN-like GTM Procedures

   The document [seamless-mcast] also defines a procedure for GTM that
   is based on the BGP procedures that were developed for MVPN.

   However, the GTM procedures of [seamless-mcast] are different than
   and are NOT interoperable with the procedures defined in this
   document.

   The two sets of procedures can co-exist in the same network, as long
   as they are not applied to the same multicast flows or to the same
   ASM multicast group addresses.

   Some of the major differences between the two sets of procedures are
   the following;

     - The [seamless-mcast] procedures for GTM do not use C-multicast
       Shared Tree Joins or C-multicast Source Tree Joins at all.  The
       procedures of this document use these C-multicast routes for GTM,
       setting the RD field of the NLRI to zero.

     - The [seamless-mcast] procedures for GTM use Leaf A-D routes
       instead of C-multicast Shared/Source Tree Join routes.  Leaf A-D
       routes used in that manner can be distinguished from Leaf A-D
       routes used as specified in [RFC6514] by means of the NLRI
       format; [seamless-mcast] defines a new NLRI format for Leaf A-D
       routes.  Whether a given Leaf A-D route is being used according
       to the [seamless-mcast] procedures or not can be determined from
       its NLRI.  (See [seamless-mcast] section "Leaf A-D Route for
       Global Table Multicast".)

     - The Leaf A-D routes used by the current document contain an NLRI
       that is in the format defined in [RFC6514], NOT in the format as
       defined in [seamless-mcast].  The procedures assumed by this
       document for originating and processing Leaf A-D routes are as
       specified in [RFC6514], NOT as specified in [seamless-mcast].

     - The current document uses an RD value of zero in the NLRI in
       order to indicate that a particular route is "about" a Global
       Table Multicast, rather than a VPN multicast.  No other semantics
       are inferred from the fact that RD is zero.  [seamless-mcast]
       uses two different RD values in its GTM procedures, with semantic
       differences that depend upon the RD values.



Zhang, et al.                                                  [Page 16]


Internet Draft zzhang-l3vpn-mvpn-global-table-mcast-01.txt  October 2013


     - In order for both sets of procedures to co-exist in the same
       network, the PBRs MUST be provisioned so that for any given IP
       group address in the global table, all egress PBRs use the same
       set of procedures for that group address (i.e., for group G,
       either all egress PBRs use the GTM procedures of this document or
       all egress PBRs use the GTM procedures of [seamless-mcast].


4. IANA Considerations

   This document has no IANA considerations.


5. Security Considerations

   The security considerations of this document are primarily the
   security considerations of the base protocols, as discussed in
   [RFC6514], [RFC4601], and [RFC5294].

   This document makes use of a BGP SAFI (MCAST-VPN routes) that was
   originally designed for use in VPN contexts only.  It also makes use
   of various BGP path attributes and extended communities (VRF Route
   Import Extended Community, Source AS Extended Community, Route Target
   Extended Community) that were originally intended for use in VPN
   contexts.  If these routes and/or attributes leak out into "the
   wild", multicast data flows may be distributed in an unintended
   and/or unauthorized manner.

   Internet providers often make extensive use of BGP communities (ie,
   adding, deleting, modifying communities throughout a network).  As
   such, care should be taken to avoid deleting or modifying the VRF
   Route Import Extended Community and Source AS Extended Community.
   Incorrect manipulation of these ECs may result in multicast streams
   being lost or misrouted.

   The procedures of this document require certain BGP routes to carry
   IP multicast group addresses.  Generally such group addresses are
   only valid within a certain scope.  If a BGP route containing a group
   address is distributed outside the boundaries where the group address
   is meaningful, unauthorized distribution of multicast data flows may
   occur.










Zhang, et al.                                                  [Page 17]


Internet Draft zzhang-l3vpn-mvpn-global-table-mcast-01.txt  October 2013


6. Acknowledgments

   The authors would like to thank Rahul Aggarwal, Huajin Jeng, Yakov
   Rekhter, and Samir Saad for their contributions to this work.


7. Authors' Addresses

   Lenny Giuliano
   Juniper Networks
   2251 Corporate Park Drive
   Herndon, VA  20171
   US
   Email: lenny@juniper.net



   Dante J. Pacella
   Verizon
   Verizon Communications
   22001 Loudoun County Parkway
   Ashburn, VA  20147
   US
   Email: dante.j.pacella@verizonbusiness.com



   Eric C. Rosen
   Cisco Systems, Inc.
   1414 Massachusetts Avenue
   Boxborough, MA, 01719
   US
   Email: erosen@cisco.com



   Karthik Subramanian
   Cisco Systems, Inc.
   170 Tasman Drive
   San Jose, CA, 95134
   US
   Email: kartsubr@cisco.com









Zhang, et al.                                                  [Page 18]


Internet Draft zzhang-l3vpn-mvpn-global-table-mcast-01.txt  October 2013


   Jeffrey Zhang
   Juniper Networks
   10 Technology Park Dr.
   Westford, MA  01886
   US
   Email: zzhang@juniper.net



   Jason Schiller
   Google
   1818 Library Street
   Suite 400
   Reston, VA  20190
   US
   Email: jschiller@google.com



8. References

8.1. Normative References

   [RFC2119] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
   Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC4364], Rosen, E. and Y. Rekhter, "BGP/MPLS IP Virtual Private
   Networks", RFC 4364, February 2006.

   [RFC6513] Rosen, E. and R. Aggarwal, "Multicast in MPLS/BGP IP VPNs",
   RFC 6513, February 2012.

   [RFC6514] Aggarwal, R., Rosen, E., Morin, T., and Y. Rekhter, "BGP
   Encodings and Procedures for Multicast in MPLS/BGP IP VPNs", RFC
   6514, February 2012.

   [RFC6515] Aggarwal, R., and E. Rosen, "IPv4 and IPv6 Infrastructure
   Addresses in BGP Updates for Multicast VPN", RFC 6515, February 2012.


8.2. Informative References

   [RFC6368] Marques, P., Raszuk, R., Patel, K., Kumaki, K., and T.
   Yamagata, "Internal BGP as the Provider/Customer Edge Protocol for
   BGP/MPLS IP Virtual Private Networks (VPNs)", RFC 6368, September
   2011.

   [RFC4601] Fenner, B., Handley, M., Holbrook, H., and I. Kouvelas,



Zhang, et al.                                                  [Page 19]


Internet Draft zzhang-l3vpn-mvpn-global-table-mcast-01.txt  October 2013


   Protocol Independent Multicast - Sparse Mode (PIM-SM):  Protocol
   Specification (Revised)", RFC 4601, August 2006.

   [RFC4684] P. Marques, et. al., "Constrained Route Distribution for
   Border Gateway Protocol/MultiProtocol Label Switching (BGP/MPLS)
   Internet Protocol (IP) Virtual Private Networks (VPNs)", RFC 4684,
   November 2006.

   [RFC5294] Savola, P. and J. Lingard, "Host Threats to Protocol
   Independent Multicast (PIM)", RFC 5294, August 2008.

   [MVPN-extranet] Rekhter, Y. and E. Rosen (editors), "Extranet
   Multicast in BGP/IP MPLS VPNs",  draft-ietf-l3vpn-mvpn-
   extranet-02.txt, August 2013

   [seamless-mcast] Rekhter, Y., Aggarwal, R., Morin, T., Grosclaude,
   I., Leymann, N., and S. Saad,"Inter-Area P2MP Segmented LSPs", draft-
   ietf-mpls-seamless-mcast-07.txt, May 2013

































Zhang, et al.                                                  [Page 20]
