


DISPATCH                                                S. Lawrence, Ed.
Internet-Draft                                               Avaya, Inc.
Intended status: Informational                                 J. Elwell
Expires: September 23, 2010            Siemens Enterprise Communications
                                                          March 22, 2010


Provider Alias Numbers for Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) User Agent
                             Configuration
           draft-lawrence-dispatch-sipforum-provider-alias-00

Abstract

   This document defines procedures for how a SIP User Agent can
   translate an identifier provided by a user into the SIP DNS domain
   name of a service provider.  The form of the user supplied identifier
   is constrained to values that can be entered using only a standard 12
   key telephone keypad.

   This document is derived from work begun in the SIP Forum Technical
   Working Group User Agent Configuration Task Group.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 23, 2010.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the



Lawrence & Elwell      Expires September 23, 2010               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft   Provider Alias Number for SIP UA Config      March 2010


   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   3.  Numeric Domain Alias Entry  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
     3.1.  Provider Alias Number Resolution Example  . . . . . . . . . 5
   4.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   5.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   6.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6




























Lawrence & Elwell      Expires September 23, 2010               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft   Provider Alias Number for SIP UA Config      March 2010


1.  Introduction

   Given the problem statement:

      A user gets a new SIP User Agent (UA); it may be a hardware device
      or software.  Some User Agents have a user interface that can
      accept a username, password, and domain name.  Other devices, like
      Analog Telephony Adapters (ATAs), have no user interface other
      than that provided by an attached analog phone.  How does a non-
      technical user minimally configure it so that when it is started,
      something useful happens?

   The [draft-sipforum-user-agent-config] "Session Initiation Protocol
   (SIP) User Agent Configuration" specification provides a procedure
   for how a SIP User Agent locates, retrieves, and maintains current
   configuration information for a given SIP Service Provider.  However,
   it assumes that either:

   o  the UA to be configured is connected to a network whose DHCP (or
      DHCPv6) service provides the DNS Name of the SIP domain for which
      configuration is desired,

   or:

   o  the UA has a means by which the user can enter that SIP domain
      name.

   Since some SIP UAs may have no more user interface than a standard 12
   key telephone keypad (the digits 0 through 9, '*', and '#'), entry of
   DNS names (see [RFC1034]), even for users comfortable with DNS names,
   is inconvenient at best.  This leaves the problem of configuring a UA
   to obtain configuration for a SIP service provider whose domain name
   is not provisioned by the local network.  This specification provides
   a means by which the UA can translate a value entered using only the
   standard telephone keypad into the DNS name of a SIP service
   provider; in the terminology of [draft-sipforum-user-agent-config],
   the "Configuration Service Domain Name".


2.  Terminology

   The following terms are used in this document:

   User Agent, UA







Lawrence & Elwell      Expires September 23, 2010               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft   Provider Alias Number for SIP UA Config      March 2010


      As defined in [RFC3261].  Note that this includes any
      implementation of a User Agent.  A SIP phone is a User Agent, but
      the term also encompasses any other entity that uses SIP (for
      example: for a text chat, for sharing a whiteboard or for fax).

   SIP Service Provider, Service Provider

      An entity that provides services to User Agents using the SIP
      protocol.  This specification requires that a Service Provider
      make configuration data and certain other information available in
      order to configure User Agents.

   Configuration

      The set of information that establishes operational parameters for
      a particular User Agent.

   Configuration Service, CS

      The source of Configuration for User Agents.

   Configuration Service Domain

      The DNS name for the service from which a Configuration is
      requested.

   Provider Alias Number, PAN

      A string consisting of decimal digits used to identify a domain
      from which configuration is to be requested.

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].


3.  Numeric Domain Alias Entry

   A UA MAY have an interface by which a string consisting only of
   decimal digits, called a Provider Alias Number (PAN), is provided by
   the user.  The PAN value is resolved to the Configuration Service
   Domain using the S-NAPTR (Simple NAPTR) DDDS application [RFC3958].

   The lookup key for the S-NAPTR request is the Provider Alias Number
   concatenated with a fixed root suffix (for the purposes of this
   initial draft, the value ".pan.sipforum.org." is used) to form a DNS
   domain name.  The UA MUST make a DNS request for NAPTR records for
   that domain name.  From the returned records (see next paragraph),



Lawrence & Elwell      Expires September 23, 2010               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft   Provider Alias Number for SIP UA Config      March 2010


   the UA MUST select the record whose Service field value is
   "SFUA.PAN"; the Configuration Service Domain Name is the value found
   in the Replacement field of this record.

   The DNS for the fixed root MUST be configured such that at most one
   NAPTR record is returned for any given Provider Alias Number, and
   MUST be configured to return the Flag field set to "a", an empty
   Regular Expression field, and the Substitution value set to the
   Configuration Service Domain Name.

3.1.  Provider Alias Number Resolution Example

   Through some manual process, the UA has obtained the provider alias
   number "555".  To obtain the Configuration Service Domain Name, the
   UA constructs a DNS NAPTR request by appending the domain suffix
   ".pan.sipforum.org." to form the query key "555.pan.sipforum.org.",
   which returns the DNS record:


                          NAPTR  10 10 "a" "SFUA.PAN" "" "example.net."


                     Figure 1: PAN NAPTR Query Result

   The record with the service-field "SFUA.PAN" provides the DNS name
   "example.net." for the Configuration Service Domain Name.


4.  IANA Considerations

   This document registers the following S-NAPTR application service tag
   in the registry defined by [RFC3958] "Domain-Based Application
   Service Location Using SRV RRs and the Dynamic Delegation Discovery
   Service (DDDS)":

                  +-------------------------+----------+
                  | Application Service Tag | SFUA.PAN |
                  +-------------------------+----------+


5.  Security Considerations

   Because the mapping of the user-entered PAN value to Configuration
   Service Domain Name relies on a potentially unsecured DNS lookup, the
   UA SHOULD take steps to ensure that the correct provider has been
   found.

   If possible, the resulting Configuration Service Domain Name SHOULD



Lawrence & Elwell      Expires September 23, 2010               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft   Provider Alias Number for SIP UA Config      March 2010


   be confirmed by the human user.

   Following the translation (specified in
   [draft-sipforum-user-agent-config]) of the Configuration Service
   Domain Name to the configuration request URL, the UA makes an https
   request for configuration data.  Because this request is https, it is
   made over TLS.  As the TLS server, the CS always provides a server
   certificate during the TLS handshake; if possible, the UA should
   validate that certificate and confirm that it contains the DNS name
   constructed from the PAN by concatenating the fixed root
   ("555.pan.sipforum.org" in the example in Section 3.1).  While it may
   not be possible to have the information needed to perform a full
   validation of the CS server certificate prior to the first
   configuration (for example, the UA may not have a current CA
   certificate for the CA that signs the CS server certificate),
   implementors are advised to provide for including that information in
   configuration data so that it can be used for subsequent
   reconfigurations; this narrows the window of vulnerability to the
   first configuration attempt.


6.  Normative References

   [RFC1034]  Mockapetris, P., "Domain names - concepts and facilities",
              STD 13, RFC 1034, November 1987.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC3261]  Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., Camarillo, G., Johnston,
              A., Peterson, J., Sparks, R., Handley, M., and E.
              Schooler, "SIP: Session Initiation Protocol", RFC 3261,
              June 2002.

   [RFC3958]  Daigle, L. and A. Newton, "Domain-Based Application
              Service Location Using SRV RRs and the Dynamic Delegation
              Discovery Service (DDDS)", RFC 3958, January 2005.

   [draft-sipforum-user-agent-config]
              Lawrence, S., Ed. and J. Elwell, "Session Initiation
              Protocol User Agent Configuration", March 2010.










Lawrence & Elwell      Expires September 23, 2010               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft   Provider Alias Number for SIP UA Config      March 2010


Authors' Addresses

   Scott Lawrence (editor)
   Avaya, Inc.
   600 Technology Park
   Billerica, MA  01821
   USA

   Phone: +1 978 288 5508
   Email: xmlscott@gmail.com


   John Elwell
   Siemens Enterprise Communications

   Phone: +44 1908 855608
   Email: john.elwell@siemens-enterprise.com


































Lawrence & Elwell      Expires September 23, 2010               [Page 7]

