


DISPATCH                                                  J. Bakker, Ed.
Internet-Draft                                    BlackBerry Corporation
Intended status: Informational                              R. Avasarala
Expires: January 14, 2014                                        Polycom
                                                           July 13, 2013



  A Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) Event Package for Communication
 Diversion Information in support of the Communication Diversion (CDIV)
                   Notification (CDIVN) CDIV service
         draft-avasarala-dispatch-comm-div-notification-12.txt

Abstract

   3GPP and TISPAN are defining the protocol specification for the
   Communication Diversion (CDIV) service using IP Multimedia (IM) Core
   Network (CN) subsystem (IMS) supplementary service.  As part of CDIV,
   a SIP based event package is used for notifying users about
   diversions (re-directions or forwarding) of requests for
   communication sessions targetting the user.  This document defines
   the SIP event package to support subscription and notification of
   diversions.  The proposed event package is applicable to the CDIV
   supplementary service in IMS and may not be applicable to the general
   internet.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 14, 2014.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.




Bakker & Avasarala      Expires January 14, 2014                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft  SIP Communication Diversion Notification       July 2013


   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Applicability Statement  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   4.  Abbreviations and Definitions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     4.1.  Abbreviations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     4.2.  Definitions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   5.  Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   6.  Package Definition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     6.1.  Event Package Name . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     6.2.  Event Package Parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     6.3.  SUBSCRIBE request bodies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     6.4.  Subscription Duration  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     6.5.  NOTIFY request bodies  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     6.6.  Notifier Processing of SUBSCRIBE requests  . . . . . . . .  7
       6.6.1.  Authentication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
       6.6.2.  Authorization  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     6.7.  Notifier Generation of NOTIFY requests . . . . . . . . . .  8
     6.8.  Subscriber Processing of NOTIFY Requests . . . . . . . . .  8
     6.9.  Handling of Forked Requests  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     6.10. Rate of Notifications  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     6.11. State Agents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   7.  Comm-div-info filter and notifier documents  . . . . . . . . . 10
   8.  Structure of Comm-div-info filter and notifier formats . . . . 11
   9.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   10. IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     10.1. Communication Diversion Information Event Package
           Registration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   11. Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   12. References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     12.1. Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     12.2. Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   Appendix A.  Change log  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15





Bakker & Avasarala      Expires January 14, 2014                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft  SIP Communication Diversion Notification       July 2013


1.  Introduction

   3GPP is currently maintaining and specifying communication diversion
   mechanisms which allow users to forward and/or redirect incoming
   communications to other destinations.  A common example is
   Communication Forward On Busy (CFB) wherein users can instruct a
   server in the network to redirect incoming requests, whilst they are
   participating in a session.  Similarly, other variants of
   communication diversion are well defined and used in practice such as
   Communication Forward on subscriber Not Reachable (CFNRc),
   Communication Forward Unconditional (CFU), Communication Forwarding
   No Reply (CFNR), Communication Deflection (CD), and Communication
   Forwarding on Not Logged-in (CFNL). 3GPP is currently maintaining and
   specifying a mechanism for users to configure Communication Diversion
   Services (3GPP TS 24.504 [1] and its successor: 3GPP TS 24.604 [2])
   for their incoming communications.

   The mechanism for users to configure Communication Diversion Services
   (3GPP TS 24.504 [1]) may cause a variety of rules to be provisioned
   in the network at the same time.  For instance, a user may have, in
   addition to other communication diversion rules, various CDIV
   services configured, e.g. some rules based on the time-of-the-day and
   some rules based on the calling party's identity.  It is possible
   that the user loses track of the various rules and undesirable
   diversions may occur.  If the user cann't notified of the diversions,
   then it is hard for the user to determine that the combination of
   rules have caused undesirable diversions.

   CDIV Notification (CDIVN) is a CDIV service providing the user the
   capability to receive notifications about all diverted communications
   (CFU, CFB, CFNR, CD, CFNRc and CFNL).  If CDIVN is configured, when a
   communication is diverted on behalf of the subscriber, the Subcsriber
   receives a notification.  The subscriber is then in able to determine
   whether the communication diversion which just occurred, was indeed
   as per their expectation.  For example, a subscriber intended to
   divert all incoming calls to voice-mail, between 3.00 p.m. to 4.00
   p.m.  Yet, by mistake she configures the time-duration as 3.00 a.m.
   to 4.00 p.m.  It would be very difficult for her to spot this error
   while manually reviewing her complete set of communication diversion
   services, with their various configurations.  Instead, if the
   subscriber receives a real-time notification of any communication
   diversion occurring after 4 p.m., she would be able to immediately
   guess that something is 'wrong' or not as per her intention and take
   corrective action.  Such corrective action could be manual
   verification of the specific rule which triggered the communication
   diversion, wherein she will be able to spot the "mistake" more
   easily.




Bakker & Avasarala      Expires January 14, 2014                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft  SIP Communication Diversion Notification       July 2013


   Thus, for effective subscriber services management of multiple
   configurations of various Communication Diversion services, a
   notification-based mechanism may work well.  Such a mechanism would
   involve notifying subscribers about diversions of their incoming
   communications, as and when the communication diversion happens or
   with a slight delay (as per subscriber service configuration).  As
   such diversion-related information is conveyed almost instantly or
   within a small time-frame, the subscribers can verify whether the
   particular communication diversion is indeed correct at that instant
   of time.

   This document defines a SIP event package that allows a SIP User
   Agents to subscribe to and be notified of communication diversions
   enacted on their behalf using the CDIV service.  The protocol
   specification for the CDIV service (using IMS core networks) can be
   found in 3GPP TS 24.504 [1].



2.  Terminology

   In this document, the key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED",
   "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY",
   and "OPTIONAL" are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [3] and
   indicate requirement levels for compliant implementations.


3.  Applicability Statement

   It is believed that the SIP event package defined here is not
   applicable to the general Internet; it has been designed to serve the
   architecture of the CDIV service (see 3GPP TS 24.504 [1]) in IMS core
   networks 3GPP TS 24.229 (see [10]).  The aim of this memo is to
   follow the procedure indicated in RFC 5727 [4] and to register a new
   event package with event name "comm-div-info" with IANA.


4.  Abbreviations and Definitions

4.1.  Abbreviations

      CDIV: Communication Diversion.

      CDIVN: Communication Diversion Notification.

      TISPAN: Telecommunications and Internet Converged Services and
      Protocols for Advanced Networking.




Bakker & Avasarala      Expires January 14, 2014                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft  SIP Communication Diversion Notification       July 2013


4.2.  Definitions

      Subscriber - The User Agent who has subscribed to the
      Communication diversion notification service.

      User - Another term for the subscriber.

      Diverting User - The User Agent who has configured a Communication
      Diversion.  This could be the User Agent who has configured the
      CDIV service rules in the network, in accordance with 3GPP TS
      24.504 [1].

      Diverted-To Entity/User - The User Agent who is the new target of
      the incoming communication, post execution of any configured CDIV
      service rules.

      Originating User - The User Agent who is the originator of the
      incoming communication, which was initially targeted towards the
      Diverting User, but finally sent to the Diverted-To User.  The
      Originating User is also referred to as the Caller.

      IMS Core Network - This refers to the IMS based SIP based network
      that conforms to the 3GPP TS 24.229 [10] and not the general SIP
      network as defined in RFC 3261 [5].


5.  Requirements

   The CDIVN service enables a user to receive notification about the
   diversion of any of his/her incoming communications, which were
   addressed to the user's address.  A comprehensive description of all
   the requirements that affect the CDIVN service developed by 3GPP and
   TIPSAN is found in 3GPP TS 22.173 [6] and 3GPP TS 24.504 [1].


6.  Package Definition

   This section fills in the details needed for an event package as
   defined in RFC 6665 [7].

6.1.  Event Package Name

   The SIP Events specification requires package definitions to specify
   the name of their package or template-package.

   The name of this package is "comm-div-info".  As specified in RFC
   6665 [7], this value appears in the Event header present in SUBSCRIBE
   and NOTIFY requests.



Bakker & Avasarala      Expires January 14, 2014                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft  SIP Communication Diversion Notification       July 2013


6.2.  Event Package Parameters

   The SIP Events specification RFC 6665 [7] allows packages to define
   additional parameters.  This event package "comm-div-info" does not
   define additional parameters.

6.3.  SUBSCRIBE request bodies

   The SIP Events specification requires package or template-package
   definitions to define the usage, if any, of message bodies in
   SUBSCRIBE requests.  Furthermore, the SIP Events specification
   requires that message bodies are specified or that detailed
   specifications for the syntax and semantics of such a message body
   are cited.

   A SUBSCRIBE request for Communication Diversion event MAY contain a
   message body.  The purpose of the body depends on its type.
   Subscriptions to the Comm-div-info event package SHALL only include a
   message body of MIME type "application/vnd.3gpp.comm-div-info+xml".
   The syntax and semantics of the message body can be found in 3GPP TS
   24.504 [1].

   A body of the SUBSCRIBE request with content type set to MIME type
   "application/comm-div-info-filter+xml" contains information about the
   communication diversion notification information filter criteria and
   notification trigger criteria.  The subscriber SHALL also verify that
   this information conforms to a valid XML document as defined in [11].
   The subscriber SHALL also verify that the information contained in
   the XML document contains elements defined in 3GPP TS 24.504 [1].

6.4.  Subscription Duration

   The default expiration time for subscriptions within this package is
   3600 seconds.  As per RFC 6665 [7], the subscriber MAY specify an
   alternate expiration in the Expires header field.

6.5.  NOTIFY request bodies

   The SIP Events specification requires package definitions to define a
   default value for subscription durations, and to discuss reasonable
   choices for durations when they are explicitly specified.

   The NOTIFY request message contains an event body.  This event body
   is in a format listed in the Accept header field of the SUBSCRIBE
   request or a package specific default format if the Accept header
   field was omitted from the SUBSCRIBE request.  Furthermore, the SIP
   Events specification requires that event bodies are specified or that
   detailed specifications for the syntax and semantics of such a event



Bakker & Avasarala      Expires January 14, 2014                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft  SIP Communication Diversion Notification       July 2013


   body are cited.

   In this event package, the body of the notification contains the
   communication diversion information pertaining to the diversion that
   occurred in the network on behalf of the subscriber.  The package
   specific body has the MIME type "application/
   vnd.3gpp.comm-div-info+xml".  The syntax and semantics of the event
   body can be found in 3GPP TS 24.504 [1].

   A subscriber must always Accept receiving a NOTIFY request with
   Content-Type "application/vnd.3gpp.comm-div-info+xml".  The notifiers
   MUST be capable of accepting the "application/
   vnd.3gpp.comm-div-info+xml" data format as described in 3GPP TS
   24.504 [1].  If the notifier sends a NOTIFY, it MUST include contents
   according to 3GPP TS 24.504 [1] and include the content-type header
   field set to "application/vnd.3gpp.comm-div-info+xml".

   The default Accept header field for SUBSCRIBE request is
   "application/vnd.3gpp.comm-div-info+xml" (assuming Event header has a
   value of "comm-div-info-ntfy").

6.6.  Notifier Processing of SUBSCRIBE requests

   The contents of a "application/vnd.3gpp.comm-div-info+xml" XML
   document in a NOTIFY request can contain sensitive information that
   can reveal some privacy information.  Therefore, such documents MUST
   only be sent to authorized subscribers.  In order to determine if a
   subscription originates in an authorized user, the subscriber MUST be
   authenticated as described in Section 6.6.1 and then the user MUST be
   authorized to be a subscriber as described in Section 6.6.2.

   The Notifier MUST check if the SUBSCRIBE request contains a body
   part.  If there is a body part, the Notifier MUST do the following.

   Check if a SUBSCRIBE request body part conforms to "application/
   vnd.3gpp.comm-div-info+xml" XML Schema document in 3GPP TS 24.504
   [1].  If it conforms then the Notifier processes the document and
   generates notifications accordingly.

6.6.1.  Authentication

   Notifiers MUST authenticate all subscription requests.  This
   authentication can be done using any of the mechanisms defined in RFC
   3261 [5] and other authentication extensions.







Bakker & Avasarala      Expires January 14, 2014                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft  SIP Communication Diversion Notification       July 2013


6.6.2.  Authorization

   Once authenticated, the notifier makes an authorization decision.  A
   notifier MUST NOT accept a subscription unless authorization has been
   provided by the user.  The means by which authorization are provided
   are outside the scope of this document.

6.7.  Notifier Generation of NOTIFY requests

   The SIP Events specification details the formatting and structure of
   NOTIFY request messages.  However, packages are mandated to provide
   detailed information on when to send a NOTIFY, how to compute the
   state of the resource, how to generate neutral or fake state
   information, and whether state information is complete or partial.
   This section describes those details for the "comm-div-info" event
   package.

   A notifier sends a NOTIFY request when a communication diversion is
   enacted on behalf of the user.  If there is a stored filter criteria
   for the user, then the notifier MUST look into the filter criteria.
   If the filter criteria matches, then the notifier generates a NOTIFY
   request and sends the NOTIFY request to the user.  If the filter
   criteria do not match, then the notifier does not generate a NOTIFY
   request.  A body part of the NOTIFY request has a content-type set to
   "application/vnd.3gpp.comm-div-info+xml" and must contain the
   elements defined in 3GPP TS 24.504 [1].

   Notifiers could detect that a communication diversion was enacted on
   behalf of the subscriber via a "History-Info" header field RFC 4244
   [8] value, per 3GPP TS 24.504 [1], sent from an application server
   hosting the CDIV service.

6.8.  Subscriber Processing of NOTIFY Requests

   The SIP Events specification expects event packages to describe the
   process followed by the subscriber upon receipt of a NOTIFY request.
   In this specification, each NOTIFY request contains a XML document
   for the content type "application/vnd.3gpp.comm-div-info+xml" (see
   3GPP TS 24.504 [1]).

6.9.  Handling of Forked Requests

   The SIP Events specification requires each package to describe
   handling of forked Requests.

   This specification only allows a single dialog to be constructed as a
   result of emitting an initial SUBSCRIBE request.  This guarantees
   that only a single notifier is generating notifications for a



Bakker & Avasarala      Expires January 14, 2014                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft  SIP Communication Diversion Notification       July 2013


   particular subscription to a particular user.

   But if forking is allowed, then the server that receives multiple
   subscriptions should be able to generate a single dialog on behalf of
   all the subscriptions that are received.  Any subsequent
   subscriptions should be mapped to the generated dialog.  Similarly
   when the server receives a single notification for the generated
   dialog, it should be generate the corresponding number of
   notifications towards the received notifications.

6.10.  Rate of Notifications

   The SIP Events specification requires each package to specify maximum
   rate at which notifications can be sent .

   Comm-div-info notifiers SHOULD NOT generate notifications for a
   single subscription at a rate of more than once every five seconds.

6.11.  State Agents

   An FSM associated with the subscriber is created in the "IDLE" state,
   e.g. upon receiving filter criteria.  Whenever a communication
   diversion is detected for a URI of the subscriber, a state transition
   occurs.  Depending on whether a filter is matched, a state is
   entered.  In the DIVERSION_NOTIFIED state, notification information
   is sent to the subscriber.  If notification information needs to be
   sent, the Notifier generates the notification information and sends
   the information to the subscriber.  If a diversion is detected but no
   filter is matched, a transition to DIVERSION_NOT_NOTIFIED occurs.

   The FSM for CDIVN is shown in below Figure.




















Bakker & Avasarala      Expires January 14, 2014                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft  SIP Communication Diversion Notification       July 2013


           +-----------+ First diversion & Filter match
       |           +-------------------------------+
       |   IDLE    |                               |
       |           |                               |
       +-----+-----+                               |
     First   |                                     |
   diversion |                                     |
     & No    |                                     |
   filter(s) |                                     |
    match    V         Next diversion &            V
       +-----------+     Filter match      +-------+-------+
       | DIVERSION +---------------------->+               |
       |    NOT    |                    |  |   DIVERSION   |
       | NOTIFIED  +--+                 +--+    NOTIFIED   |
       +-----+-----+  |                    +-------+-------+
             ^        |                            |
             +--------+----------------------------+
               Next diversion & No filter(s) match



                   Figure 1: Diverted URI State Machine

   The subscriber could receive, as part of the notification
   information, the state the FSM was in prior to detecting the
   diversion.

   o  [IDLE]: meaning that no diversions have occured since setting the
      present "filter".

   o  [DIVERSION_NOTIFIED]: meaning that since receiving the last NOTIFY
      request for this even package, no additional diversions have
      occured.

   o  [DIVERSION_NOT_NOTIFIED]: meaning that one or more diversions have
      occured since setting the present "filter" or since receiving the
      last NOTIFY request for this even package.


7.  Comm-div-info filter and notifier documents

   Comm-div-info document is an XML document [11] that MUST be well-
   formed and SHOULD be valid.  Communication Diversion Information
   documents MUST be based on XML 1.0 and MUST be encoded using UTF-8
   (see RFC 4745 [12]).






Bakker & Avasarala      Expires January 14, 2014               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft  SIP Communication Diversion Notification       July 2013


8.  Structure of Comm-div-info filter and notifier formats

   The

   o  structure of the filter and notifier format;

   o  examples of the use of subscribtion and notification bodies; and

   o  XML Schema of subscribtion and notification bodies,

   have been described in 3GPP TS 24.504 [1].


9.  Security Considerations

   Authentication and authorization of subscriptions have been discussed
   in Section 6.6.  Lack of authentication or authorization may provide
   comm-div-info information to unauthorized parties and can reveal
   sensitive information with regards to the user's call receiving
   patterns.  For example, who calls the user and at what time, etc.

   Integrity protection and confidentiality of notifications are also
   discussed in Section 6.7.  If a notifier does not encrypt bodies of
   NOTIFY requests, an eavesdropper could learn the status of a SIP user
   agent and use it to create malicious sessions.  If the notifier does
   not integrity protect the bodies of NOTIFY requests, a man-in- the-
   middle attacker or malicious SIP proxy could modify the contents of
   the comm-div-info event package notification.  Although this does not
   cause harm, it can create annoyances.


10.  IANA Considerations

   This document registers the new SIP Event Package.

10.1.  Communication Diversion Information Event Package Registration


   Package Name: Comm-div-info

   Type: Package

   Contact:  John Merdith, <John.meredith@3gpp.org>

   Published Specification: RFC XXXX (Note to RFC Editor)






Bakker & Avasarala      Expires January 14, 2014               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft  SIP Communication Diversion Notification       July 2013


11.  Acknowledgements

   The authors would like to thank Mary Barnes, Samir Saklikar, Subir
   Saha, Ban Al-Bakri, Roland Jesske, Jose Miguel Torres, Paul Kyzivat,
   John Elwell , Keith Drage , Gonzalo Camarillo, Olle E. Johansson,
   Atle Monrad and Dean Willis for their valuable comments and
   suggestions.


12.  References

12.1.  Normative References

   [1]   3GPP, "TISPAN; PSTN/ISDN simulation services: Communication
         Diversion (CDIV); Protocol specification", 3GPP TS 24.504
         8.17.0, June 2013.

   [2]   3GPP, "Communication Diversion (CDIV) using IP Multimedia (IM)
         Core Network (CN) subsystem;  Protocol specification", 3GPP
         TS 24.604 10.6.0, June 2013.

   [3]   Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
         Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [4]   Peterson, J., Jennings, C., and R. Sparks, "Change Process for
         the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) and the Real-time
         Applications and Infrastructure Area", BCP 67, RFC 5727,
         March 2010.

   [5]   Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., Camarillo, G., Johnston, A.,
         Peterson, J., Sparks, R., Handley, M., and E. Schooler, "SIP:
         Session Initiation Protocol", RFC 3261, June 2002.

   [6]   3GPP, "IP Multimedia Core Network Subsystem (IMS) Multimedia
         Telephony Service and supplementary services; Stage 1", 3GPP
         TS 22.173 10.5.0, June 2012.

   [7]   Roach, A., "SIP-Specific Event Notification", RFC 6665,
         July 2012.

   [8]   Barnes, M., "An Extension to the Session Initiation Protocol
         (SIP) for Request History Information", RFC 4244,
         November 2005.

   [9]   Jennings, C., Audet, F., and J. Elwell, "Session Initiation
         Protocol (SIP) URIs for Applications such as Voicemail and
         Interactive Voice Response (IVR)", RFC 4458, April 2006.




Bakker & Avasarala      Expires January 14, 2014               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft  SIP Communication Diversion Notification       July 2013


12.2.  Informative References

   [10]  3GPP, "IP multimedia call control protocol based on Session
         Initiation Protocol (SIP) and Session Description Protocol
         (SDP); Stage 3", 3GPP TS 24.229 10.12.0, June 2013.

   [11]  Sperberg-McQueen, C., Paoli, J., Maler, E., and T. Bray,
         "Extensible Markup Language (XML) 1.0 (Second Edition)", World
         Wide Web Consortium FirstEdition REC-xml-20001006,
         October 2000, <http://www.w3.org/TR/2000/REC-xml-20001006>.

   [12]  Schulzrinne, H., Tschofenig, H., Morris, J., Cuellar, J., Polk,
         J., and J. Rosenberg, "Common Policy: A Document Format for
         Expressing Privacy Preferences", RFC 4745, February 2007.


Appendix A.  Change log


   [RFC EDITOR NOTE: Please remove this section when publishing]


   Changes from draft-avasarala-dispatch-comm-div-notification-11

   o  Updated affiliations

   o  Changed reference from RFC 3265 to RFC 6665

   o  Changed reference from 3GPP TS 24.604 to 3GPP TS 24.504

   o  Editorial clean up.

   Changes from draft-avasarala-dispatch-comm-div-notification-10

   o  The SIP Events specification (RFC 3265) requires that bodies to be
      used as part of the event package are specified or that detailed
      specifications for the syntax and semantics of such a body are
      cited.  With that knowledge, the authors could greatly reduce the
      size of this draft; the detailed specification is in 3GPP TS
      24.504 and in 3GPP TS 24.604.

   o  Editorial clean up.

   Changes from draft-avasarala-dispatch-comm-div-notification-09

   o  No changes of substance.  An update addressing the comments on the
      list and offline, will follow.




Bakker & Avasarala      Expires January 14, 2014               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft  SIP Communication Diversion Notification       July 2013


   Changes from draft-avasarala-dispatch-comm-div-notification-08

   o  Corrected text to not preclude use of S/MIME or multipart.

   o  Updated Finite State Machine diagram.

   o  Updated the schema for CDIVN notification document to reflect FSM
      updates.

   Changes from draft-avasarala-dispatch-comm-div-notification-07

   o  Added MIME type for communication diversion filter criteria.

   o  Updated the State Agents section to add state diagram for CDIVN
      Service.

   o  Updated the schema for CDIVN notification document.

   o  Updated the Acknowledgements section.

   Changes from draft-avasarala-dispatch-comm-div-notification-06

   o  Changed the namespace for XML schema to "http://urn.etsi.org"
      aligning with 3GPP TS 24.504

   o  Updated the XML schema and removed the word "optional" for
      "diverting-user-info"

   Changes from draft-avasarala-dispatch-comm-div-notification-05

   o  Updated Requirements section

   o  Incorporated expert review comments for state information,
      notification content and subscribe bodies

   o  Modified the section on examples for subscription and notification
      body

   Changes from draft-avasarala-dispatch-comm-div-notification-04

   o  Incorporated review comments

   o  Added text for SUBSCRIBE request body and NOTIFY request body and
      checking of filter criteria.

   o  Updated Communication Diversion Notification Information document
      and XML schema to add Diversion and notification count information
      as optional parameters.



Bakker & Avasarala      Expires January 14, 2014               [Page 14]

Internet-Draft  SIP Communication Diversion Notification       July 2013


   Changes from draft-avasarala-dispatch-comm-div-notification-03

   o  Added State information to Notifiers.

   o  Modified diverting-URI definition and element in communication
      diversion information selection criteria as optional parameter .

   Changes from draft-avasarala-dispatch-comm-div-notification-02

   o  Modified the applicability statement to make it more IMS specific.

   o  Added a definition for IMS Core network.

   o  Updated authors list and Acknowledgement sections.

   Changes from draft-avasarala-dispatch-comm-div-notification-01

   o  Incorporated review comments.

   o  Modified contact details for co author Subir Saha.

   Changes from draft-avasarala-sipping-comm-div-notification-00

   o  Changed contact details of co author Subir Saha.

   o  Moved from SIPPING to DISPATCH WG.

   Changes from draft-avasarala-dispatch-comm-div-notification-00

   o  Added comm-div-info document structure information and schema for
      the event package.

   o  Added more elaborate description for various sections in comm-div-
      info document


Authors' Addresses

   John Luc Bakker (editor)
   BlackBerry Corporation
   5000 Riverside Drive, Building 6, Suite 100
   Irving, Texas  75039
   USA

   Email: jbakker@blackberry.com






Bakker & Avasarala      Expires January 14, 2014               [Page 15]

Internet-Draft  SIP Communication Diversion Notification       July 2013


   Ranjit Avasarala
   Nokia Siemens Networks
   Manyata Tech Park, Nagawara Outer Ring Road
   Bangalore  560045
   India

   Email: ranjit.avasarala@nsn.com












































Bakker & Avasarala      Expires January 14, 2014               [Page 16]

