


Network Working Group                                      D. Segelstein
Internet-Draft                                                 A. Flavel
Updates: 5357 (if approved)                                     D. Nortz
Intended status: Standards Track                               AT&T Labs
Expires: January 1, 2012                                   June 30, 2011


  Using Domain Name Services to Enable an AMT Gateway to Discover the
     Optimal AMT Relay in a Multi-Network SSM Multicast Environment
                   draft-segelstein-mboned-amt-dns-00

Abstract

   One of the obstacles to implementing AMT Multicast in a multi-network
   environment is the difficulty an AMT Gateway may have in finding an
   AMT Relay that is optimal.  Optimal in this context means that the
   AMT Relay has multicast connectivity to the Source, and its location
   minimizes the unicast (tunneled) portion of the path to the Gateway.
   Blind use of the global anycast address specified for AMT Relays in
   "Automatic IP Multicast Without Explicit Tunnels (AMT)" could result
   in reaching an AMT Relay that does not have multicast connectivity to
   the source, which would yield a failure to obtain the multicast
   content; or it could result in reaching an AMT Relay that is
   otherwise less than optimal.  This document proposes a method for
   implementing standard DNS procedures so that an AMT Gateway using
   normal DNS queries can virtually always find the optimal AMT Relay
   for a given Source.

Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."



Segelstein, et al.       Expires January 1, 2012                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft   DNS for Discovery of Optimal AMT Relay        June 2011


   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 1, 2012.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.



































Segelstein, et al.       Expires January 1, 2012                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft   DNS for Discovery of Optimal AMT Relay        June 2011


Table of Contents

   1.  Overview and Rationale  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   2.  Assumptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   3.  The Proposed Procedure for Finding an AMT Relay . . . . . . . . 5
     3.1.  The AMT Gateway Forms a DNS Query to Find the AMT Relay . . 6
     3.2.  ".net" DNS Redirects the Query to the "S1*.net"
           Authoritative DNS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
       3.2.1.  Option 1: DNS Query of the Form "S1.amt.net"  . . . . . 6
       3.2.2.  Option 2: DNS Query of the Form "S1-amt.net"  . . . . . 7
       3.2.3.  Option 3: DNS Query of the form "S1.net"  . . . . . . . 7
     3.3.  "S1*.net" DNS Returns the IP Address of Its Own
           Network's AMT Relay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
     3.4.  The Result of the Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
     3.5.  Possible Inefficiencies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   4.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   5.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   6.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
   7.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
     7.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
     7.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9





























Segelstein, et al.       Expires January 1, 2012                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft   DNS for Discovery of Optimal AMT Relay        June 2011


1.  Overview and Rationale

   Implicit in the definition of a global anycast address for AMT Relays
   [I-D.ietf-mboned-auto-multicast] is the assumption that an AMT
   Gateway will succeed in obtaining multicast content simply by finding
   the closest (in routing distance) AMT Relay.  Consideration of a
   moderately complex multi-network architecture reveals that this is
   not necessarily a valid assumption.

   An environment in which all networks are multicast-enabled and have
   multicast-capable interconnections would be well-suited to globally
   anycast-addressed AMT Relays.  In that environment, the nearest AMT
   Relay to any given AMT Gateway will be optimal and successful in
   delivering multicast content.  However, in general, connections among
   networks will not ubiquitously be multicast-capable, and that is
   likely to be the case for some time.  In that case, reaching the
   nearest AMT Relay is not guaranteed to be successful.  Accordingly,
   this document addresses the problem of finding an optimal AMT Relay
   in an SSM multicast, multi-network environment, where connectivity
   between networks may or may not be multicast-enabled.

   In order to successfully provide multicast content to an AMT Gateway,
   the AMT Relay reached must have multicast connectivity to the source.
   In order for it to be optimal, it must maximize the portion of the
   path that is multicast, and minimize the portion that requires a
   unicast tunnel.  Further, the network reached should retain some
   flexibility so that its own policies may be invoked in the allocation
   of usage of its resources.  It may, for example, seek to consider
   network load when directing the AMT Gateway to a specific AMT Relay.
   In addition, the discovery procedure should minimize the risk of
   exposure to the possibility of a malicious party that could advertise
   an anycast AMT address and attract AMT Gateway messages.  This could
   have the potential of disabling multicast for those end-users whose
   Gateways reach that malicious destination.

   The solution presented in this document has the following
   characteristics:

   o  It requires very little or no change to existing technologies.

   o  It naturally results in finding the optimal AMT Relay in most
      cases.

   o  It allows AMT Gateways to use existing protocols and procedures.

   o  It simplifies and minimizes administration and management of
      resources.




Segelstein, et al.       Expires January 1, 2012                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft   DNS for Discovery of Optimal AMT Relay        June 2011


   o  It allows flexibility in network allocation of resources.

   o  It avoids exposure to malicious actors.

   The implementation proposed can achieve the above characteristics for
   the following reasons:

   o  AMT Gateways require only a single, simple DNS query to find the
      optimal AMT Relay.

   o  This implementation requires no changes to existing DNS
      procedures, and only requires DNS servers in relevant
      authoritative domains to be administered to incorporate awareness
      of source networks to which they have multicast connectivity, and
      to respond appropriately to DNS queries for optimal AMT Relays.

   o  It builds efficiency into the procedure itself, and thus does not
      require a centralized intelligence to direct the AMT Relay
      discovery process.


2.  Assumptions

   This document will not address the manner in which the application
   discovers the Multicast Source, and generally assumes there is one
   source per content provider.  However, a method similar to that
   proposed here for finding the optimal AMT Relay may in fact be used
   to find the optimal source in a multi-source environment.

   This document is meant to address issues solely related to SSM[SSM].
   It does not propose to make any changes to the way SSM works as a
   transport, or the way DNS works to resolve names to IP addresses, and
   therefore will not go into any detail on the inner working of SSM or
   DNS.


3.  The Proposed Procedure for Finding an AMT Relay

   Once a multicast-enabled application obtains an address for desired
   content, e.g., (S1,G1), it generates an IGMP message to join that
   stream.  An AMT Gateway client (stand-alone or one incorporated into
   the application) will determine whether native multicast is
   available, and if not will invoke AMT Gateway functions to attempt to
   find an AMT Relay.







Segelstein, et al.       Expires January 1, 2012                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft   DNS for Discovery of Optimal AMT Relay        June 2011


3.1.  The AMT Gateway Forms a DNS Query to Find the AMT Relay

   At this point, the AMT Gateway generate a DNS query of the form
   "S1.amt.net" or "S1-amt.net" or "S1.net" (alternatives to be examined
   below) instead of seeking the AMT Relay by means of the global AMT
   Relay anycast address.  This domain, "S1*.net", is defined so that
   authoritative DNS servers are resident on networks that have
   multicast connectivity to the network that hosts the source "S1".  As
   an example of such a query, for a source IP address 12.123.221.123,
   the value of "S1" in the DNS query could be of the form
   "12123221123*.net.  Alternatively, it could be of a more restrictive
   form that could eliminate some domain possibilities.  Only two things
   are required for this solution to function correctly:

   1.  Each network that has one or more AMT Relays with multicast
       connectivity to a given source, and that wishes to serve content
       from that source, must have a DNS server that is authoritative
       for that source domain, and

   2.  That all be reachable by the same anycast address.

   The query for "S1*.net" will initially be directed to the local DNS
   server defined for the end-user, which will in most cases be local to
   the end-user's access network.

3.2.  ".net" DNS Redirects the Query to the "S1*.net" Authoritative DNS

   In general, the local DNS will not be authoritative either for the
   ".net" domain or the "S1*.net" domain.  However, the local DNS server
   will be aware of and will query the ".net" authoritative DNS for the
   anycast address of the "S1*.net" authoritative DNS.

3.2.1.  Option 1: DNS Query of the Form "S1.amt.net"

   This option assumes that there is an organization responsible for an
   "amt.net" domain.  Then that organization would maintain DNS servers
   that are aware of those DNS servers authoritative for "Sx.amt.net",
   where "x" specifies any multicast source reachable by an AMT Relay.

   The ".net" DNS server redirects the local DNS query to the "amt.net"
   DNS server.  In turn, the "amt.net" DNS servers redirects the DNS
   query to the appropriate DNS servers authoritative for the source
   being sought in the query.  That will be a set of DNS servers
   reachable by an anycast address.

   When the local DNS server queries that "S1.amt.net" DNS server, the
   query will naturally (via anycast) be routed to the nearest (in
   routing metric) DNS authoritative for source "S1".



Segelstein, et al.       Expires January 1, 2012                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft   DNS for Discovery of Optimal AMT Relay        June 2011


3.2.2.  Option 2: DNS Query of the Form "S1-amt.net"

   This option assumes no "amt.net" domain.  Then ".net" authoritative
   DNS servers must be aware of those DNS servers authoritative for "Sx-
   amt.net", where "x" again specifies any multicast source reachable by
   an AMT Relay.  The "-amt" qualifier simply aids the lookup by the
   ".net" DNS of the DNS servers authoritative for the "S1" domain.
   Thus, the ".net" DNS server redirects the DNS query to the
   appropriate DNS servers authoritative for the source being sought in
   the query.  That will be a set of DNS servers reachable by an anycast
   address.

   When the local DNS server queries that "S1-amt.net" DNS server, the
   query will naturally (via anycast) be routed to the nearest (in
   routing metric) DNS authoritative for source "S1".

3.2.3.  Option 3: DNS Query of the form "S1.net"

   This option assumes no "-amt" to aid the lookup by the ".net" DNS of
   the DNS servers authoritative for "Sx".  The ".net" DNS server simply
   looks up the DNS servers authoritative for "S1" and redirects the DNS
   query to those DNS servers.  That will be a set of DNS servers
   reachable by an anycast address.

   When the local DNS server queries that "S1.net" DNS server, the query
   will naturally (via anycast) be routed to the nearest (in routing
   metric) DNS authoritative for source "S1".

3.3.  "S1*.net" DNS Returns the IP Address of Its Own Network's AMT
      Relay

   By virtue of the conditions set out in 3.1, above, the DNS
   authoritative for "S1*.net" will be resident on a network that has
   multicast connectivity to the source "S1".  This may be because the
   source is on that same network, or it may be because that network has
   multicast interconnection to the network on which the source is
   located.

   Because the DNS authoritative for "S1*.net" was reached by anycast,
   that network is assured to be nearest (in routing metric) to the DNS
   local to the AMT Gateway.

   As a result of the above, the DNS reached by this last query may
   safely respond with the address of an AMT Relay on its own network.
   That DNS may provide a response according to its own network's
   policies and capabilities.  For example, the response may be an
   anycast address that would route to the closest among several
   possible AMT Relays.  Alternatively, it may respond with a CNAME,



Segelstein, et al.       Expires January 1, 2012                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft   DNS for Discovery of Optimal AMT Relay        June 2011


   which can be resolved by an intelligent DNS server that takes into
   account network load in deciding to which AMT Relay to direct the AMT
   Gateway.  Or it may respond with the unicast address of a specific
   AMT Relay.

3.4.  The Result of the Procedure

   The procedure detailed above results in reaching an AMT Relay that
   has multicast connectivity to the desired source.  In addition, the
   AMT Relay will be in the multicast-capable network closest to the
   end-user's local DNS server, which is in most cases local to the end-
   user.  This minimizes the inter-network unicast path between the AMT
   Relay and the AMT Gateway.  The reached network can, however,
   implement its own policies with regard to selecting a particular AMT
   Relay for that query, thus allowing flexibility in network
   administration.  The end-user's AMT Gateway will thus have reached
   the optimal AMT Relay within the constraints of also taking into
   account the policies of the reached network provider.

   Administration of the DNS hierarchy is minimally affected.  However,
   only those network providers that wish to carry multicast traffic for
   a given source need to undertake the minor additional steps required
   to make their AMT Relays authoritative for that source, and hence
   available to AMT Gateways seeking content from that source.  Further,
   if the ".amt.net" option of Section 3.2.1 is adopted, the authority
   for the "amt.net" domain is required to administer those DNS servers
   in accordance with this hierarchy.

3.5.  Possible Inefficiencies

   In the case that an end-user's application or browser is assigned a
   DNS server that is not local, the anycast routing will yield a false
   "nearest" network DNS.  The content will still be served via
   multicast, but the AMT Relay found will not be optimal.


4.  Security Considerations

   This document introduces no security considerations other than any
   already associated with DNS and SSM.


5.  IANA Considerations

   This memo makes no request of IANA.






Segelstein, et al.       Expires January 1, 2012                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft   DNS for Discovery of Optimal AMT Relay        June 2011


6.  Acknowledgements

   The authors thank folks for review and comment.


7.  References

7.1.  Normative References

   [I-D.ietf-mboned-auto-multicast]
              Thaler, D., Talwar, M., Aggarwal, A., Vicisano, L., and T.
              Pusateri, "Automatic IP Multicast Without Explicit Tunnels
              (AMT)", draft-ietf-mboned-auto-multicast-10 (work in
              progress), March 2010.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

7.2.  Informative References

   [SSM]      "Source-Specific Multicast for IP, work in progress
              (expired Internet Draft)", November 2000.


Authors' Addresses

   David Segelstein
   AT&T Labs
   200 Laurel Avenue South
   Middletown,, NJ  07748
   USA

   Phone: +1 732 420 1742
   Fax:
   Email: dsegelstein@att.com
   URI:















Segelstein, et al.       Expires January 1, 2012                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft   DNS for Discovery of Optimal AMT Relay        June 2011


   Ashley Flavel
   AT&T Labs
   200 Laurel Avenue South
   Middletown,, NJ  07748
   USA

   Phone: +1 732 420 1762
   Fax:
   Email: af360w@att.com
   URI:


   Doug Nortz
   AT&T Labs
   200 Laurel Avenue South
   Middletown,, NJ  07748
   USA

   Phone: +1 732 420 1739
   Fax:
   Email: dnortz@att.com
   URI:





























Segelstein, et al.       Expires January 1, 2012               [Page 10]

