


SIPREC WG                                                    A. Johnston
Internet-Draft                                                     Avaya
Intended status: Informational                                 A. Hutton
Expires: January 4, 2011               Siemens Enterprise Communications
                                                            July 3, 2010


                SIP Call Control - Recording Extensions
                    draft-johnston-siprec-cc-rec-00

Abstract

   This document defines SIP extensions for session recording to meet
   the requirements in the "Requirements for SIP-based Media Recording
   (SIPREC)" document.  In particular, mechanisms to allow SIP elements
   to distinguish between the Recording Session and the Communication
   Session.  Also a mechanism for a UA to learn that the communication
   session is being recorded is proposed.  The Metadata about the
   session is not covered by this document.  SIP feature tags 'srs',
   'src', and 'recorded' are defined to identify the Session Recording
   Server, Session Recording Client, and the presence of recording in
   the communication session.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 4, 2011.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of



Johnston & Hutton        Expires January 4, 2011                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                 SIP CC Rec                      July 2010


   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Overview  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   3.  Requirements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   4.  Callee Capabilities Extensions for SIP Recording  . . . . . . . 3
     4.1.  src Feature Tag . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
     4.2.  srs Feature Tag . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
     4.3.  recorded Feature Tag  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   5.  Architecture  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   6.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   7.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7






























Johnston & Hutton        Expires January 4, 2011                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                 SIP CC Rec                      July 2010


1.  Overview

   The motivation, requirements, and use cases for SIP recording are
   discussed in in [I-D.ietf-siprec-req].  This draft discusses the use
   of SIP [RFC3261] as the session recording protocol.  While most of
   the functions of the call recording protocol can be met by unextended
   SIP, there are a few that need extensions.  This draft looks at a few
   of these functions and proposes some extensions to implement them.


2.  Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in BCP 14, RFC 2119
   [RFC2119].


3.  Requirements

   This section discusses the requirements in [I-D.ietf-siprec-req]
   relating to the session recording protocol that require SIP
   extensions.  They are:

      REQ-010 A request for a new Recording Session MUST be redirected
      to an available SRS.

      REQ-023 The mechanism MUST support a means for a SIP UA to request
      that a session is not recorded.

      REQ-024 The mechanism MUST provide a means of indicating to the
      end users of a Communication Session that the session in which
      they are participating is being recorded.

      REQ-030 The mechanism MUST enable the Recording Session to
      identify itself as a SIP session that is established for the
      purpose of recording.

   The proposed mechanism extends the SIP callee capabilties and caller
   preferences to meet these requirements.


4.  Callee Capabilities Extensions for SIP Recording

   This section discusses how the callee capabilities defined in
   [RFC3840] can be extended for SIP call recording.

   SIP Callee Capabilities defines feature tags which are used to



Johnston & Hutton        Expires January 4, 2011                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                 SIP CC Rec                      July 2010


   represent characteristics and capabilities of a UA.  From RFC 3840:

      "Capability and characteristic information about a UA is carried
      as parameters of the Contact header field.  These parameters can
      be used within REGISTER requests and responses, OPTIONS responses,
      and requests and responses that create dialogs (such as INVITE)."

   Note that feature tags are also used in dialog modifying requests and
   responses such as re-INVITE and responses to a re-INVITE, and UPDATE.
   The 'isfocus' feature tag, defined in [RFC4579] is similar
   semantically to this case: it indicates that the UA is acting as a
   SIP conference focus, and is performing a specific action (mixing) on
   the resulting media stream.  This information is available from
   OPTIONS queries, dialog package notifications, and the SIP
   registration event package.

   We propose the definition of three new feature tags: 'src', 'srs',
   and 'recorded'.

4.1.  src Feature Tag

   The 'src' feature tag is used in Contact URIs by the Session
   Recording Client (SRC) related to recording sessions.  A Session
   Recording Server uses the presence of this feature tag in dialog
   creating and modifying requests and responses to confirm that the
   dialog being created is for the purpose of a Recording Session
   (REQ-30).  In addition, a registrar could discover that a UA is an
   SRC based on the presence of this feature tag in a registration.
   Other SIP Recording extensions and behaviors can be triggered by the
   presence of this feature tag.

   Note that we could use a single feature tag, such as 'recording' used
   by either an SRC or SRS to identify that the session is a recording
   session.  However, due to the differences in functionality and
   behavior between an SRC and SRS, using only one feature tag for both
   is not ideal.  For instance, if a routing mistake resulted in a
   request from a SRC being routed back to another SRC, if only one
   feature tag were defined, they would not know right away about the
   error and could become confused.  With separate feature tags, they
   would realize the error immediately and terminate the session.  Also,
   call logs would clearly show the routing error.

4.2.  srs Feature Tag

   The 'srs' feature tag is used in Contact URIs by the Session
   Recording Server (SRS) related to recording sessions.  A Session
   Recording Client uses the presence of this feature tag in dialog
   creating and modifying requests and responses to confirm that the



Johnston & Hutton        Expires January 4, 2011                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                 SIP CC Rec                      July 2010


   dialog being created is for the purpose of a Recording Session
   (REQ-30).  In addition, a registrar could discover that a UA is an
   SRS based on the presence of this feature tag in a registration.
   Other SIP Recording extensions and behaviors can be triggered by the
   presence of this feature tag.

   To ensure a recording session is redirected to an SRS (REQ-10), an
   SRC can utilize the SIP Caller Preferences extensions, defined in
   [RFC3841].  The presence of a Accept-Contact: *;sip.srs allows a UA
   to request that the INVITE be routed to an SRS.  Note that to be
   completely sure, the SRC would need to include a Require: prefs
   header field field in the request.

4.3.  recorded Feature Tag

   The 'recorded' feature tag is used exclusively in recorded
   Communication Sessions by the Session Recording Client (SRC).  An SRC
   recording a session includes this feature tag in the Communicaton
   Session to indicate that some part of the media for the session is
   being recorded (REQ-24).  A UA receiving the 'recorded' feature tag
   in a dialog establishing or modifying request or response knows the
   media is being recorded and renders this information to the user.

   When recording is initiated (in the initial INVITE or 200 OK, or by a
   re-INVITE or UPDATE mid-call), the UA can use the presence of the
   'recorded' feature tag to initiate a disconnect of the session,
   sending a BYE with a Reason header field indicating that the
   termination is due to the UA refusing recording of the session.  Also
   note that a signaling indication such as this does not replace other
   notifications such as tones and announcements played in the media
   path.  However, the ability to set a policy for no recording in a UA
   and have the UA able to take automatic action is useful.  A UA can
   also render this information to the user - consider an incoming
   INVITE with the 'recorded' feature tag included - the UA can tell the
   user during alerting that the resulting call, if answered, will be
   recorded, allowing the user to take appropriate action.  This
   partially supports REQ-24.

      Editor's Note: We considered the use of the SIP Caller Preferences
      extensions, defined in [RFC3841] to allow a UA to request a call
      not be recorded, i.e. using a Reject-Contact: *;sip.recorded
      allows a UA to request that recording not be used.  However, this
      requires the all proxies and UAs support caller prefs (Require:
      prefs).  Some other mechanism to fully support REQ-23, perhaps a
      'norecord' SIP option tag is needed instead.






Johnston & Hutton        Expires January 4, 2011                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                 SIP CC Rec                      July 2010


5.  Architecture

   The SIP feature tags 'srs' and 'src' defined in this document support
   the proposed architecture by providing a clear indication that a
   session is a Recording Session and identifying the Session Recording
   Server (SRS) and Session Recording Client (SRC) which are described
   in the architecture [I-D.ietf-siprec-architecture].


6.  Security Considerations

   This draft defines three new SIP feature tags.  Feature tags are
   transported as Contact header field parameters.  In order to rely on
   them, integrity protection of the SIP message or response is
   required.  SIP transport over TLS over a single hop provides
   integrity protection for feature tags.  Unfortunately, multi-hop
   integrity protection provided by RFC 4474 does not help, as only the
   address part of the Contact URI is protected by the signature in the
   Identity header field.

   An attacker modifying or removing an 'src' or 'srs' feature tag could
   attempt to impersonate a SIP Recording Server or a SIP Recording
   Client.  An SRS and SRC must authenticate each other before
   establishing or modifying recording sessions and can not just rely on
   the presence of these feature tags.

   An attacker removing or adding a 'recorded' feature tag could try to
   hide the fact that recording is taking place, or pretend that
   recording is taking place when it is not.  This could result in
   incorrect announcements and indications being played to the user, and
   possibly the teardown of calls if the UA has a policy of not allowing
   recording.


7.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [I-D.ietf-siprec-req]
              Rehor, K., Jain, R., Portman, L., and A. Hutton,
              "Requirements for SIP-based Media Recording (SIPREC)",
              draft-ietf-siprec-req-00 (work in progress), May 2010.

   [I-D.ietf-siprec-architecture]
              Hutton, A., Portman, L., Jain, R., and K. Rehor, "An
              Architecture for Media Recording using the Session
              Initiation Protocol", draft-ietf-siprec-architecture-00



Johnston & Hutton        Expires January 4, 2011                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                 SIP CC Rec                      July 2010


              (work in progress), June 2010.

   [RFC3261]  Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., Camarillo, G., Johnston,
              A., Peterson, J., Sparks, R., Handley, M., and E.
              Schooler, "SIP: Session Initiation Protocol", RFC 3261,
              June 2002.

   [RFC3840]  Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., and P. Kyzivat,
              "Indicating User Agent Capabilities in the Session
              Initiation Protocol (SIP)", RFC 3840, August 2004.

   [RFC4579]  Johnston, A. and O. Levin, "Session Initiation Protocol
              (SIP) Call Control - Conferencing for User Agents",
              BCP 119, RFC 4579, August 2006.

   [RFC3841]  Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., and P. Kyzivat, "Caller
              Preferences for the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)",
              RFC 3841, August 2004.


Authors' Addresses

   Alan Johnston
   Avaya
   St. Louis, MO  63124

   Email: alan.b.johnston@gmail.com


   Andrew Hutton
   Siemens Enterprise Communications

   Email: andrew.hutton@siemens-enterprise.com


















Johnston & Hutton        Expires January 4, 2011                [Page 7]


