

Internet Engineering Task Force                           Q. X. Huang
INTERNET-DRAFT                         Western Mining Company Limited
<draft-qxhuang-ecdcs-gis-00.txt>                          S. S. Zhang
                                                           U. S. T. B
                                                             J. H. Hu
Intended status: Informational                             U. S. T. B
Expires: March 14, 2012                            September 14, 2011

            A Novel Emergency Command and Dispatch Communication
                  System Based on Geographic Information

                   draft-qxhuang-ecdcs-gis-00.txt

Abstract 
                   
   This document describes a novel Emergency Command and Dispatch 
   Communication System (ECDCS), which is designed based on Geographic
   Information System (GIS). To begin with, some related intelligent
   notions are overviewed and the scheduling system is proposed. 
   Then, the architecture of wisdom network is proposed. Finally, 
   Function of each part of system is also discussed.



Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with 
   the provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents 
   at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as 
   reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.
   
   This Internet-Draft will expire on March 14, 2012.







Huang, et al.              Expires - March 14, 2012            [Page 1]

Internet Draft      ECDCS Based on Geographic Information    March 2012




Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with 
   respect to this document.  Code Components extracted from this 
   document must include Simplified BSD License text as described
   in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided
   without warranty as described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1 Terminology.....................................................3
   2 Introduction....................................................3
   3 Emergency Command and Dispatch Communication System (ECDCS).....3
      3.1 Resources Document Management (RDM)........................3
      3.2 Emergency Mechanism Composition (EMC)......................4
      3.3 Command and Dispatch Process (CDP).........................5
      3.4 Command and Communications Platform (CCP)..................5
   4 Summary.........................................................6
   5 Security Considerations.........................................6
   6 IANA Considerations.............................................6
   7 Acknowledgments.................................................6
   8 References......................................................6
   Author's Addresses................................................6





















Huang, et al.              Expires - March 14, 2012            [Page 2]

Internet Draft      ECDCS Based on Geographic Information    March 2012


1  Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].

   This document uses terms from [RFC3261].
                 
2  Introduction 

   Research on emergency communication is important in the process of
   digital mine construction, and it is a hot topic recently. Due to 
   Emergency Command and Dispatch Communication System (ECDCS) with 
   mobile communication devices, the original communication system 
   which has been severely damaged can be protected to maintain 
   communications emergently [1]. Because of various management 
   departments, each department can perform emergency preplan 
   respectively [2]. Based on Geographic Information System (GIS),
   this document is dedicated to design a novel ECDCS for the 
   construction of digital mine. 


3  Emergency Command and Dispatch Communication System (ECDCS)

   ECDCS is a communications system based on the intelligent 
   information network, met the needs of the intelligent management,
   dealt with urgent crisis and emergency events and integrated 
   language, data and sharing for emergency command and 
   informationized the whole process management. The system is 
   comprised by four elements: resource document management, emergency
   mechanism composition, command and dispatch process and command
   communication platform. 

3.1 Resources Document Management (RDM)

   RDM module is mainly aimed at emergency preparations constructing
   corresponding emergency plan for emergency command system when 
   emergency affairs [3] is preventable, which is regarded as auxiliary
   line of the emergency command system to establish corresponding
   process and mechanism, such as standard plan affairs, events grade,
   response department, relief resources, command department, follow-up
   manpower, secondary events with relevant experience value, aftermath
   treatment and so on, providing corresponding decision and rapid 
   response to emergency command. RDM module includes six parts: 
   emergency response plan compilation, emergency case management, 
   emergency plan drill, emergency experts management, emergency 
   supplies management and emergency disaster statistics.





Huang, et al.              Expires - March 14, 2012            [Page 3]

Internet Draft      ECDCS Based on Geographic Information    March 2012


   The emergency response plan is provided for compiling a complete
   emergency plan conveniently. Emergency plan can be saved as a word 
   document after users fill the information in property dialog boxes, 
   and this record is kept in the database correspondingly through the
   handy module design.

   Emergency case management records and manages the accident which
   has happened in a time unit, including the accident site, grade, 
   casualties, economic loss and so on. 

   Emergency plan drill is to record and manage the historical drill
   of the emergency response plan and to provide the corresponding 
   practice process.

   Emergency experts management is to widely collect information of
   each kind of accidents relief experts, such as names, telephone 
   numbers, expertise for a rescue expert database establishment to
   offer the fastest and the most professional rescue.

   Emergency supplies management is to record and manage the existing
   relief supplies, and a relief supplies database is established for
   it in order to discover the shortage of supply materials in time 
   and provide material guarantee for accident rescue.

   Emergency disaster statistics is provided for inquiring about the
   accidents which have happened with conditions of disaster type, 
   loss situation and years.


3.2 Emergency Mechanism Composition (EMC)

   EMC module is provided for making overall arrangements for the
   internal rescue work expediently, and making the corresponding
   rescue and deploying the appropriate relief supplies to ensure
   the smooth progress of the rescue.

   Departments or units at different levels set up command centers
   according to the type of incident and call resources plan 
   information and configuration information in the preset, where
   modern technologies are supplied to retrieve and deploy, such
   as spatial information (digital maps of the accident scene),
   expert resource database, trade and professional 
   characteristics, event estimation, aid guarantee, rescue 
   manpower, departments and appropriate resources.

   EMC module is composed by the general scene headquarters,
   technical rescue organizations, emergency rescue organizations,
   security guard organizations, rescue evacuation organizations, 
   medical care organizations and material supply organizations.
   Each part has their respective functions and duties, and this
   clear division mechanism ensures effective emergency rescue.



Huang, et al.              Expires - March 14, 2012            [Page 4]

Internet Draft      ECDCS Based on Geographic Information    March 2012




3.3 Command and Dispatch Process (CDP)

   The responsibility of CDP contains warning after the accident,
   accident rescue, emergency response agencies and their place
   of duty, dealing with the aftermath and other related issues
   in real time with visual management. The goal of intelligent
   alarming can be reached through multi-angle information
   collecting which providing scientific decision making proofs
   for visual command and dispatch as well. CDP module provides
   tracking function with warning, rescue, rehabilitation and so on.

   Thus, the CDP module can be composed by emergency case startup,
   emergency organization establishment and emergency dispatch
   handling. These three parts complete all functions of CDP, such
   as special command, group command, special report, command
   transferring, command authority, command coordination, command
   call and command advance notice. The process can monitor
   terminal audio and video of command and dispatch systems, and it
   can take over any command terminal.




3.4 Command and Communications Platform (CCP)

   CCP based on the handset message service is one of the most
   important communication means for completing daily emergency duty
   and ensuring all emergency response incidents disposal well, and
   through existing or new mobile command vehicle it achieves the
   purpose of emergency communications.

   CCP send text messages according to the specific accident level
   and types if an emergency occurs in underground mine and the
   corresponding relief route can be produced according to the
   specific accident circumstances. Emergency response agencies
   receive text messages, then they notify the various departments
   to start relief and rescue work in time. Each department 
   understands the current disaster relief situation, and through
   the most effective line rescue and relief work can be carried out.













Huang, et al.              Expires - March 14, 2012            [Page 5]

Internet Draft      ECDCS Based on Geographic Information    March 2012


4  Summary

   Emergency command and dispatch communication is an important point
   in digital mine construction. It is beneficial to reduce the loss
   and impact caused by unexpected mime events, and through it lives
   and safety of workers are attained protection. ECDCS present in 
   this document can solve emergencies well, and this document 
   provides a reference system model for command and dispatch 
   communication.


5  Security Considerations

   Security can not be considerd in the emergency command and dispatch
   communication software, though it is an integral concern for digital
   mine construction. 


6  IANA Considerations

   This document does not have any implications for IANA.


7  Acknowledgments
   The research was supported by National High Technology Research and
   Development Program of P. R. China (No.2009AA062705).


8  References

   [1] Lv Jing, Liu Zhenling. "Integrated Communication System for 
   Urban Emergency Command", 2011 International Conference on CASE,
   July 2011.

   [2] Li Jian, Wang Xiaokun, Chen Weiqiang, Zhu Zhong. "Study on
   Urban Public Transportation Emergency Command System Platform",
   2010 Second World Congress on Software Engineering, December 2010.

   [3] Ma Yongqiang, An Jiyu. "Research on structure of information
   fusion of Campus Emergency Command System", 2010 International
   Conference on E-Product E-Service and E-Entertainment, November
   2010.


Author's Addresses

   Qiuxiang Huang
   Western Mining Company Limited
   No. 52 Five Four Street, Xining, Qinghai, 810001
   P. R. China 

   Email: huanqx@163.com


Huang, et al.              Expires - March 14, 2012            [Page 6]

Internet Draft      ECDCS Based on Geographic Information    March 2012
