Internet Engineering Task Force                           Q. X. Huang
INTERNET-DRAFT                         Western Mining Company Limited
<draft-qxhuang-uwn-arch-00.txt>                              J. H. Hu
Intended status: Informational                             U. S. T. B
Expires: January 19, 2012                             August 18, 2011

              Ubiquitous Wisdom Networking Architecture
                   draft-qxhuang-uwn-arch-00.txt

Abstract 
                   
   This document describes the concept of wisdom networks. To begin  
   with, some related intelligent networks are overviewed and the  
   wisdom network is proposed. Then, the analysis of wisdom node is 
   outlined. Furthermore, the architecture of wisdom network is   
   proposed. Finally, open research issues for the realization of 
   wisdom network are also discussed.


Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with 
   the provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents 
   at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as 
   reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.
   
   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 18, 2012.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Huang&Hu              Expires - January 19, 2012             [Page 1]

Internet Draft      Ubiquitous Wisdom Networking Arch    January 2012
   


Table of Contents

   1 Terminology.....................................................3
   2 Introduction....................................................3
   3 Wisdom Philosophy...............................................3
      3.1 The concept of wisdom......................................3
      3.2 UWN Nodes..................................................4
      3.3 The Definition of UWN......................................4
   4 The Architectural Description...................................5
   5 Open research issues............................................6
      5.1 Wisdom measurement problems................................6
      5.2 Management of wisdom nodes.................................6
      5.3 Network Organization Technical Issues......................6
      5.4 Security Problems..........................................7
   6 Security Considerations.........................................7
   7 IANA Considerations.............................................7
   8 Acknowledgments.................................................7
   9 References......................................................7
   Author's Addresses................................................7



































Huang&Hu              Expires - January 19, 2012             [Page 2]

Internet Draft      Ubiquitous Wisdom Networking Arch    January 2012


1  Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].

   This document uses terms from [RFC3261].
                 
2  Introduction 
   This document describes architecture for ubiquitous wisdom networking
   (UWN). In the wisdom philosophy description part, the concept of 
   wisdom is introduced and the definition of the wisdom node in UWN is 
   given. Furthermore, the document develops the framework of UWN, and 
   three kinds of architecture are detailed. Since the traditional 
   ubiquitous network which is based on intelligence can no longer meet 
   the growing demand for information of humanity, we expect the UWN 
   architecture described here to be utilized in various practical 
   applications, including those subject to technologies of remote 
   monitor in the construction of digital mine. 

   In a sense, the architecture of UWN provides a common goal for 
   network-related parties, which is to increase the wisdom of 
   networks. Through the introduction of the wisdom, UWN will realize a
   high degree of unity among the academic research, technology 
   development, equipment manufacturing, network operation and policy 
   setting.


3  Wisdom philosophies 

3.1 The concept of wisdom

   First we should make it clear that wisdom is different from 
   intelligence. This can be expressed as the following three aspects. 
   Firstly, the relationship between intelligence and wisdom is not 
   including simply, because their abilities involve kinds of fields 
   respectively. Secondly, they emphasis different aspects - 
   intelligent emphasis the ability, while wisdom emphasis the 
   perception. Thirdly, the objectives to be achieved are distinct - 
   intelligence goes to the improvement and perfection, while wisdom 
   is faced to surpass the boundary.

   Generally, wisdom can be distilled from knowledge, knowledge can be
   derived from information, information can be gathered from data and
   finally data can be assembled, acquired, switched and channeled by 
   the existing tools and techniques borrowed from computer science and
   network technology. To a network, wisdom is acquired as follows: 
   to begin with, the collected raw data is processed to information. 
   Then, through controlling the information, we establish a credible 
   and persuasive knowledge base. Finally, wisdom extracted from the 
   knowledge base, and other knowledge with no wisdom we call it simple
   knowledge.



Huang&Hu              Expires - January 19, 2012             [Page 3]

Internet Draft      Ubiquitous Wisdom Networking Arch    January 2012


3.2 UWN Nodes

   The nodes in UWN are wisdom nodes. According to the level of the 
   wisdom that the node has, we classify four kinds of wisdom: Super 
   Wisdom (SW), High-level Wisdom (HW), Mid-level Wisdom (MW) and 
   Elementary Wisdom (EW). Then, four kinds of nodes are obtained, i.e.
   elementary wisdom nodes, mid-level wisdom nodes, high-level wisdom 
   nodes, and super wisdom nodes.

   The EW is the basic wisdom that any nodes should possess while only
   very few nodes have SW. The wisdom amount of a node is unfixed during
   its lifetime. The node which has low level of wisdom can raise their 
   wisdom capacity to a high level over time. 

   There are two extreme cases when wisdom is measured. The first case 
   is that wisdom is infinite, and it corresponds to the probability of
   the inevitable occurrence event in the standard event field, namely
   1, and that is the case of SWN. The second case is that there is no
   wisdom, which corresponds to the probability of the event that is 
   unlikely to occur in the standard event field, namely 0. The two 
   extreme forms can be obtained from the definition, but in real life
   situations turn up between them.

3.3 The Definition of UWN

   The UWN is a communication network composed of kinds of wisdom 
   nodes, and it provides ultimate services which based on the wisdom
   for network users. One with a high perception can improve ability 
   easily in kinds of fields. But in turn, one of many-sided abilities
   is not likely easy to improve its perception. Therefore, the network
   with the highest wisdom capacity is the ideal network, and it is the
   ultimate requirement.

   The UWN reflects the wisdom characteristic in 3 aspects: (1) when the
   network is handling with the incident, it can always select the best
   kind of strategy; (2) the network can know its insufficient aspects 
   by itself to realize new or potential needs from users, thus it can 
   prepare for the implementation; and (3) the network can improve the 
   wisdom ability of the outside through the dynamic learning feedback 
   mechanism.

   In UWN, both human beings and other objects use their own wisdom 
   smoothly, and they wisely provide and accept kinds of services.












Huang&Hu              Expires - January 19, 2012             [Page 4]

Internet Draft      Ubiquitous Wisdom Networking Arch    January 2012


4  The Architectural Description

   The UWN architecture can be descript from three constituent parts, 
   i.e. the layer architecture, the abstract architecture, and the 
   technological frame.

   The layer architecture of UWN consists of the application layer, 
   wisdom layer, transport layer, network layer, data link layer and
   physical layer. We give the transport layer, network layer, data 
   link layer and physical layer a joint name - general based layer. 
   The layer between general based layer and the application layer is
   the wisdom layer. The function of each general based layer is similar
   to the according layer in traditional networks. The new layer - 
   wisdom layer provides services that network wants. The wisdom layer 
   is able to connect low layers, in DTN [1], the wisdom layer is 
   depicted as the bundle layer, and thus the application programs can 
   achieve multi-regional inter-communication.

   The abstract architecture consists of the perceptive extension plan,
   network plane and service and application plane. The main function
   of the perceptive extension plan is to realize information 
   collection, capture and object identification. The network plane 
   optimizes network features according to the perceptive extension 
   plan, to support material-to-material and material-to-man or 
   man-to-material communication well. The service and application plane
   is oriented to various applications. The task of this plan is to 
   realize the information processing, collaboration, sharing and 
   decision.

   The technological frame consists of the data platform, control 
   platform, knowledge platform, management platform and service and  
   support platform. In [2], the data platform, control platform and
   knowledge platform are described clearly. It depicted that the data
   plane concerns the basic data necessary for the localization process,
   the control platform is in charge of controlling data plane's 
   entities in order to retrieve the necessary data, and the knowledge 
   platform provides a global view of all information concerning the 
   network. The management plane involves all management issues, such
   as mobility, task, security, etc. The service and support platform
   involves many fields, such as common middleware, information opening
   platform, cloud computing and service support.

   The correlation between the abstract architecture and the 
   technological frame is that, according to each architecture function,
   the data platform corresponds to the perceptive extension plan, 
   control platform, knowledge platform and management platform 
   correspond to network plane, and service and support platform
   corresponds to the service and application plane.








Huang&Hu              Expires - January 19, 2012             [Page 5]

Internet Draft      Ubiquitous Wisdom Networking Arch    January 2012



5  Open research issues

   Many open research issues in UWN that need in-depth study inevitably
   exist. We list four important issues here.

5.1 Wisdom measurement problems

   In UWN, the specific wisdom capacity measurement is an emergent 
   problem needed to be solved. Moreover, when the wisdom node can
   be considered reaching a high wisdom level as the wisdom capacity
   increases is worth discussing.

   Two aspects should be considered. The first one is the definition
   problem, such as definitions of the standard event field and its
   probability; the second one is the equivalent mechanism establishing
   problem. The primary problem that should be taken particular 
   attention during researches is that there is no uniform standard for
   wisdom comparison at all. To be intuitively, the wisdom shown in
   harsh environments is higher than it shown under normal conditions
   when choose a good strategy.

5.2 Management problems of wisdom nodes

   Since wisdom nodes are deployed arbitrarily in UWN, relevant 
   mechanisms that nodes join and exit the network needed to be 
   established, and how to describe items of the mechanism will also be
   an issue. Moreover, the wisdom network can not be limited to 
   distribute on the earth only. That is because the concept of SP is
   too small, and the wisdom network need to exceed the scope of the
   earth. Therefore, we can extend the wisdom network to universe in
   future, and establish various kinds of wisdom networks, such as the
   wisdom solar system network, the wisdom Milky Way network, the wisdom
   galaxy cluster network and the wisdom galaxy cluster network.

5.3 Network Organization Technical Issues

   Self-organization in the wisdom network involves a lot of related
   technology researches, such as OFDM modulation and demodulation
   technologies, channel coding and decoding technologies, 
   synchronization technology and RFID, etc. The wisdom network must
   be the trend of future networks, and its application will be very
   extensive. For various applications and different networking modes,
   how to organize the network nodes effectively will be an open 
   research issue.










Huang&Hu              Expires - January 19, 2012             [Page 6]

Internet Draft      Ubiquitous Wisdom Networking Arch    January 2012


5.4 Security Problems

   In UWN, the number of nodes is very large, so the network security
   issue will be an important aspect that should be considered
   seriously. In order to realize the secure network environment for
   interactive identification information and to start the appropriate
   security mechanism in a dynamic way, security issues of UWN become
   unavoidable.

   Other than cryptography, key management, routing security, location
   aware security, data fusion security, physical security and data 
   link security, we also need to consider the security of the wisdom
   layer (e.g. the authentication problem of wisdom nodes).


6  Security Considerations

   Security is an integral concern for the design of UWN Architecture,
   but its use is optional.  Sections 5.4 of this document present
   some factors to consider for securing the UWN architecture.


7  IANA Considerations

   This document does not have any implications for IANA.


8  Acknowledgments
   The research was supported by National High Technology Research and
   Development Program of P. R. China (No.2009AA062705).


9  References

   [1] V. Cerf et al, "Delay-Tolerant Networking Architecture", RFC
   4838, April 2007.

   [2] Mathieu Bouet, Shahab Gashti, Guy Pujolle. "An Energy-Aware
   Autonomic Architecture for Localization in Ubiquitous Networks", 
   Proceedings of Wireless Communications and Networking Conference,
   April 2009.


Author's Addresses

   Qiuxiang Huang
   Western Mining Company Limited
   No. 52 Five Four Street, Xining, Qinghai, 810001
   P. R. China 

   Email: hujiahui17@126.com





Huang&Hu              Expires - January 19, 2012             [Page 7]

Internet Draft      Ubiquitous Wisdom Networking Arch    January 2012
