


MMUSIC                                                          R. Ejzak
Internet-Draft                                            Alcatel-Lucent
Intended status: Informational                         February 26, 2013
Expires: August 30, 2013


                         Alternatives to BUNDLE
               draft-ejzak-mmusic-bundle-alternatives-01

Abstract

   This paper discusses some potential modifications to the BUNDLE
   proposal for multiplexing of multiple media types within a single
   5-tuple to address limitations of the current proposal and
   alternatives already considered by MMUSIC.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 30, 2013.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.




Ejzak                    Expires August 30, 2013                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft             BUNDLE alternatives             February 2013


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Issues with BUNDLE  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   3.  Potential solutions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
     3.1.  Unspecified address for subsequent m lines in SDP offer . . 4
     3.2.  Unspecified address for subsequent m lines in SDP
           answer  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
     3.3.  Hybrid approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   4.  Discussion  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   5.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   6.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   7.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9





































Ejzak                    Expires August 30, 2013                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft             BUNDLE alternatives             February 2013


1.  Introduction

   BUNDLE [I-D.ietf-mmusic-sdp-bundle-negotiation] provides for the
   multiplexing of the media associated with multiple SDP [RFC4566] m
   lines into a single 5-tuple and RTP [RFC3550] session, thus providing
   many potential advantages in reducing the messages needed for ICE
   [RFC5245] candidate gathering (particularly for server reflexive
   candidates) and reducing the messaging for DTLS [RFC6347] key
   exchange.  BUNDLE is signaled in an SDP offer by using the grouping
   framework to identify those m lines that are to share a single
   5-tuple.  The grouped m lines are all signaled with different port
   numbers in the first SDP offer/answer exchange to allow for
   successful negotiation without BUNDLE.  This is a change from the
   previous version of BUNDLE, which signaled the same port for each
   bundled m line.  The change was needed to work with legacy
   intermediaries that would fail the call on receipt an SDP offer with
   the same port on multiple m lines.  In the event that BUNDLE
   negotiation succeeds, each subsequent SDP offer is sent with the same
   port number for each valid m line in the bundle.  This is done to
   clearly signal to intermediaries the 5-tuple in use for each m line.


2.  Issues with BUNDLE

   BUNDLE always requires at least two SDP offer/answer exchanges to
   negotiate the (preferred) use of bundled media, but only one offer/
   answer exchange to reject bundled media.  BUNDLE is intended to
   minimize signaling rather than to increase it - and particularly the
   more expensive out-of-band signaling.

   Since the answerer can reject individual m lines (including the first
   one), it's not clear which 5-tuple will be in use for the bundle
   until the second offer/answer exchange completes, delaying call setup
   time in this case.

   In the event that a subsequent SDP offer/answer exchange is needed
   later during the session, BUNDLE requires the signaling of the same
   port for each bundled m line.  If there is an intermediary in the
   session performing 3pcc procedures as a B2BUA, then the intermediary
   may send an empty (SDP-less) re-INVITE request to a WebRTC endpoint
   to trigger sending of an SDP offer, which is a common 3pcc scenario.
   If the purpose of the empty re-INVITE is to establish a connection to
   a different media endpoint and the SDP offer is forwarded to the new
   endpoint via a legacy intermediary that requires unique ports on m
   lines, then the 3pcc procedure will fail and there is no simple work-
   around.  While it is possible to provide an API option to request a
   new offer with different port numbers, there is no reliable way to
   anticipate when such a 3pcc scenario might occur so there is still



Ejzak                    Expires August 30, 2013                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft             BUNDLE alternatives             February 2013


   the risk of 3pcc scenario failure.


3.  Potential solutions

   This paper proposes two modifications to BUNDLE for consideration.
   As with the current version of BUNDLE, these proposals assume the
   signaling of different port numbers for each m line in the SDP offer
   to avoid call failure and retry.  Since the proposals address
   different scenarios and are compatible with one another, both could
   be adopted, as also discussed below as a "hybrid" option.

   Note that the paper only considers manipulation of the connection and
   port information in the subsequent m lines of the SDP offer and/or
   answer (in particular the use of the unspecified address).  Zero port
   is not considered due to its very specific meaning on an SDP m line.
   There are also some restrictions on the handling of DTLS crypto
   information since this is shared among the bundled m lines.  Changes
   to bandwidth, directionality, or other attributes are not considered
   since they are all needed to signal characteristics of the media
   associated with the m line.

   This paper does not discuss the syntax of the unspecified address for
   IPv6 as this has been covered elsewhere.

3.1.  Unspecified address for subsequent m lines in SDP offer

   This approach borrows a mechanism from Trickle ICE to avoid the
   signaling of any candidates for the subsequent m lines in the SDP
   offer.  The middle box will not allocate resources for these m lines
   when forwarding the SDP offer, and the SDP answerer will usually
   respond with the unspecified address for these m lines.  Even if the
   SDP answer includes valid connection information for these m lines,
   the middle box will still not allocate separate transport flows for
   them.

   If the SDP answerer chooses to reject the first m line(s) in the
   bundle group in the SDP offer (by setting port in the m line to
   zero), it places the intended port, connection, candidate and DTLS
   crypto information for the bundle in the first valid m line of the
   SDP answer and includes the unspecified address for all other m lines
   in the bundle group.  Because of this, it is understood by both
   endpoints that the 5-tuple connection, port and DTLS crypto
   information is to be based on the first valid m line in the SDP offer
   and the first valid m line in the SDP answer.  It is possible for
   this information to be included in different m lines in the answer
   compared to the offer, but with this rule there is no ambiguity as to
   the parameters of the transport connection, and the intermediary only



Ejzak                    Expires August 30, 2013                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft             BUNDLE alternatives             February 2013


   sees this SDP exchange if it has previously forwarded an indication
   of support for BUNDLE.

   In this relatively rare case where the answerer rejects the first
   (usually highest priority) m line, the offerer should send an updated
   offer acknowledging rejection of the initial m line(s) (with zero
   port), and with the transport information already in use for the
   bundle moved to the new first valid m line.  Simple intermediaries
   that only look at transport information in the SDP, e.g., to open
   pinholes, would be confused without a second SDP offer.

   For subsequent offers, the offerer will put the port, connection,
   candidate and DTLS crypto information in use for the bundle in the
   first valid m line of the new SDP offer to start the process again.

   If the SDP answerer chooses to not bundle media, then the SDP offerer
   will either need to perform Trickle ICE, if supported, or to send
   another SDP offer with valid connection, candidate and port
   information for each m line.

   The primary advantage of this approach is that it is unnecessary to
   allocate either any ICE candidates for the subsequent m lines or any
   middle box resources for these m lines.

   Another advantage of this approach is that media setup completes in
   one SDP offer/answer exchange for the most common scenarios with
   BUNDLE where the first bundled m line is acccepted by the answerer.
   The need of a second SDP offer/answer to support the less-preferred
   non-bundle scenario or to support the unlikely answerer's rejection
   of the first m line should be of less concern.

   This approach also eliminates redundant (and potentially conflicting)
   transport information from multiple m lines in both SDP offers and
   answers, thus improving readability and slightly decreasing the size
   of the SDP messages.

   It is possible that the middle box will not accept the SDP offer with
   an unspecified address, although RFC 3264 mandates support for this.

   RFC 3264 indicates that the use of unspecified address for an m line
   signals that "neither RTP nor RTCP should be sent to the peer".  It
   is understood with the BUNDLE extension defined here that this text
   is modified to mean that no RTP or RTCP is sent using the transport
   parameters defined for the media line.







Ejzak                    Expires August 30, 2013                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft             BUNDLE alternatives             February 2013


3.2.  Unspecified address for subsequent m lines in SDP answer

   To further reduce the potential for unsupported signaling at middle
   boxes and to avoid problems with the unbundled case, the solution
   might still signal valid connection and port information for all m
   lines in the bundle group of the first SDP offer (as in the current
   BUNDLE draft), thus potentially causing the middle box to
   unnecessarily allocate resources.  But if the SDP answerer decides to
   bundle media, then it can signal the unspecified address for the
   subsequent m lines in the bundle.

   With this approach, the middle box recognizing the unspecified
   address in subsequent m lines will release extraneous resources and
   avoid failure due to inactivity.

   If the SDP answerer chooses to reject the first m line(s) in the
   bundle group in the SDP offer (by setting port in the m line to
   zero), it places the intended port, connection, candidate and DTLS
   crypto information for the bundle in the first valid m line of the
   SDP answer and includes the unspecified address for all other m lines
   in the bundle group.  Because of this, it is understood by both
   endpoints that the 5-tuple connection, port and DTLS crypto
   information is to be based on the first valid m line in the SDP offer
   and the first valid m line in the SDP answer.  It is possible for
   this information to be included in different m lines in the answer
   compared to the offer, but with this rule there is no ambiguity as to
   the parameters of the transport connection, and the intermediary only
   sees this SDP exchange if it has previously forwarded an indication
   of support for BUNDLE.

   In this relatively rare case where the answerer rejects the first
   (usually highest priority) m line, the offerer should send an updated
   offer acknowledging rejection of the initial m line(s) (with zero
   port), and with the transport information already in use for the
   bundle moved to the new first valid m line.  Note in this case that
   the new SDP offer still includes valid port and connection
   information for all other valid m lines in the bundle group to be
   prepared for any 3pcc scenario.  Simple intermediaries that only look
   at transport information in the SDP, e.g., to open pinholes, would be
   confused without a second SDP offer.

   For subsequent offers, the offerer will put the port, connection,
   candidate and DTLS crypto information in use for the bundle in the
   first valid m line of the new SDP offer to start the process again.
   The new SDP offer still includes valid port and connection
   information for all other valid m lines in the bundle group.

   This approach is robust in the presence of 3pcc scenarios that



Ejzak                    Expires August 30, 2013                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft             BUNDLE alternatives             February 2013


   forward SDP to different endpoints.  This approach avoids sending the
   unspecified address to intermediaries that have not already indicated
   support for BUNDLE.

   This approach also eliminates redundant (and potentially conflicting)
   transport information from multiple m lines in the SDP answer, thus
   improving readability and slightly decreasing the size of the SDP
   messages.

   There is some small risk that the middle box will not recognize the
   unspecified address in the SDP answer (even though its support is
   mandated), but this risk is limited to the bundled case since the SDP
   for the unbundled case is not impacted.

   This approach has the disadvantage that the offerer must allocate
   connection and candidate information for all m lines in the bundle
   even when only one set of transportation information is used in the
   bundle case.

3.3.  Hybrid approach

   The two approaches "unspecified address for subsequent m lines in SDP
   offer" (option O) and "unspecified address for subsequent m lines in
   SDP answer" (option A) can be combined into a hybrid approach as
   follows.

   Option A is the default option for the initial SDP offer/answer
   exchange for a new session with an unknown endpoint.  This minimizes
   potential problems with intermediaries and allows for completion of
   media setup with one SDP offer/answer exchange for most bundled cases
   and all non-bundled cases.

   Option O can also be used for the initial SDP offer/answer exchange
   when it is known that bundle is likely to succeed and there is no
   concern with compatibility at intermediaries.

   Option O is the default option for subsequent SDP offer/answer
   exchanges during a session once it is established that both endpoints
   and intermediaries support BUNDLE.

   Option A is used for subsequent SDP offer/answer exchanges during a
   session if BUNDLE is not negotiated during the initial exchange or if
   there is any potential for a 3pcc scenario sending signaling through
   a new and potentially incompatible intermediary.

   This hybrid approach combines the best features of both alternatives
   and provides considerable flexibility in fine tuning the SDP offer/
   answer exchange for different applications.



Ejzak                    Expires August 30, 2013                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft             BUNDLE alternatives             February 2013


4.  Discussion

   Of the approaches presented in the paper, the author prefers the
   hybrid modification of BUNDLE described above over either individual
   approach and prefers all of them over the current BUNDLE.

   The hybrid approach allows completion of media and transport
   negotiation in one SDP offer/exchange in most cases, and most
   importantly when successfully negotiating the bundling of media.

   The hybrid approach is consistent with 3pcc using either signaling
   option, thus avoiding potential 3pcc failure scenarios.

   The hybrid approach minimizes redundant transport related information
   in the bundled m lines thus slightly reducing SDP size and processing
   requirements.

   The hybrid approach allows for customization of the procedures to
   simplify common (e.g., WebRTC only) cases and to avoid allocation of
   transport resources when they are not needed.

   There is some risk in including the unspecified address for certain m
   lines in the SDP.  This risk can be limited to exposing the
   unspecified address only in the SDP answer to intermediaries that
   have already signaled support for this extended BUNDLE proposal in
   the forwarded SDP offer.  Since support for the unspecified address
   is mandated by RFC 3264, this seems like a small risk.


5.  IANA Considerations

   To be completed.


6.  Security Considerations

   To be completed.


7.  Informative References

   [I-D.ietf-mmusic-sdp-bundle-negotiation]
              Holmberg, C. and H. Alvestrand, "Multiplexing Negotiation
              Using Session Description Protocol (SDP) Port Numbers",
              draft-ietf-mmusic-sdp-bundle-negotiation-00 (work in
              progress), February 2012.

   [RFC3550]  Schulzrinne, H., Casner, S., Frederick, R., and V.



Ejzak                    Expires August 30, 2013                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft             BUNDLE alternatives             February 2013


              Jacobson, "RTP: A Transport Protocol for Real-Time
              Applications", STD 64, RFC 3550, July 2003.

   [RFC4566]  Handley, M., Jacobson, V., and C. Perkins, "SDP: Session
              Description Protocol", RFC 4566, July 2006.

   [RFC5245]  Rosenberg, J., "Interactive Connectivity Establishment
              (ICE): A Protocol for Network Address Translator (NAT)
              Traversal for Offer/Answer Protocols", RFC 5245,
              April 2010.

   [RFC6347]  Rescorla, E. and N. Modadugu, "Datagram Transport Layer
              Security Version 1.2", RFC 6347, January 2012.


Author's Address

   Richard Ejzak
   Alcatel-Lucent
   1960 Lucent Lane
   Naperville, Illinois  60563-1594
   US

   Email: richard.ejzak@alcatel-lucent.com



























Ejzak                    Expires August 30, 2013                [Page 9]

