


MPLS Working Group                                                L. Jin
Internet-Draft                                           ZTE Corporation
Intended status: Standards Track                               F. Jounay
Expires: August 21, 2011                                  France Telecom
                                                               M. Bhatia
                                                          Alcatel-Lucent
                                                       February 17, 2011


   Extensions to Resource Reservation Protocol - Traffic Engineering
   (RSVP-TE) for Hub and Spoke Multipoint Label Switched Paths (LSPs)
                   draft-jjb-mpls-rsvp-te-hsmp-lsp-00

Abstract

   In Multiprotocol Label Switching (MPLS) and Generalized MPLS (GMPLS)
   environment, the RSVP-TE based Point-to-Multipoint (P2MP) LSP allows
   traffic to transmit from root to leaf node, but there is no co-routed
   reverse path for traffic from leaf to root node.  This draft
   introduces a Hub and Spoke Multipoint (HSMP) LSP, which allows
   traffic from both the root to the leaves through a P2MP LSP and also
   the leaves to the root along a co-routed reverse path.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 21, 2011.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of



Jin, et al.              Expires August 21, 2011                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft      RSVP-TE Hub-Spoke Multipoint LSP       February 2011


   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Application  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     1.1.  Time Synchronization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     1.2.  P2MP Pseudowire based L2VPNs (VPMS and VPLS) . . . . . . .  6

   2.  Comparing Hub-Spoke MP LSP with P2MP and Unidirectional
       Reverse LSP  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     2.1.  Number of Path and Resv State Blocks . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     2.2.  Hardware Programming and Label Utilization . . . . . . . .  8
     2.3.  RSVP Control Traffic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8

   3.  Setting up a Hub and Spoke Multipoint LSP with RSVP-TE . . . .  9
     3.1.  Hub and Spoke Multipoint LSP and Path Messages . . . . . .  9
     3.2.  Procedures for Hub and Spoke Multipoint LSP  . . . . . . .  9
     3.3.  Bandwidth Allocation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10

   4.  Setting up the Hub Spoke Multipoint  LSP . . . . . . . . . . . 11

   5.  Grafting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13

   6.  Pruning  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14

   7.  Refresh Reduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15

   8.  Fast Reroute . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16

   9.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17

   10. Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18

   11. IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19

   12. References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
     12.1. Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
     12.2. Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20

   Appendix 1.  Appendix: Alternate Mechanism to set up a reverse
                LSP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22




Jin, et al.              Expires August 21, 2011                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft      RSVP-TE Hub-Spoke Multipoint LSP       February 2011


   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23


















































Jin, et al.              Expires August 21, 2011                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft      RSVP-TE Hub-Spoke Multipoint LSP       February 2011


   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC2119 [RFC2119].

   When used in lower case, these words convey their typical use in
   common language, and are not to be interpreted as described in
   RFC2119 [RFC2119].












































Jin, et al.              Expires August 21, 2011                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft      RSVP-TE Hub-Spoke Multipoint LSP       February 2011


1.  Application

   The proposed technique targets one-to-many applications that require
   reverse one-to-one traffic flow (thus many one-to-one in the reverse
   direction).

   There are a few applications that could use such kind of Resource
   Reservation Protocol - Traffic Engineering (RSVP-TE) based Hub and
   Spoke Multipoint LSPs.

1.1.  Time Synchronization

   The delivery of time synchronization to end equipments, such as base
   stations, can be achieved using a time protocol as [IEEE] (also known
   as PTP).  This protocol defines Transparent Clock (TC) function,
   which can be used in transport nodes to improve the accuracy of time
   synchronization.  Two types of TCs exist in [IEEE]: End-to-end
   Transparent Clock (E2E TC) and Peer-to-peer Transparent Clock (P2P
   TC).  P2P TCs assume that the link delays between the different nodes
   are calculated

   Assuming that a chain of P2P TCs is used between a PTP master and a
   PTP slave, time synchronization can be delivered to the PTP slave by
   sending timestamps only in the direction master to slave (one way
   mode), via PTP Sync messages.  This is possible because of the link
   delay calculation performed locally by each node, which enables it to
   calculate the propagation delay over the path.  This scenario permits
   that the same PTP Sync messages would be sent by the PTP master to
   all the PTP slaves.

   In this scenario (chain of P2P TCs), the PTP slave might have to send
   also messages (not carrying timestamps) back to the PTP master in
   some cases.  For instance, PTP Signaling messages could be sent back
   to the PTP master.  These PTP Signaling messages are not intended to
   be received by the other PTP slaves.

   By using Point-to-Multipoint (P2MP) technology to transmit PTP Sync
   messages will greatly improve the bandwidth usage for above
   applications.  This will also be useful for monitoring performance
   metrics for two-way delay and related metrics such as delay variation
   and loopback measurement.  Current RSVP-TE based Point-to-Multipoint
   LSP mechanism only provides unidirectional path from the root to the
   leaf nodes, which cannot fulfill the above new requirement (i.e. need
   for a reverse path for the PTP Signaling messages).

   This draft attempts to solve this problem.  RSVP-TE based Hub and
   Spoke P2MP LSP described in this draft provides a co-routed reverse
   path from the leaf to the root based on current unidirectional Point-



Jin, et al.              Expires August 21, 2011                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft      RSVP-TE Hub-Spoke Multipoint LSP       February 2011


   to-Multipoint LSP.

1.2.  P2MP Pseudowire based L2VPNs (VPMS and VPLS)

   Point-to-Multipoint (P2MP) Pseudowires (PW) described in
   [I-D.ietf-pwe3-p2mp-pw] requires an additional reverse LSP to be set
   up from the leaf node (referred as egress PE) to root node (referred
   as ingress PE).  Instead, if HSMP LSP is used to multiplex P2MP PW,
   the reverse path can also be multiplexed to HSMP upstream path to
   avoid setting up an independent reverse path.  In that case, the
   operational cost will be reduced for maintaining only one HSMP LSP,
   instead of P2MP LSP and n (number of leaf nodes) P2P reverse LSPs

   The VPMS defined in [I-D.ietf-l2vpn-vpms-frmwk-requirements] requires
   reverse path from the leaf to the root node.  The P2MP PW multiplexed
   to HSMP LSP can provide VPMS with reverse path, without introducing
   independent reverse paths from each leaf to the root.

   The P2MP PW multiplexed to HSMP LSP can also be used for VPLS
   [RFC4672], which will reduce the overall broadcast/multicast
   utilization for VPLS.  In current VPLS implementations with a full
   mesh of P2P LSPs between PEs, broadcast, unknown and multicast (BUM)
   traffic is efficiently distributed over the physical links between
   Provider (P) and Provider Edge (PE) routers.
   [I-D.ietf-l2vpn-vpls-mcast] and
   [I-D.ietf-l2vpn-ldp-vpls-broadcast-exten] leverages this constraint
   by introducing the usage of P2MP PW and/or P2MP LSP.  But a specific
   P2P PW over P2P LSP is still needed for unicast traffic between the
   PEs.

   In the VPLS implementation scenario with P2MP PW multiplexed to HSMP
   LSPs, each PE signals a P2MP PW with itself as a root to all other
   PEs in the VPLS.  Thereafter, all BUM traffic from this PE will use
   this P2MP PW.  Unicast (learnt) traffic from a particular PE (e.g.
   PE1) to another PE (e.g.  PE2) will be sent from leaf to root using
   the reverse path of P2MP PW where PE2 is the root.

   This simplifies the VPLS implementation by reducing (a) link
   utilization for the BUM traffic and (b) the total number of LSPs
   maintained by each PE (i.e. instead of requiring a full mesh of LSPs,
   PEs now only require one HSMP LSP).  It also helps in avoiding the
   unnecessary MAC learning that happens on the hub PE routers in case
   of H-VPLS.








Jin, et al.              Expires August 21, 2011                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft      RSVP-TE Hub-Spoke Multipoint LSP       February 2011


2.  Comparing Hub-Spoke MP LSP with P2MP and Unidirectional Reverse LSP

   An HSMP LSP provides a Point-to-Multipoint reachability from the root
   node to the leaf nodes and a unicast reachability from all the leaf
   nodes back to the root node.  An obvious question that comes up is
   that how is this better than setting up a P2MP LSP from a root node
   and Unidirectional reverse LSPs back from the leaves to the root
   node.  This section compares the two mechanisms and demonstrates how
   establishing one HSMP LSP is better than establishing a P2MP LSP with
   reverse LSPs from the leaves back to the root.

   Consider the topology as shown in Figure 1.  Router A wants to
   establish a Point-to-Multipoint connectivity to Routers E, F, G and H
   and also wants a Unicast path back from these routers to itself.
   There are two ways to accomplish this.  In the first, we set up a
   HSMP LSP between A, E, F, G and H. In the second, we set up a P2MP
   LSP between A, E, F, G and H and establish regular LSPs back from
   these routers to A.

                                    A
                                    |
                                    B
                                   / \
                                  C   D
                                 / \ / \
                                E  F G  H

                                 Figure 1

2.1.  Number of Path and Resv State Blocks

   When an RSVP-capable router receives an initial Path message, it
   creates a path state block (PSB) for that particular session.  Each
   PSB consists of parameters derived from the received Path message
   such as SESSION, SENDER_TEMPLATE, SENDER_TSPEC, RSVP_HOP objects, and
   the outgoing interface provided by the IGP routing.  Similarly, as a
   Resv message travels upstream toward the sender, it creates a
   reservation state block (RSB) in each RSVP-capable node along the way
   which stores information derived from the objects in the received
   Resv message, such as SESSION, RSVP_HOP, FLOWSPEC, FILTERSPEC, STYLE,
   etc objects.  The PSB and the RSB need to be periodically refreshed
   by the Path and the Resv messages.

   In case of HSMP LSP, the number of PSBs and the RSBs is the same as
   that for establishing a single P2MP LSP and is a function of how the
   P2MP LSP is signaled.  It is equal to the number of S2L sub-LSPs of
   the P2MP LSP if each S2L sub-lsp is signaled independently.  It is
   one, if an aggregated mode is used where multiple sub-lsps of the



Jin, et al.              Expires August 21, 2011                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft      RSVP-TE Hub-Spoke Multipoint LSP       February 2011


   P2MP LSP are signaled togethar.

   In the second case routers need to maintain this state for the P2MP
   LSP and all the Unidirectional LSPs that go via it.

   Lets look at the state that branch node B needs to maintain.  In case
   of HSMP LSP it is the same as a P2MP LSP.  In the other approach it
   needs to maintain state for the following LSPs:

   1.  P2MP LSP from A and E, F, G and H

   2.  Reverse LSP ECBA

   3.  Reverse LSP FCBA

   4.  Reverse LSP GDBA

   5.  Reverse LSP HDBA

   We can thus clearly see that the amount of state that routers need to
   maintain in the second approach is much more than the HSMP LSP.  It
   becomes all the more pronounced when the P2MP LSP is signalled using
   the aggregated approach described in [RFC4875] where a single Path
   and Resv message is used to signal the entire P2MP LSP.  In such
   cases the amount of state that such branch nodes need to maintain
   increase linearly with the leaf nodes that get added to the P2MP LSP.

2.2.  Hardware Programming and Label Utilization

   In the HSMP LSP the LSR B advertises the same (upstream) label to C
   and D, thus consumes only one label and needs to only program one
   entry in the ILM table.

   In the second approach, LSR B needs to advertise two different labels
   to LSRs C and D and will thus consume 2 ILM entries in HW.

   We can clearly see that the number of labels consumed in the second
   approach will increase linearly with the amount of branching that
   happens on that LSR.  It will further aggravate as the number of P2MP
   LSPs increase.

2.3.  RSVP Control Traffic

   In the second approach, LSR B will have RSVP control traffic for the
   P2MP LSP and all the Unidirectional reverse LSPs that pass through
   it.  In case of HSMP LSR B will only have the RSVP traffic for the
   P2MP LSP.




Jin, et al.              Expires August 21, 2011                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft      RSVP-TE Hub-Spoke Multipoint LSP       February 2011


3.  Setting up a Hub and Spoke Multipoint LSP with RSVP-TE

   The Hub and Spoke Multipoint LSP comprises of one downstream
   unidirectional P2MP LSP from ingress LSR to each of egress LSR, and a
   co-routed upstream path from each of egress LSR to ingress LSR.

   [RFC3473] describes a point-to-point bidirectional LSP mechanism for
   the GMPLS architecture, where a bidirectional LSP setup is indicated
   by the presence of an Upstream_Label object in the Path message.  The
   Upstream_Label object has the same format as the generalized label,
   and uses Class-Number 35 (of form 0bbbbbbb) and the C-Type of the
   label being used.  Hub and Spoke Multipoint LSP describe in this
   draft will use similar mechanism, and reuse the Upstream_Label object
   defined in [RFC3473].  Note: the downstream label assignment is still
   applied, and upstream direction is based on the h&s topology (hub =
   upstream, spoke= downstream), rather on forwarding direction.

3.1.  Hub and Spoke Multipoint LSP and Path Messages

   [RFC4875] allows a P2MP LSP to be signaled using one or more Path
   messages .  Each Path message may signal one or more source to leaf
   (S2L) sub-LSPs.  This document assumes that a unique Path message is
   being used to signal each individual sub-LSP of the HSMP LSP.  Later
   versions of this document can describe mechanisms to use a single
   Path message to describe each component sub LSP of the HSMP LSP.

3.2.  Procedures for Hub and Spoke Multipoint LSP

   The process of establishing a Hub and Spoke Multipoint LSP follows
   the establishment of a unidirectional P2MP LSP define in [RFC4875]
   with some additions.  To support Hub and Spoke Multipoint LSPs an
   Upstream_Label object is added to the Path message.  The
   Upstream_Label object MUST indicate a label that is valid for
   forwarding at the time the Path message is sent.  When a Path message
   containing an Upstream_Label object is received, the receiver first
   verifies that the upstream label is acceptable.  If the label is not
   acceptable, the receiver MUST issue a PathErr message with a "Routing
   problem/Unacceptable label value" indication.

   The generated PathErr message MAY include an Acceptable Label Set
   defined in [RFC3473] section 4.1.

   The transit node must also allocate one label for the co-routed
   upstream path before propagating the Path message to all downstream
   nodes.  If a transit node is unable to allocate a label or internal
   resources, then it MUST issue a PathErr message with a "Routing
   problem/MPLS label allocation failure" indication.  With regards to
   the co-routed return path from the leafs to the root, the forwarding



Jin, et al.              Expires August 21, 2011                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft      RSVP-TE Hub-Spoke Multipoint LSP       February 2011


   table on transit node will have one incoming labels allocated for all
   of the outgoing interfaces, and one outgoing label received from
   Upstream_Label object in Path message sent by upstream node.  That
   means the traffic from different egress LSRs will be merged at each
   transit node, and will be sent together to upstream node, see section
   3.3 for more detail of bandwidth guarantee in this case.

   The Path messages sending downstream with same [P2MP ID, Tunnel ID,
   Extended Tunnel ID] tuple as part of the SESSION object and the
   [Tunnel Sender Address, LSP ID] tuple as part of the SENDER_TEMPLATE
   object, but may different [Sub-Group Originator ID, Sub-Group ID]
   MUST use same allocated label value for Upstream_Label object.

   Leaf nodes process Path messages as usual, with the exception that
   the upstream label should be used to transport data traffic
   associated with the Hub and Spoke Multipoint LSP upstream towards the
   root node.

   When a Hub and Spoke Multipoint LSP is removed, both upstream and
   downstream labels are invalidated and it is no longer valid to send
   data using the associated labels.

3.3.  Bandwidth Allocation

   The bandwidth allocation for upstream path from leaf to root could be
   same as the downstream path from root to leaf node [RFC3473], and the
   bandwidth will be guarantee only when there is no traffic merging
   happened on transit node.  If there are cases where leaf nodes send
   traffic to root node at the same time which may cause traffic to be
   merged on one physical link at transit node, then traffic overload
   may happen on these links.  There are several ways to avoid this kind
   of traffic overload.  One way is to let the application to do some
   delay at each leaf node to avoid traffic merging on some links of
   transit node.

   Some applications may not require bandwidth guarantee for the
   upstream path from leaf to root, then it is not necessary to allocate
   bandwidth for the upstream path.  The mechanism described in
   [I-D.ietf-ccamp-asymm-bw-bidir-lsps-bis] can be used to allocate zero
   bandwidth for the upstream path.

   The mechanism of providing asymmetric bandwidth allocation (non-zero
   bandwidth of upstream path) for HSMP LSP is out of the draft scope.








Jin, et al.              Expires August 21, 2011               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft      RSVP-TE Hub-Spoke Multipoint LSP       February 2011


4.  Setting up the Hub Spoke Multipoint  LSP

   The Following is an example of establishing a HSMP LSP using the
   procedures described in the previous sections.


                +-- Receiver
                |
                PE2   PE3 --- Receiver
                |     |
                P1 -- P3
               /
   Source --- PE1
               \
                P2 -- PE5 --- Receiver
                |
                PE4 --- Receiver

             Figure 2

   The mechanism is explained using Figure 1.  PE1 is a root LER (head
   end) node.  PE2, PE3, PE4 and PE5 are the leaf LER nodes.  P1 and P2
   are branch LSR nodes and P3 is a plain LSR node.

   1.  PE1 learns that PE2, PE3, PE4 and PE5 are interested in joining a
       HSMP tree with a P2MP ID of P2MP ID1.  We assume that PE1 learns
       of the egress LERs at different points in time.

   2.  PE1 computes the P2P path to reach PE3 and sends a Path message
       with ERO [PE1, P1, P3, PE3].  It also provides an Upstream Label
       UL1 in the Upstream_Label object that P1 should use when
       forwarding packets to PE1.

   3.  The Path message traverses hop-by-hop and finally reaches PE3.
       Assume that the Path message from P1 to P3 uses upstream label of
       UL3, in which case P1 must program the ILM to swap UL3 with UL1.
       The Path message from P3 to PE3 uses upstream label UL4, and thus
       P3 programs the ILM to swap UL4 with UL3.

   4.  PE3 responds with a Resv message that contains label L4, that P3
       should use when forwarding packets to PE3.  Similarly, the Resv
       from P3 to P1 contains label L3, that P1 should use when
       forwarding packets to P3.

   5.  Similarly when setting up the component sub-LSP from PE1 to PE2,
       PE1 will use the same Upstream label UL1 as it knows that this
       sub-LSP belongs to the same HSMP LSP because of the same P2MP
       session object that both sub-LSPs carry.



Jin, et al.              Expires August 21, 2011               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft      RSVP-TE Hub-Spoke Multipoint LSP       February 2011


   6.  The Path message, thus for this component sub-LSP goes with ERO
       [PE1, P1, PE2] along with the Upstream label UL1 that P1 should
       use when forwarding packets to PE1.

   7.  P1 forwards the Path message with a new Upstream label UL2.
       Finally, PE2 sends a Resv message containing label L2, that P1
       should use when forwarding packets to PE2.  P1 also understands
       that the Resv messages from PE2 and PE3 refer to the same HSMP
       LSP, because of the P2MP Session Object carried in each. [

   8.  P1 sends a separate Resv message to PE1 corresponding to each of
       the sub-LSPs, but uses the same label L1 since the two sub LSPs
       belong to the same HSMP LSP.

   9.  The other component sub LSPs are set up in a similar way as
       described above.



































Jin, et al.              Expires August 21, 2011               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft      RSVP-TE Hub-Spoke Multipoint LSP       February 2011


5.  Grafting

   The operation of adding leaf LER(s) to an existing HSMP LSP is termed
   grafting.  This operation allows leaf nodes to join a HSMP LSP at
   different points in time.

   The leaf LER(s) can be added by signaling only the impacted component
   sub- LSPs in a new Path message.  Hence, the existing component sub-
   LSPs do not have to be re-signaled.


                +-- Receiver
                |
                PE2   PE3 --- Receiver
                |     |
                P1 -- P3 -- P6 -- PE6 --- Receiver
               /
   Source --- PE1
               \
                P2 -- PE5 --- Receiver
                |
                PE4 --- Receiver

             Figure 3

   Assume PE1 needs to set up another sub-LSP from PE1 to PE6.  Being a
   part of the same HSMP LSP, PE1 MUST advertise the same Upstream Label
   to P1 in its Path message.  P1 advertises the same Upstream Label to
   P3.  P3 when sending the Path message to P6 would advertise a fresh
   Upstream label and similarly P6 would use a new upstream label when
   forwarding the Path message to PE6.

   PE6 sends a Resv message with a label back to P6.  P6, would send a
   new label back to P3.  P3 because of this new component sub-LSP (PE1-
   PE6) is now a branch LSR node that performs MPLS multicast
   replication.















Jin, et al.              Expires August 21, 2011               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft      RSVP-TE Hub-Spoke Multipoint LSP       February 2011


6.  Pruning

   The operation of removing egress LER nodes from an existing HSMP LSP
   is termed as pruning.  This operation allows leaf nodes to be removed
   from a HSMP LSP at different points in time.  This section describes
   the mechanisms to perform pruning.

   Assume that the LER PE6 wants to be removed from the HSMP LSP.  Since
   we used a unique Path message for each component sub LSP, the
   teardown will rely on generating a PathTear message for the
   corresponding Path message.  PE6 will send a Path Tear message with
   the SESSION and SENDER_TEMPLATE objects corresponding to the HSMP LSP
   and the [Sub-Group Originator ID, Sub-Group ID] tuple corresponding
   to the Path message.  P3 upon receiving the PathTear message would
   prune the MPLS multicast replication list and will become a normal
   RSVP LSR node.

   In the P2MP and HSMP context the PathTear is used for a specific
   component sub LSP teardown.  This does not necessarily mean the whole
   path's breakdown from upstream; hence the LSRs MUST retain the
   Upstream label until all the component sub LSPs of the HSMP LSP are
   torn down.

   When a HSMP LSP is removed by the root, a PathTear message MUST be
   generated for each Path message used to signal the HS Multipoint LSP.


























Jin, et al.              Expires August 21, 2011               [Page 14]

Internet-Draft      RSVP-TE Hub-Spoke Multipoint LSP       February 2011


7.  Refresh Reduction

   The refresh reduction procedures described in [RFC2961] are equally
   applicable to HS Multipoint LSPs described in this document.  Refresh
   reduction applies to individual messages and the state they install/
   maintain, and that continues to be the case for HS Multipoint LSPs.













































Jin, et al.              Expires August 21, 2011               [Page 15]

Internet-Draft      RSVP-TE Hub-Spoke Multipoint LSP       February 2011


8.  Fast Reroute

   [RFC4090] extensions can be used to perform fast reroute for the
   mechanism described in this document when applied within packet
   networks.

   This is still TBD.












































Jin, et al.              Expires August 21, 2011               [Page 16]

Internet-Draft      RSVP-TE Hub-Spoke Multipoint LSP       February 2011


9.  Acknowledgements

   We would like to thank Dimitri Papadimitriou, Yuji Kamite, Sebastien
   Jobert for their comments and feedback on the document.















































Jin, et al.              Expires August 21, 2011               [Page 17]

Internet-Draft      RSVP-TE Hub-Spoke Multipoint LSP       February 2011


10.  Security Considerations

   The same security considerations apply as for the RSVP-TE P2MP LSP
   specification, as described in [RFC4875].















































Jin, et al.              Expires August 21, 2011               [Page 18]

Internet-Draft      RSVP-TE Hub-Spoke Multipoint LSP       February 2011


11.  IANA Considerations

   No requests for IANA at this point of time.
















































Jin, et al.              Expires August 21, 2011               [Page 19]

Internet-Draft      RSVP-TE Hub-Spoke Multipoint LSP       February 2011


12.  References

12.1.  Normative References

   [I-D.ietf-ccamp-asymm-bw-bidir-lsps-bis]
              Takacs, A., Berger, L., Caviglia, D., Fedyk, D., and J.
              Meuric, "GMPLS Asymmetric Bandwidth Bidirectional Label
              Switched Paths (LSPs)",
              draft-ietf-ccamp-asymm-bw-bidir-lsps-bis-01 (work in
              progress), January 2011.

   [IEEE]     "IEEE Standard for a Precision Clock Synchronization
              Protocol for Networked Measurement and Control Systems",
              2008.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC3473]  Berger, L., "Generalized Multi-Protocol Label Switching
              (GMPLS) Signaling Resource ReserVation Protocol-Traffic
              Engineering (RSVP-TE) Extensions", RFC 3473, January 2003.

   [RFC4875]  Aggarwal, R., Papadimitriou, D., and S. Yasukawa,
              "Extensions to Resource Reservation Protocol - Traffic
              Engineering (RSVP-TE) for Point-to-Multipoint TE Label
              Switched Paths (LSPs)", RFC 4875, May 2007.

12.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.ietf-l2vpn-ldp-vpls-broadcast-exten]
              Delord, S., Key, R., Kamite, Y., Liu, Z., Paul, M., Kunze,
              R., Chen, M., and L. Jin, "Extension to LDP-VPLS for
              Ethernet Broadcast and Multicast",
              draft-ietf-l2vpn-ldp-vpls-broadcast-exten-00 (work in
              progress), February 2011.

   [I-D.ietf-l2vpn-vpls-mcast]
              Aggarwal, R., Kamite, Y., Fang, L., and Y. Rekhter,
              "Multicast in VPLS", draft-ietf-l2vpn-vpls-mcast-08 (work
              in progress), October 2010.

   [I-D.ietf-l2vpn-vpms-frmwk-requirements]
              Kamite, Y., JOUNAY, F., Niven-Jenkins, B., Brungard, D.,
              and L. Jin, "Framework and Requirements for Virtual
              Private Multicast Service (VPMS)",
              draft-ietf-l2vpn-vpms-frmwk-requirements-03 (work in
              progress), July 2010.




Jin, et al.              Expires August 21, 2011               [Page 20]

Internet-Draft      RSVP-TE Hub-Spoke Multipoint LSP       February 2011


   [I-D.ietf-pwe3-p2mp-pw]
              Martini, L., Boutros, S., Sivabalan, S., Konstantynowicz,
              M., Vecchio, G., Nadeau, T., JOUNAY, F., Niger, P.,
              Kamite, Y., Jin, L., Vigoureux, M., Ciavaglia, L., and S.
              Delord, "Signaling Root-Initiated Point-to-Multipoint
              Pseudowires using LDP", draft-ietf-pwe3-p2mp-pw-01 (work
              in progress), February 2011.

   [RFC2961]  Berger, L., Gan, D., Swallow, G., Pan, P., Tommasi, F.,
              and S. Molendini, "RSVP Refresh Overhead Reduction
              Extensions", RFC 2961, April 2001.

   [RFC4090]  Pan, P., Swallow, G., and A. Atlas, "Fast Reroute
              Extensions to RSVP-TE for LSP Tunnels", RFC 4090,
              May 2005.

   [RFC4672]  De Cnodder, S., Jonnala, N., and M. Chiba, "RADIUS Dynamic
              Authorization Client MIB", RFC 4672, September 2006.

































Jin, et al.              Expires August 21, 2011               [Page 21]

Internet-Draft      RSVP-TE Hub-Spoke Multipoint LSP       February 2011


1.  Appendix: Alternate Mechanism to set up a reverse LSP

   We had considered another approach where the leaves could set up a
   unidirectional LSP by reversing the RRO that they recieve in the S2L
   sub-LSP Path message and use that as the ERO in their Path message.
   This approach was rejected because this would have entailed setting
   up another reverse LSP which leads to more state being maintained on
   all the intermediate routers.  The reader is suggested to go through
   Section 2 which discusses this in detail.










































Jin, et al.              Expires August 21, 2011               [Page 22]

Internet-Draft      RSVP-TE Hub-Spoke Multipoint LSP       February 2011


Authors' Addresses

   Lizhong Jin
   ZTE Corporation
   Bibo Road, Shanghai  201203
   China

   Email: lizhong.jin@zte.com.cn


   Frederic Jounay
   France Telecom
   Lannion Cedex  95134
   France

   Email: frederic.jounay@orange-ftgroup.com


   Manav Bhatia
   Alcatel-Lucent
   Bangalore,
   India

   Email: manav.bhatia@alcatel-lucent.com



























Jin, et al.              Expires August 21, 2011               [Page 23]


