


Network Working Group                                            E. Lear
Internet-Draft                                        Cisco Systems GmbH
Intended status: BCP                                           P. Eggert
Expires: April 21, 2011                                             UCLA
                                                        October 18, 2010


         IANA Procedures for Maintaining the Timezone Database
                  draft-lear-iana-timezone-database-00

Abstract

   ATTENTION: This memo contains a DRAFT proposal for the IANA to assume
   operational responsibilities relating to the management of the
   Timezone (TZ) Database.  The authors seek comment and review of this
   proposal.  No action will be taken without rough consensus of the TZ
   community.

   The Timezone (TZ) Database consists of timezone information for all
   localities throughout the world.  This database has been meticulously
   maintained and distributed free of charge by a group of volunteers,
   coordinated by a single volunteer who is now planning to retire.
   This memo specifies a DRAFT PROPOSAL for the IANA procedures involved
   with maintenance of the TZ database and associated code, including
   how to submit proposed updates, how decisions for inclusion of those
   updates are made, and the selection of a designated expert BY AND FOR
   the timezone community.  The intent of this memo is, to the extent
   possible, document existing practice and provide a means to ease
   succession.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.




Lear & Eggert            Expires April 21, 2011                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft      Maintaining the Timezone Database       October 2010


   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 21, 2011.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the BSD License.


1.  Introduction

   ATTENTION: This memo contains a DRAFT proposal for the IANA to assume
   operational responsibilities relating to the management of the
   Timezone (TZ) Database.  The authors seek comment and review of this
   proposal.  No action will be taken without rough consensus of the TZ
   community.

   Since the early 1980s, a database that is in use on nearly all UNIX
   systems, Java systems, and other sorts of systems has been hosted at
   the National Institutes of Health.  [TZDB] The database consists of
   both historic and current entries for geographies throughout the
   world.  Associated with the database is a reference implementation of
   functions that can be used to convert time values.

   The database has been maintained by volunteers that participate in a
   mailing list that is also hosted at the NIH.  The database itself is
   updated approximately twenty times per year, depending on the year,
   based on information these experts provide to the maintainer.  Arthur
   David Olson has maintained the database, coordinated the mailing
   list, and provided a release platform since the database's inception.
   With his retirement now approaching it is necessary to provide a
   means for this good work to continue.  The Internet community owes
   Arthur Olson and the volunteers on the tz mailing list a debt of
   gratitude.

   The IANA provides registry services to the Internet community.  Those



Lear & Eggert            Expires April 21, 2011                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft      Maintaining the Timezone Database       October 2010


   registries are coordinated by technical experts who are designated by
   the Internet Engineering Steering Group (IESG).  The IANA is also
   well suited as a distribution platform for the TZ database itself.

   The IETF has for quite some time had the capability to maintain non-
   working group mailing lists.  The TZ mailing list would fit nicely
   just as such a list.

1.1.  Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].

   TZ Database  The TimeZone Database, sometimes referred to as the
      Olson Database.  This database consists of information about
      offsets from UTC for different localities, including daylight
      savings time (DST) transition information.
   TZ Coordinator  The person or people who maintain and manage release
      of the TZ Database.  The TZ coordinator also has responsibility
      for maintaining the TZ mailing list.  The TZ coordinatior is a
      Designated Expert, as defined in [RFC5226].
   TZ mailing list  The forum where matters relating to the TZ database
      and supporting code are discussed.

   The rest of this document specifies the following:

   1.  Transferring and maintenance of the TZ mailing list;
   2.  Procedures for selecting a technical expert for the technical
       expert who will play the role of coordinator, as well as release
       manager for the TZ database;
   3.  Procedures for updating the TZ database;
   4.  Maintenance and ownership of reference code; and
   5.  Ownership of the database.


2.  The TZ Mailing List

   For many years the TZ mailing list at the NIH has been the forum
   where discussion of changes to the TZ database and support files
   would take place.  In addition, the TZ mailing list is used to
   announce releases of the database.  Currently the TZ mailing list is
   administered by the TZ coordinator.

   This list membership will be transitioned to the IETF mail server.
   The TZ coordinator will continue to manage the list, in accordance
   with rules of governance for non-WG mailing lists (including, for
   example, the commonly used "Note Well" statement).  The list will be



Lear & Eggert            Expires April 21, 2011                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft      Maintaining the Timezone Database       October 2010


   used just as it has been, to learn of, discuss, and confirm TZ
   definition changes, as well as an announcement list for new versions
   of the database.  The TZ coordinator will continue to manage the
   list.


3.  Making Updates to the TZ Database

   Updates to the TZ database are made by the TZ coordinator in
   consultation with the TZ mailing list.  TZ coordinator is empowered
   to decide, as the designated expert, appropriate changes, but SHOULD
   take into account views expressed on the mailing list.

   The TZ coordinator will also decide the timing of database releases.
   The release itself today consists of several tar files that are
   downloaded from a well known location.

   Moving forward, the TZ database is to be signed prior to release
   using a well known key, along with any appropriate supporting
   information and distributed from a well known location that is
   advertised by IANA in a manner of its choosing.


4.  Selecting or Replacing a TZ Coordinator

   From time to time it will be necessary to replace a TZ Coordinator.
   This could occur for a number of reasons:

   o  The coordinator is retiring (as Arthur Olson is) or has announced
      that he or she will be unable to continue to perform the function;
   o  The coordinator is missing or has died;
   o  The coordinator is not performing the function in accordance with
      community wishes.

   In any of these cases, members of the community should raise the
   issue on the TZ list.  If a rough consensus can be formed easily, and
   quickly, then the results should be presented to the IESG for comment
   and review.  In keeping with [RFC5226], the IESG selects the TZ
   coordinator(s).  The IESG MUST use rough consensus of the TZ mailing
   list as their primary guide to further action, when it exists.  If
   the IESG determines that there is no rough consensus within the TZ
   community, the IESG will assign one of its members to develop that
   rough consensus on the TZ mailing list, and through whatever other
   means may be necessary.  If rough consensus still cannot be developed
   after one month, at the discretion of the IESG, it MAY then choose a
   replacement TZ coordinator.  The IESG is not an avenue for appeals of
   specific decisions of the coordinator, but rather a last resort when
   a coordinator is thought not to be functioning in an appropriate way.



Lear & Eggert            Expires April 21, 2011                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft      Maintaining the Timezone Database       October 2010


   N.B., the coordinator is a function, and may be filled by one OR MORE
   people, as the community sees fit.


5.  Maintenance and Distribution of Reference Code

   Currently the maintainer of the TZ database also maintains reference
   code.  This software is currently distributed under the BSD license.
   No change shall be made to the license without consultation and rough
   consensus of the community.  IANA shall allow for the downloading of
   this reference code.  The reference implementation shall be
   distributed along with an associated cryptographic signature of an
   identity that IANA shall publish.


6.  Database Ownership

   It is the understanding of the IESG, ISOC, and IANA that the database
   itself is public domain.  Certain portions of code currently
   distributed fall under the BSD license, and will be distributed as
   such.  Should claims be made and substantiated against the database,
   the IANA will act in accordance with all competent court orders.  No
   further ownership claims will be made by IANA, the IETF Trust, or
   ISOC on the database.


7.  IANA Considerations

   The IANA will see that the role of TZ Coordinator is filled, based on
   the procedures described above.  The IANA will act as a repository
   for the TZ database and associated reference code.  The database
   coordinator will be named by the IESG as described above, and will
   act as the maintainer of the database and code, as described above.
   The IANA will provide the TZ coordinator with appropriate access to
   maintain the database, as well as necessary tooling that may be
   required, so long as no direct software costs are incurred.  Both
   current and historical versions of the database will be stored and
   distributed via HTTP/HTTPs.  IANA will be operationally responsible
   for the security of the system upon which the database resides.

   The IANA will also maintain a cryptographic identity that is used to
   sign the database, and that will survive a change of coordinators.


8.  Security Considerations

   The distribution of the database is currently not secured.  This memo
   states that moving forward the TZ database will be distributed with a



Lear & Eggert            Expires April 21, 2011                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft      Maintaining the Timezone Database       October 2010


   valid cryptographic signature.


9.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC5226]  Narten, T. and H. Alvestrand, "Guidelines for Writing an
              IANA Considerations Section in RFCs", BCP 26, RFC 5226,
              May 2008.

   [TZDB]     Eggert, P. and A. Olson, "Sources for Time Zone and
              Daylight Saving Time Data",
              <http://www.twinsun.com/tz/tz-link.htm>.


Appendix A.  Changes

   o  Initial Revision


Authors' Addresses

   Eliot Lear
   Cisco Systems GmbH
   Richtistrasse 7
   Wallisellen, ZH  CH-8304
   Switzerland

   Phone: +41 1 878 9200
   Email: lear@cisco.com


   Paul Eggert
   UCLA
   Computer Science Department
   4532J Boelter Hall
   Los Angeles, CA  90095
   USA

   Phone: +1 310 267 2254
   Email: eggert@cs.ucla.edu








Lear & Eggert            Expires April 21, 2011                 [Page 6]

