


Network Working Group                                         B. Nordman
Internet-Draft                                Lawrence Berkeley National
Intended status: Informational                                Laboratory
Expires: January 6, 2011                                       R. Winter
                                                         NEC Labs Europe
                                                            July 5, 2010


             Considerations for Power and Energy Management
                    draft-norwin-energy-consider-00

Abstract

   With rising cost and an increasing awareness of the environmental
   impact of energy consumption, a desirable feature of networked
   devices is to be able to assess their power state and energy
   consumption at will.  With this data available, one can build
   sophisticated applications such as monitoring applications or even
   active energy management systems.  These systems themselves are out
   of scope of this memo, as it discusses only considerations for the
   monitored devices.  Implementation specifics such as the definition
   of a Management Information Base are also outside the scope of this
   document.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 6, 2011.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents



Nordman & Winter         Expires January 6, 2011                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft               Consider Energy                   July 2010


   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Requirements notation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Overview/Goals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   4.  Scope of devices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   5.  Energy Manangement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     5.1.  Device Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     5.2.  NMS Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     5.3.  MIB Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     5.4.  Power State Monitoring . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   6.  Use Cases  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   7.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   8.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13



























Nordman & Winter         Expires January 6, 2011                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft               Consider Energy                   July 2010


1.  Requirements notation

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].














































Nordman & Winter         Expires January 6, 2011                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft               Consider Energy                   July 2010


2.  Overview/Goals

   This document aims at framing and recording the discussions on power
   and energy management within the IETF.  To this end, it clarifies
   terminology that most people believe have a well-defined meaning,
   which in practice however can mean vastly different things.  The
   document further describes how energy and power reporting differs
   from other reporting tasks that have been defined by the IETF (e.g.
   IPFIX) and the resulting implications for mechanisms the IETF will
   define in the future.  This document is intended to be a living
   document that also tries to capture why certain decisions were made
   in the process of defining power and energy management mechanisms.

   Another goal is to present use cases that go beyond the 'traditional'
   IETF ones to keep emerging standards open with respect to these use
   cases.  In this memo, we focus on power monitoring only.
   Participating entities are monitoring systems that receive
   information and networked devices that provide information on energy
   consumption and power state information concerning themselves or
   potentially also other devices.  Not in the scope of this memo are
   means for controlling the energy consumption and the power state of
   monitored devices.  It is assumed that devices will manage their own
   power state, or if done externally, by proprietary and standardized
   solutions (that are or will become available), or as a consequence of
   functional applications.


























Nordman & Winter         Expires January 6, 2011                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft               Consider Energy                   July 2010


3.  Terminology

   Discussions about energy consumptions and device power states are
   often confusing as different products define states such as
   'stand-by' quite differently.  Even the same class of devices often
   implement such states differently.  Named power states are
   intrinsically difficult to define consistently as they imply not only
   something about a device's energy consumption but also something
   about the device's capabilities in that state.  To avoid confusion
   based on a different understanding of certain terms, we first define
   the meaning of certain terminology used in this document.

   In this document, we synonymously use the terms Power Mode and Power
   State; named modes are general categories.  Some well-known power
   states have been used and have been (re-)defined in different
   contexts over the years, which make them unsuitable for discussion in
   a general context.  Most prominently 'standby' has very different
   meanings and implications across a broad set of devices from TV sets
   to servers.  We therefore deliberately do not refer to standby in
   this document.  Within this document we restrict ourselves to a small
   set of named power state categories which are broadly understood,
   which however contain a large potential set of different power states
   themselves.  These categories are on, off and sleep.

   In general, devices that are asleep will be able to wake quickly and
   will retain network connectivity.  Devices that are off usually take
   much more time to turn on than the wake time and usually lack network
   connectivity.  Devices that are on are fully functional but
   potentially with reduced performance.

   The organizing unit for power is a single device with one or more
   power sources.  The term "product" is sometimes used as a synonym,
   and also covers the case in which a device proxies network presence
   including power reporting for a second device.

















Nordman & Winter         Expires January 6, 2011                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft               Consider Energy                   July 2010


4.  Scope of devices

   All devices that have a network connection should be in scope.  While
   first adopters will surely be devices such as switches, routers, and
   servers (some of which already report power levels and power state
   through proprietary means), in the future networked electronic
   devices, appliances, and even lights will need such capability too.
   These devices may have different ways of accomplishing discovery and
   management for functional purposes, but will share the common energy/
   power reporting capability.  While some of these will directly
   measure power, other devices will not measure their power, but may be
   able to reliably estimate it.  These devices are still in scope.







































Nordman & Winter         Expires January 6, 2011                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft               Consider Energy                   July 2010


5.  Energy Manangement

   First and foremost, the task of power and energy management is
   reporting.  While a more active role in energy management is
   conceivable by e.g. putting devices into power states based on
   policies or other predefined schemes at a network management system
   (NMS), this document focusses on the reporting side of things.

5.1.  Device Considerations

   There should not be an assumption that power state management of
   devices is done externally/centrally as ideally most devices will
   manage their own power state (distributed intelligence).  This
   document does not address the power consumption levels of internal
   components of a product, only the energy inputs to the entire product
   (and net consumption if it provides power to other products).

   Simple devices from a network perspective such as appliances would
   benefit from a simple identification capability that would directly
   or indirectly reveal the brand/model of the device, and possible a
   URL to further information about the device.  An example of this is
   the "Universal Product Code" on many products.  Subsequent documents
   should identify the appropriate mechanism to accomplish this, e.g. an
   existing MIB.  An energy management application could then obtain
   current energy use for a device like a refrigerator, and compare it
   to what it is expected to use under normal operation, and alert the
   building manager if it is significantly out of range.  This also can
   be used to quickly inventory energy-using products in a building, and
   to summarize by product type where energy is being used.

5.2.  NMS Considerations

   A Network Management System is the entity which collects the reported
   energy and power reporting data and uses it for 'advanced'
   applications.  One such application could be to correlate energy
   consumption with some other metric to display some form of efficiency
   metric (like watthours/bit) if deemed useful.  A second role an NMS
   could fulfill is to set device policies to control larger networked
   systems such as a data center.  (Note: unclear whether the same
   channel should be used for setting and reporting).

   An NMS will usually query MIB data on a periodic basis, with that
   period dictated by its needs, possibly being dynamic.  MIBs can
   provide an energy "meter reading" to lead to energy use for each
   period.  Thus, the NMS does most of the work to generate time series
   energy data, and this minimizes burden on the host and the complexity
   of the Power MIB.




Nordman & Winter         Expires January 6, 2011                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft               Consider Energy                   July 2010


   The first core function of the power monitoring are to maintain
   meters of energy use and of time in different power states (and
   through summing, total energy and time).  The second is to be able to
   report current power consumption and power state.

5.3.  MIB Considerations

   The MIB should be generic as there are a large number of devices yet
   to come and power states are and will be more so in the future very
   diverse.  Power state categories ("buckets") are on/sleep/off with
   freely definable power states therein (example ACPI).  A fourth basic
   power state of 'ready' may be more appropriate for some devices,
   particularly appliances.

   Reporting should cover both AC and DC power sources (and devices may
   have more than one power source).  However, other types should be
   provided for, and the type of energy one of the reported values.
   Standard low-voltage DC (e.g.  USB, Power over Ethernet, eMerge) is
   immediately useful.  Eventually, there should be values for wireless
   power, battery power, and natural gas.  A core set of values should
   be available from any device that implements the Power MIB at all so
   that an NMS can quickly obtain and aggregate uniform data for all
   devices.

   The MIB should be structured so that the smallest possible set of
   values/information is applicable to a large range of devices, can be
   implemented efficiently and is extensible to accommodate additional
   information objects.  As an example, many devices will not be battery
   powered but it should be easy to add battery monitoring to the basic
   set of energy-related information.

   It is tempting to add a lot of descriptive information (e.g. on
   highly specific power states and periodic energy consumption) into
   the MIB; however, this information will greatly vary across device
   types.  It appears that the best place for such information, if
   indeed it is needed for the power reporting task, is the NMS and not
   the MIB itself.

5.4.  Power State Monitoring

   The power state of a device or component typically can only have a
   small number of discrete values such as, for example, full power, low
   power, standby, hibernating, off.  However, some of these states may
   have one or more sub-states or state parameters.  For example, in low
   power state, a reduced clock rate may be set to a large number of
   different values.  For the device power state, the following
   information is considered to be relevant:




Nordman & Winter         Expires January 6, 2011                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft               Consider Energy                   July 2010


   o  the current state

   o  the time of the last change

   o  the current real power (energy consumption rate) averaged over a
      short time interval

   o  total energy consumption

   o  energy consumption since the last report or for the last
      configured time interval








































Nordman & Winter         Expires January 6, 2011                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft               Consider Energy                   July 2010


6.  Use Cases

   The following are some different use cases that this facility might
   be used in.  These are not necessarily mutually exclusive.

   o  A data center, with a NMS which is integrated with application
      functionality, and also manages energy use.

   o  A commercial building, in which the energy reporting is separate
      from any management of devices, and more as background to help
      understand building operation (including occupancy) and identify
      inefficiencies or equipment failures.

   o  A house, which shares some of the commercial building
      characteristics, but with different management approach and
      security concerns.

   o  A vehicle, which uses the reporting only for automatic management,
      not for reporting to the user.
































Nordman & Winter         Expires January 6, 2011               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft               Consider Energy                   July 2010


7.  Security Considerations

   None.
















































Nordman & Winter         Expires January 6, 2011               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft               Consider Energy                   July 2010


8.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.















































Nordman & Winter         Expires January 6, 2011               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft               Consider Energy                   July 2010


Authors' Addresses

   Bruce Nordman
   Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory

   Email: bnordman@lbl.gov


   Rolf Winter
   NEC Labs Europe

   Email: rolf.winter@neclab.eu







































Nordman & Winter         Expires January 6, 2011               [Page 13]


