


Network Working Group                                         R. Whittle
Internet-Draft                                          First Principles
Intended status: Experimental                             March 07, 2010
Expires: September 8, 2010


         Ivip (Internet Vastly Improved Plumbing) Architecture
                     draft-whittle-ivip-arch-04.txt

Abstract

   Ivip (Internet Vastly Improved Plumbing) is a Core-Edge Separation
   solution to the routing scaling problem, for both IPv4 and IPv6.  It
   provides portable address "edge" address space which is suitable for
   multihoming and inbound traffic engineering (TE) to end-user networks
   of all types and sizes - in a manner which imposes far less load on
   the DFZ control plane than the only current method of achieving these
   benefits: separately advertised PI prefixes.  Ivip includes two
   extensions for ITR-to-ETR tunneling without encapsulation and the
   Path MTU Discovery problems which result from encapsulation - one for
   IPv4 and the other for IPv6.  Both involve modifying the IP header
   and require most DFZ routers to be upgraded.  Ivip is a good basis
   for the TTR (Translating Tunnel Router) approach to mobility, in
   which mobile hosts retain an SPI micronet of one or more IPv4
   addresses (or IPv6 /64s) no matter what addresses or access network
   they are using, including behind NAT and on SPI addresses.  TTR
   mobility for both IPv4 and IPv6 involves generally optimal paths,
   works with unmodified correspondent hosts and supports all
   application protocols.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.




Whittle                 Expires September 8, 2010               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft              Ivip Architecture                 March 2010


   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 8, 2010.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the BSD License.
































Whittle                 Expires September 8, 2010               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft              Ivip Architecture                 March 2010


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   2.  Brief description of Ivip  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   3.  The routing scaling problem and other goals for an
       architectural enhancement  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   4.  Summary of Ivip's architectural choices  . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   5.  Goals  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
     5.1.  IPv4 and IPv6  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
     5.2.  Portability, multihoming and TE for billions of
           end-user networks  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
     5.3.  Modular separation of the control of mapping from the
           CES architecture itself  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
     5.4.  Simple ITRs and ETRs with little or no communication
           between them . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
     5.5.  Maximise the flexibility with which ITRs and ETRs can
           be located . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
     5.6.  Mobility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
     5.7.  Elimination of encapsulation and PMTUD problems  . . . . . 21
     5.8.  No requirement for new host functionality  . . . . . . . . 23
     5.9.  Full benefits to all adopters irrespective of level of
           adoption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
     5.10. Business incentives to deploy new infrastructure . . . . . 24
     5.11. Maintenance of existing levels of security and
           robustness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
     5.12. Avoiding the need for any one server to store or
           receive the complete mapping database  . . . . . . . . . . 26
     5.13. Eliminating unfair burdens . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
   6.  Non-goals  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
     6.1.  Isolation between core and edge networks is not
           required . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
     6.2.  Full adoption not required . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
     6.3.  Mapping changes need not be free of financial cost . . . . 30
     6.4.  No attempt to cope with partially reachable ETRs . . . . . 31
     6.5.  No attempt to mix IPv4 and IPv6  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
     6.6.  Not Locator - Identifier Separation  . . . . . . . . . . . 33
   7.  Architectural Choices  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
     7.1.  Core-Edge Separation rather than Elimination . . . . . . . 35
       7.1.1.  Core-Edge Elimination (CEE) architectures  . . . . . . 35
       7.1.2.  Core-Edge Separation (CES) architectures . . . . . . . 38
     7.2.  Nearby authoritative query servers . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
     7.3.  Real-time mapping distribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
     7.4.  SPI address management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
     7.5.  IP in IP encapsulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
     7.6.  MHF initially or in the long term to avoid
           encapsulation and PMTUD problems . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
     7.7.  Outer header address is that of the sending host . . . . . 44
     7.8.  IPTM (ITR Probes Tunnel MTU) PMTUD management  . . . . . . 45



Whittle                 Expires September 8, 2010               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft              Ivip Architecture                 March 2010


   8.  Architectural Elements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
     8.1.  ITRs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
       8.1.1.  Types of ITR and their addresses . . . . . . . . . . . 48
       8.1.2.  DITRs - Default ITRs in the DFZ  . . . . . . . . . . . 49
       8.1.3.  Modified Header Forwarding - MHF-only ITRs . . . . . . 50
       8.1.4.  Encapsulation and PMTUD management . . . . . . . . . . 50
       8.1.5.  Mapping lookup and caching . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
       8.1.6.  ITFH - ITR Function in Host  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
       8.1.7.  ITRs auto-discovering local query servers  . . . . . . 55
     8.2.  ETRs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
       8.2.1.  In servers or dedicated routers  . . . . . . . . . . . 56
       8.2.2.  ETRs in ISP networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
       8.2.3.  ETRs at the end-user network site  . . . . . . . . . . 56
       8.2.4.  MHF ETR functionality - EAF and PLF  . . . . . . . . . 57
       8.2.5.  ETR functionality for encapsulation  . . . . . . . . . 58
     8.3.  QSRs - Resolving Query Servers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
     8.4.  QSCs - caching query servers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
     8.5.  MHF - Modified Header Forwarding . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
       8.5.1.  EAF - ETR Address Forwarding for IPv4  . . . . . . . . 60
       8.5.2.  PLF - Prefix Label Forwarding, for IPv6  . . . . . . . 61
     8.6.  TTR Mobility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
   9.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
   10. IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
   11. Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
   Appendix A.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
   Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 70

























Whittle                 Expires September 8, 2010               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft              Ivip Architecture                 March 2010


1.  Introduction

   Version 03 (2010-01-13) of this Ivip-arch ID was a freshly written
   document which is shorter than the original from 2007.  Some
   terminology has been changed and the presentation is optimised for
   people who are involved in the RRG.  Please see
   [I-D.whittle-ivip-glossary] for definitions of some terms and
   acronyms.  Please refer to the RRG mailing list and
   http://www.firstpr.com.au/ip/ivip/ for the latest developments.

   This Version 04 includes significant changes to Ivip's mapping
   system.  The DRTM (Distributed Real Time Mapping) system
   [I-D.whittle-ivip-drtm] removes the need for "Replicators", or for
   any server to carry the full Ivip mapping database.  While DRTM is
   discussed in this Ivip-arch ID, please see the Ivip-drtm ID for a
   full description of this system, and how it enables the introduction
   of scalable routing solutions and global mobility with the initiative
   and investments being made by organisations which need not be ISPs.

   The Ivip (pr.  "Eye-vip") project began in June 2007 and in early
   2010 is one of the four Core-Edge Separation (CES) architectures
   being considered by the RRG (IRTF Routing Research Group)
   [I-D.irtf-rrg-recommendation] - the others being IRON-RANGER, LISP
   [I-D.ietf-lisp] and TIDR [I-D.adan-idr-tidr].

   For my overall assessment of the proposals submitted to the RRG, and
   for my arguments for why Ivip is the most suitable for further IETF
   development, please see
   http://www.ietf.org/mail-archive/web/rrg/current/msg06162.html
   ("Recommendation suggestion from RW" 2010-03-04) My discussion of the
   other proposals can be found in the RRG Archives of January and
   February 2010.

   I publicly disclose and discuss all Ivip developments as rapidly as
   possible in order to gain support and constructive critiques - and in
   the hope that any novel ideas will remain free from patent
   encumbrances.

   This ID is intended for readers who are broadly familiar with the
   routing scaling problem and RRG discussions and who have, ideally,
   familiarised themselves with LISP.

   This ID provides not only a general description of Ivip, but the
   rationale for architectural choices which distinguish Ivip from other
   approaches.  Some aspects of Ivip's architecture are discussed in
   greater detail in separate documents:

   The DRTM (Distributed Real Time Mapping) system



Whittle                 Expires September 8, 2010               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft              Ivip Architecture                 March 2010


   [I-D.whittle-ivip-drtm] describes the new approach to Ivip's real-
   time mapping system, which uses multiple typically "nearby" full
   database query servers provided directly or indirectly by MABOCs.

   The TTR approach to mobility is described in [TTR Mobility].

   The IPv4 approach to Modified Header Forwarding (MHF) is described in
   detail in [I-D.whittle-ivip-etr-addr-forw].  The IPv6 approach is
   described in [PLF for IPv6] and the best summary of its operation can
   be found at the end of the ~10k word Ivip Conceptual Summary and
   Analysis: [Ivip Summary and Analysis] .

   Ivip's approach to Path MTU Discovery, when ITRs tunnel using
   encapsulation, is discussed in [PMTUD-Frag].





































Whittle                 Expires September 8, 2010               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft              Ivip Architecture                 March 2010


2.  Brief description of Ivip

   Ivip (Internet Vastly Improved Plumbing) is a Core-Edge Separation
   solution to the routing scaling problem, for both IPv4 and IPv6.  It
   provides portable address "edge" address space which is suitable for
   multihoming and inbound traffic engineering (TE) to end-user networks
   of all types and sizes - in a manner which imposes far less load on
   the DFZ control plane than the only current method of achieving these
   benefits: separately advertised PI prefixes.

   The new "edge" subset of the global unicast address space which is
   used in this fashion is called SPI (Scalable Provider Independent)
   space.  End-user networks divide their SPI space into "micronets",
   each with a common mapping to a single ETR (Egress Tunnel Router)
   address.  Micronets have arbitrary starting points and integer
   lengths - in units of IPv4 addresses or, for IPv6, /64 prefixes.

   When an ITR (Ingress Tunnel Router) receives a packets which are
   addressed to an SPI address.  After looking up the mapping of the
   micronet which covers the destination address, the ITR tunnels the
   traffic packet to the ETR specified in that mapping - and the ETR
   delivers the packet to the end-user network.

   A Mapped Address Block (MAB) is a DFZ-advertised prefix of global
   unicast address space which is typically divided up into many
   separate micronets - such as hundreds to hundreds of thousands of
   micronets, each of which can be used via any ISP.  The total set of
   all MABs constitutes the "edge" (SPI) subset of the global unicast
   address range.  The remainder is known as "core" space.

   A MAB is managed by an MABOC (MAB Operating Company).  MABOCs may be
   end-user networks and the micronets their MABs contain may be used
   solely for that end-user network - but each micronet can be mapped to
   any ETR in the world.  More typically, MABOCs will lease the SPI
   space to large numbers of end-user networks on a commercial basis,
   rather than use it themselves.

   The mapping of each micronet is controlled directly by the end-user
   network which owns or leases the portion of SPI space the micronet is
   within - or by another organization appointed by this end-user
   network.  Multihoming end-user networks would typically contract a
   separate company to change the mapping of their micronets, in
   response to the reachability of their network through their two or
   more ETRs and according to the network's inbound TE requirements.

   DITRs (Default ITRs in the DFZ) are required for handling packets
   sent to SPI addresses from hosts in networks without ITRs.  The one
   or more DITRs at a DITR site advertise in the DFZ the MABs the site



Whittle                 Expires September 8, 2010               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft              Ivip Architecture                 March 2010


   supports, which is typically a subset of all MABs in the Ivip system.

   ITRs other than DITRs request mapping for SPI addresses from local
   Resolving Query Servers (QSRs) in their own network or in their ISP's
   network.  They may do this directly or through one or more levels of
   caching query servers - QSCs.

   QSRs are caching query servers which query multiple, distributed,
   authoritative query servers (QSAs) which are typically "nearby", such
   as within a few thousand km.  QSAs are located at a number of widely
   dispersed sites, such as 5 to 50, where DITRs are located and run by,
   or for, these MABOCs.  Each QSA is authoritative for only a subset of
   all MABs - the set supported by that DITR site.

   Each QSR uses a DNS-based mechanism and an additional protocol to
   discover two or more typically "nearby" QSAs for each MAB.  Since
   each QSA handles mapping requests for multiple MABs, this means the
   number of such QSA's each QSR needs to discover is much less than the
   number of MABs.  The number of MABs is much less than the number of
   end-user networks using SPI space - and the number of micronets is
   greater than this number, since each end-user network may have many
   micronets.

   End-user networks or their appointees generate real-time mapping
   changes using facilities provided by the MABOC which manages the MAB
   the micronet is located within.  Most mapping changes will be to
   change the ETR address of an existing micronet.  Other mapping
   changes will redefine how an end-user network's SPI space is divided
   into separate micronets.  MABOCs will typically charge their
   customers for each mapping change.

   These mapping changes are transmitted in real-time from the MABOC to
   the organisation which runs the DITR-sites with DITRs which advertise
   this MAB.  The mapping changes are received and incorporated into a
   real-time updated full mapping database for this MAB, in one or more
   QSAs at each site.  One or more of these QSAs handle mapping queries
   from the DITRs at the site and one or more handle mapping queries
   from QSRs in typically nearby ISP and end-user networks.  Any QSR can
   send queries to any QSA, but would normally choose nearby ones.  QSAs
   can give feedback in mapping replies concerning how busy they are,
   with suggestions of other QSAs to use instead.  So there is natural
   load-sharing with multiple QSAs being spread around the world and
   dynamic load-balancing between them according to actual loads.

   Since no one QSA or DITR-site is required to handle the full set of
   MABs, since each DITR-site organization controls its own real-time
   push of mapping to its sites, and since there can be any number of
   DITR-sites and any number of DITR-site operating companies, there are



Whittle                 Expires September 8, 2010               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft              Ivip Architecture                 March 2010


   no obvious scaling limits on the number of micronets the entire
   system can handle, or the frequency of mapping updates to those
   micronets.  If a given global set of DITR-sites hits some kind of
   scaling limit in these respects, then the total load can be handled
   by more such systems of DITR-sites.

   QSRs too can be installed in larger numbers in a busy ISP or end-user
   network if the query demand exceeds the capacity of one such server.
   Each QSR can automatically discover very large numbers (tens to
   hundreds of thousands) of QSAs, and each QSA will typically handle
   dozens to hundreds or perhaps thousands of MABs.

   While there is no assurance of nearby QSAs, MABOCs will generally
   want to have numerous widely dispersed DITR sites, each with QSAs for
   two reasons.  Firstly to ensure the DITRs tunnel packets without been
   too far from the path between the sending host (in a network without
   ITRs) and the ETR.  Secondly to encourage ISPs and larger end-user
   networks to install ITRS and use the QSAs - since this will result in
   shorter paths for packets and less load on the DITRs.

   ISPs and end-user networks do not absolutely need to install ITRs.
   However ISPs will be motivated to install them (and therefore install
   several QSRs for them to send mapping queries to) for two reasons.
   Firstly, to ensure the ISP's customer's SPI-addressed packets are
   tunneled reliably, rather than relying on DITRs.  Secondly, when
   their customers send SPI-addressed packets to SPI-using end-user
   networks which are also customers of the ISP, if the ISP has its own
   ITRs, then these packets do not leave the ISP's network.  Without
   ITRs, they would leave the network via an expensive upstream link, be
   tunneled by a DITR and return via the same or a different upstream
   link.

   Since end-user networks can run their own ETRs on existing PA address
   space they get from their ISP, the only thing an ISP needs in order
   to allow such a network to use SPI space is to accept outgoing
   packets for forwarding when they have SPI source addresses.  All
   other initiatives and investments - including the provision of
   multiple widely dispersed DITRs, QSAs and the real-time push of
   mapping changes to these - is undertaken by the MABOCs who profit by
   renting SPI space to their end-user customers.  A MABOC need not be
   an ISP.

   Ivip includes two extensions for ITR-to-ETR tunneling without
   encapsulation and the Path MTU Discovery problems which result from
   encapsulation - one for IPv4 and the other for IPv6.  Both involve
   modifying the IP header and require most DFZ routers to be upgraded.

   Ivip is a good basis for the TTR (Translating Tunnel Router) approach



Whittle                 Expires September 8, 2010               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft              Ivip Architecture                 March 2010


   to mobility, in which mobile hosts retain an SPI micronet of one or
   more IPv4 addresses (or IPv6 /64s) no matter what addresses or access
   network they are using, including behind NAT and on SPI addresses.
   TTR mobility for both IPv4 and IPv6 involves generally optimal paths,
   works with unmodified correspondent hosts and supports all
   application protocols.  TTR Mobility is described in: [TTR Mobility]













































Whittle                 Expires September 8, 2010              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft              Ivip Architecture                 March 2010


3.  The routing scaling problem and other goals for an architectural
    enhancement

   For a fuller account of my understanding of the routing scaling
   problem, and other problems which should be considered when devising
   an architectural enhancement to the Internet, please see
   http://www.ietf.org/mail-archive/web/rrg/current/msg06099.html
   ("Scalable routing problem & architectural enhancements" 2010-02-23)
   and http://www.ietf.org/mail-archive/web/rrg/current/msg06162.html
   ("Recommendation suggestion from RW" 2010-03-04).

   The most visible aspect of the routing scaling problem can be
   summarised as there being practical problems and unfair cost-burdens
   due to the growth in the number of PI prefixes end-user networks
   advertise in the DFZ.  Advertising PI prefixes is currently the only
   method of providing portability, multihoming and inbound traffic
   engineering (TE) for end-user networks.  The same problem exists in
   principle for IPv4 and IPv6, but only IPv4 has a problem at present.

   The less visible part of it is the large number of end-user networks
   who are unable to gain these benefits due to the costs and other
   barriers to obtaining their own address space and advertising it in
   the DFZ.  Part of the reason for these costs and barriers is the
   push-back against this practice, due to concerns about the burden
   each PI prefix places on the DFZ control plane.  Another part is the
   cost and other difficulties of obtaining the minimum amount of space
   which can be advertised in the DFZ - currently 256 IPv4 addresses as
   a /24 prefix.

   The burden placed on the interdomain routing system (often referred
   to loosely as the Default-Free Zone - DFZ) by the prefixes advertised
   by ISPs is generally thought not to be a problem.  So the challenge
   is to find a way of providing address space and new methods of
   routing so that the portability, multihoming and TE needs of
   potentially millions or billions of end-user networks can be served
   in a "scalable" manner: efficiently, robustly and without unfair
   burdens falling on anyone, such as those who operate the DFZ routers.

   The unfair, unsustainable, burden is caused by the number of
   separately advertised PI prefixes of end-user networks today - and
   the rate at which these prefixes have their point of advertisement
   changed.  (Also, if an end-user network changes the type of
   advertisement frequently, such as with more or less ASNs, this too is
   a burden.)  Please see
   http://www.ietf.org/mail-archive/web/rrg/current/msg06163.html
   ("Geoff Huston's BGP/DFZ research" 2010-03-05) for up-to-date
   analysis of trends in the number of prefixes and in the problems
   caused by changes to those prefixes.



Whittle                 Expires September 8, 2010              [Page 11]

Internet-Draft              Ivip Architecture                 March 2010


   The most important part of the burden is on the DFZ's "BGP control
   plane".  This is partly the inter-router BGP traffic and the overall
   behaviour of routers - particularly any difficulty which the
   excessive number of prefixes causes in the system converging to good
   enough best-paths in the event of an outage.  It is also the burden
   of CPU effort and storage in the RIB of each router.  This includes
   the effort of writing changes to the FIB when RIB information
   changes.  Also, FIBs may have their ability to handle packets
   temporarily disabled while new information is written.

   The actual number of prefixes each DFZ router has to handle is a
   major part of the problem, though the total RIB burden also depends
   on how many neighbours each router has.  The number of prefixes in
   the FIB is a serious burden too, but it is widely believed that this
   is not the most important problem.  Any solution which only helps
   reduce the number of prefixes the FIB must handle is not really a
   solution to the problem.

   The number of prefixes advertised in the DFZ is the most obvious and
   directly costly part of the routing scaling problem - analogous to
   the tip of an iceberg.  The larger, harder-to-measure, part of the
   problem is the unknown number of end-user networks which want or need
   portability, multihoming and/or inbound TE but which cannot obtain it
   at present, due to the costs and other barriers to gaining address
   space and advertising it as PI prefixes.

   In order to provide portability etc. to millions or perhaps billions
   of end-user networks in a scalable manner, it follows that the DFZ
   routers must not have to consider the prefixes of each individual
   network in their RIB or FIB.  Consequently, the Core-Edge Separation
   class of scalable routing architectures work by providing a special
   subset of the global unicast address space, which is suitable and
   attractive for providing end-user networks with portability,
   multihoming and TE, but which places only very slight burden on the
   DFZ compared to the burden each PI prefix places today.  (Core-Edge
   Elimination architectures have a different approach, which is
   discussed below in "Architectural Choices - Core-Edge Separation
   rather than Elimination".

   Support for mobility has not generally been considered part of the
   routing scaling problem.  However, mobility is prominently mentioned
   in the RRG Charter.  With the proliferation of cellphones, VoIP,
   other IP applications it is reasonable to assume that in the future -
   such as by 2020 - most hosts will be mobile devices, generally
   running on limited battery power and relying on wireless links which
   are frequently slow, unreliable and/or expensive.

   Mobility is arguably an extreme form of portability and/or



Whittle                 Expires September 8, 2010              [Page 12]

Internet-Draft              Ivip Architecture                 March 2010


   multihoming.  To embark on a major architectural enhancement for
   scalable routing, in a manner which did not support billions of
   mobile devices, would make little sense.  While provision of mobility
   is frequently assumed not to be related to interdomain routing, it is
   prominent in the RRG's Charter.  The TTR (Translating Tunnel Router)
   Mobility architecture [TTR Mobility] is a new approach to global
   mobility, for both IPv4 and IPv6 - and is an extension of a CES
   architecture such as Ivip.

   In the TTR Mobility architecture, each mobile device is generally
   considered to be a separate end-user network.  An entire
   corporation's network, or that of a large university, is also an
   "end-user network".  So in the following discussion, this term could
   mean a wide variety of things - far beyond the small subset of end-
   user networks whish are currently able to gain and advertise PI
   space.



































Whittle                 Expires September 8, 2010              [Page 13]

Internet-Draft              Ivip Architecture                 March 2010


4.  Summary of Ivip's architectural choices

   Ivip is based on some unique architectural choices, including: ITRs
   (Ingress Tunnel Routers) receiving mapping changes in real-time;
   typically "nearby" QSA authoritative query servers which are "full-
   database" for at least one MAB, but typically a significant fraction
   of all MABs; migration to Modified Header Forwarding (MHF) to avoid
   encapsulation and its PMTUD (Path MTU Discovery) difficulties; and
   (when encapsulation is used) the use of the sending host's address as
   the outer header's source address, so that ETRs can easily enforce
   ISP BR (Border Router) source address filtering on decapsulated
   packets.

   The following description assumes that Ivip will be introduced with
   encapsulation, with long-term migration to MHF.  However, it is
   possible that by the time the introduction date is set that most DFZ
   routers will have firmware based FIBs, and so could be easily
   upgraded to support MHF.  In that case, ITRs and ETRs could be much
   simpler, since they would not need to handle encapsulation or PMTUD
   management.

   Below, Ivip is generally assumed to be introduced as a single system
   for the purposes of solving the routing scaling problem.  However,
   multiple independent systems along the lines of Ivip (with
   encapsulation) could also be introduced without need for
   standardisation for the purpose of supporting commercial TTR Mobility
   services.

   The adoption of an architectural enhancement to improve routing
   scalability is frequently assumed to depend largely or entirely on
   ISPs making the initial investment.  However, with DRTM, this need
   not be the case.

   DRTM enables SPI space to be leased to end-user networks - with full
   support for portability, multihoming and inbound TE for all their
   communications - with the investment and initiative being taken by
   organisations which may not be ISPs.  These are the MABOCs - MAB
   Operating Companies - who lease the space in each MAB they control to
   typically thousands to hundreds of thousands separate end-user
   networks.  An SPI-adopting end-user network can run its own ETR on
   the existing PA space it obtains from each of its one or more ISPs.
   ISPs need make no investment to allow this to proceed - but they must
   forward the outgoing packets from these SPI-adopting networks which
   have SPI source addresses.

   DRTM removes the need for the Replicators, full-database query
   servers in ISP networks and "Missing Payload Servers" which are
   described in the more recent ID: Ivip Fast Payload Replication



Whittle                 Expires September 8, 2010              [Page 14]

Internet-Draft              Ivip Architecture                 March 2010


   [I-D.whittle-ivip-fpr].  However, within DRTM, there remains an
   option to have the caching QSR (Resolving Query Servers) be full
   database for one, multiple or perhaps all MABs, and to use a small
   (such as between several nearby ISPs) Replicator system as part of
   fanning out mapping updates from DITR-sites to these "full-database"
   Map Resolvers.  DRTM does not currently specify how the organisations
   which run DITR sites reliably and securely deliver the real-time
   mapping to each such site.  This is an internal matter for these
   organisations and the potentially multiple MABOCs they receive this
   mapping information from.  It is possible that Replicators could be
   part of these arrangements too.

   With TTR mobility, the MN (Mobile Node) can be in any access network
   at all, including behind one or more layers or NAT and including
   being on SPI space in an end-user network which has adopted SPI
   space.  In all cases, the MN needs no support from the network it is
   currently connected to, since the MN establishes a two-way tunnel to
   the TTR and sends its SPI source address outgoing packets to the TTR
   for forwarding.  So TTR mobility is a scalable routing solution which
   requires no investment or support from ISPs, and in which the
   initiative and investment comes from TTR Mobility companies, which
   need not be ISPs.





























Whittle                 Expires September 8, 2010              [Page 15]

Internet-Draft              Ivip Architecture                 March 2010


5.  Goals

5.1.  IPv4 and IPv6

   Ivip is intended to solve the routing scaling problem (as described
   in the introduction), for IPv4 and IPv6, for very large numbers of
   end-user networks - where this includes a single MN (Mobile Node)
   within the definition of "end-user network".

   Much of Ivip is identical in principle for both Internets.  However
   the mapping information for IPv6 is lengthier and there are other
   differences, such as in Path MTU Discovery (PMTUD) when encapsulation
   is used, and in the IPv4 and IPv6 approaches to MHF which remove the
   need for encapsulation.

5.2.  Portability, multihoming and TE for billions of end-user networks

   Ivip is intended to provide scalable address space for billions of
   end-user networks - for both IPv4 and IPv6.  The new kind of address
   space - SPI (Scalable Provider Independent) space - is suitable for
   end-user networks to use in a portable fashion, meaning they can keep
   this space when choosing another ISP for Internet connectivity.

   There is an assumed upper bound of order 10^7 on the number of non-
   mobile end-user networks.  This is on the basis of a population of
   10^10 and there being typically no more than one organization per
   10^3 people which needs portability, multihoming and/or inbound TE
   enough to invest in a second ISP service and whatever else is
   required to achieve these goals.  Brian Carpenter suggested the same
   thing (http://www.ietf.org/mail-archive/web/rrg/current/msg05801.html
   2010-01-27).

   Given the growing ubiquity of cell-phones and the desire to give them
   IP connectivity with mobility, including session survival when
   changing access networks, it is reasonable to assume an upper bound
   of order 10^10 on the number of "mobile end-user networks".  This
   order 10^10 upper bound has been discussed on in the RRG and no-one
   has suggested a routing scaling solution with mobility should aim for
   any greater number of end-user networks.

   In Ivip's mapping system and in its ITRs, no distinction is made
   between end-user networks which are mobile or non-mobile, so the
   total number 10^10 is the upper bound on number of micronets for the
   Ivip system to handle.  In IPv4, since the smallest micronet is a
   single IPv4 address and there are only 3.7 billion global unicast
   addresses in total, from which the "edge" SPI addresses can be drawn,
   it follows that for Ivip in IPv4, there can be no more than probably
   3 x 10^9 micronets.



Whittle                 Expires September 8, 2010              [Page 16]

Internet-Draft              Ivip Architecture                 March 2010


   Portability of the end-user network address space which is used to
   identify hosts, routers and networks is an absolute requirement of
   scalable routing.  Even if a network could reliably and inexpensively
   renumber all its hosts and routers, and change all its configuration
   files which contained such addresses, it would never be able to
   reliably and securely alter all the other places where these
   identifying addresses reside in other networks.  These includes the
   use of these addresses in referrals, existing communication sessions,
   config files of VPNs and hard-coded (however questionably) into
   firmware and software.  Another example of the need for portability
   is end-user networks which host services for other organisations -
   typically their customers - in a way that the IP addresses of the
   network's hosts appear in the DNS zone files of these other
   organizations.  For the network to have to renumber its network, such
   as to use PA space from another ISP, would require costly, error-
   prone and carefully timed updates to zone files of all these other
   organizations.

   Assuming the end-user network has two or more ISPs, SPI space will
   also support multihoming and inbound traffic engineering.  In the
   following, "TE" refers to "inbound traffic engineering" - the ability
   to steer incoming traffic streams between two or more ISPs.
   (Outbound TE is simply a matter of sending outgoing packets out
   whichever ISP link is desired.)  Ivip's approach to TE differs from
   that of other CES architectures.  It is potentially finer-grained,
   more flexible and more able to respond to rapid changes in traffic
   patterns.

   The goal of scalable routing is to scalably provide portability,
   multihoming and TE to all networks which want or need it.  However,
   it is reasonable to assume that most home and SOHO networks, and some
   smaller factory and office networks, will remain happy with the
   reliability of their single-provider service, and will not concerned
   about portability when choosing another ISP.

   A small number of end-user networks will have multiple sites or some
   other reason to split their SPI space into multiple micronets, but in
   any realistic scenario involving billions of such networks, the great
   majority of such networks will be a single site or device, with
   little or no need for TE or greater address space than a single IPv4
   address or an IPv6 /64.  Therefore, it is reasonable to expect that
   most of these billions of networks will require only a single
   micronet of SPI addresses.  So, for these scenarios of billions of
   end-user networks, the total number of separately mapped micronets of
   SPI address space will be only marginally greater than the number of
   end-user networks.





Whittle                 Expires September 8, 2010              [Page 17]

Internet-Draft              Ivip Architecture                 March 2010


5.3.  Modular separation of the control of mapping from the CES
      architecture itself

   Ivip's real-time mapping system means that the tunneling behaviour of
   all ITRs can be controlled directly.  The mapping consists of a
   single ETR address, so Ivip ITRs do not need to make any choices
   between multiple ETRs for the purposes of multihoming service
   restoration or TE.  The non-Ivip CES architectures do not provide
   real-time mapping to ITRs, and therefore need to have the ITRs
   perform their own multihoming reachability testing and decision-
   making, to choose which of several ETRs to tunnel packets to.

   Control of the tunneling behaviour of Ivip ITRs rests entirely
   outside the Ivip system.  It is the responsibility of end-user
   networks to control this mapping at all times - and many end-user
   networks are likely to delegate this responsibility to a company they
   hire for this purpose.  Exactly how end-user networks make their
   decisions about mapping - and how, for instance, a Multihoming
   Monitoring (MM) company might detect ETR failure, and alter mapping
   accordingly - is entirely separate from Ivip's mapping system, ITRs
   and ETRs.

   This appointment of another organization to control the mapping of
   one or more of an end-user network's micronets would involve a
   private, flexible, arrangement between an end-user network and the MM
   company it hires to continually probe the network's reachability via
   its two or more ETRs.  This means the frequency and type of probing,
   and the decision-making algorithms, can be completely open-ended and
   subject to development and customisation - without any constraints or
   need for changes in the RFCs which define Ivip.  With TTR Mobility,
   the mapping of the micronet which the MN uses would be controlled by
   the TTR Company, rather than the end-user or the MN itself.

   This modular separation of the detection and decision-making
   functions from the CES architecture is good engineering practice and
   ensures that the Ivip subsystem can be used flexibly, including for
   purposes not yet anticipated.

   Other CES techniques monolithically integrate the following functions
   into the core-edge separation architecture itself - primarily by
   specifying exactly how all ITRs must behave regarding: reachability
   testing to ETRs, or of networks through ETRs, or with ETRs reporting
   reachability of end-user networks to ITRs by some means; multihoming
   failure detection based on these; decisions about how to choose
   between ETRs to restore service; and how to implement TE.  This would
   add greatly to the complexity of the system itself, make it harder to
   introduce new methods of testing reachability etc. and restrict all
   end-user networks to relying on the necessarily restricted set of



Whittle                 Expires September 8, 2010              [Page 18]

Internet-Draft              Ivip Architecture                 March 2010


   functions which can reasonably be built into all ITRs.

5.4.  Simple ITRs and ETRs with little or no communication between them

   With encapsulation, the only time ITRs engage in two-way
   communication is when probing the Path MTU to the ETR, by using a
   special pair of packets which carry a larger traffic packet than has
   previously been successfully received by the ETR from this ITR.  The
   ETR then responds to the ITR and the ITR acknowledges this.

   Apart from this, ITRs do not communicate with anything but their
   local query servers - directly with their local QSRs (Resolving Query
   Servers) or indirectly with these, via one or more levels of QSC
   caching query servers.  ETRs do not communicate with any part of the
   Ivip system except for ITRs, and then only for this PMTUD management
   function.

   If MHF is used rather than encapsulation, there is no need for ITRs
   to communicate with ETRs - so ITRs only communicate with QSCs and
   QSRs - and ETRs do not communicate at all.

   Consequently ETRs and ITRs can be simple functions in existing
   routers or in standalone servers.  The ITR function can also be
   implemented in the sending host (ITFH), though this is not advisable
   if the sending host is on a slow, unreliable, link such as a wireless
   link.  ETRs must be on conventional global unicast addresses ("core"
   addresses) - not on SPI ("edge") addresses.  ITRs can be on both
   kinds of address.  Ivip may in the future include an option for an
   ITR or ITFH to set up a two-way persistent tunnel to its one or more
   local query servers, which would allow an ITR function to be behind
   one or more layers of NAT.  This "tunnel" could be as simple as TCP
   or SCTP from the ITR, or ITFH, to each query server, with keepalive
   packets.

   It is important to make ITRs as simple as possible, in order that
   they may be inexpensive and therefore, if desired, more numerous - so
   as to reduce the load on each one.  ETRs are simpler than ITRs, since
   they simply decapsulate packets with a comparison between outer and
   inner source addresses and do not look up or cache mapping
   information.

   Ivip with encapsulation uses simple IP-in-IP encapsulation.  There is
   no special header and no other data piggybacked onto traffic packets.
   This minimises encapsulation overhead and reduces the complexity of
   both ITRs and ETRs.  Other CES architectures use their own headers to
   carry extra information with each traffic packet, with that header
   behind a UDP header.  These other architectures also require ITRs to
   determine reachability to multiple ETRs.



Whittle                 Expires September 8, 2010              [Page 19]

Internet-Draft              Ivip Architecture                 March 2010


5.5.  Maximise the flexibility with which ITRs and ETRs can be located

   Ivip ITRs can be located in the sending host, in the sending-host's
   end-user network (which may be an ISP network or an end-user network
   using either SPI or conventional PI space) or in the ISP network
   which the host's end-user network connects to the Net through.  If
   there is no such ITR, the packet will enter the DFZ and be forwarded
   to the nearest (in BGP terms) DITR (Default ITR in the DFZ,
   previously known as OITRD for Open ITR in the DFZ).

   ETRs can be located in ISP networks with a link to each end-user
   network they serve.  ETRs can also be located at the end-user network
   end of a link from an ISP, and so be physically located at the end-
   use site.  In both cases, their address must be a conventional "core"
   global unicast address (usually from one of the ISP's prefixes) - not
   an SPI ("edge") address or behind NAT.

5.6.  Mobility

   One of Ivip's goals is to support mass adoption of IP mobility, since
   this will surely a major facet of the future of Internet
   communications.  It would make no sense to introduce one set of
   architectural changes to solve the routing scaling problem as it
   appears today, and then have to devise and introduce a second set to
   provide for billions of mobile devices.

   Ivip is a good basis for the TTR approach to mobility, and would be
   attractive to deploy for this reason alone.

   It is frequently assumed that in order for a CES architecture to
   support mobility, the Mobile Node (MN) must be its own ETR.  LISP-MN
   makes this assumption.  So does draft-jen-mapping-00
   [I-D.jen-mapping] - a critique of which is [Critique of
   draft-jen-mapping-00].

   TTR mobility does not involve mapping changes every time the MN gains
   a new physical address, since it continues to use the same one or
   more TTRs as its one or more ETRs.  Mapping changes are needed when
   the MN uses a new TTR.  This is desirable after the MN moves a large
   distance, such as 1000km or more, but it not absolutely needed.  An
   MN can still work with a TTR which is on the other side of the world
   - albeit with longer latency and greater chance of packet loss.

   Although the TTR approach to mobility could be used with other CES
   architectures, Ivip is a better basis for TTR mobility than other CES
   architectures such as LISP.  None of these other proposals provide a
   method of ITRs gaining updated mapping within a few seconds, as Ivip
   does.  With Ivip's real-time mapping system, the Mobile Node (MN) can



Whittle                 Expires September 8, 2010              [Page 20]

Internet-Draft              Ivip Architecture                 March 2010


   begin using a new, nearby, TTR within seconds and, most importantly,
   within a few seconds no ITR will be tunneling packets to the
   previous, and now more distant, TTR.  Therefore the MN can promptly
   end the tunnel to the previous TTR and use the new TTR exclusively.
   Without this real-time mapping, the MN would need to retain tunnels
   to one or more previous TTRs for as long as the mapping system takes
   to ensure no ITRs are tunneling packets to them.  This might take 10
   to 30 minutes or more for the non-Ivip CES architectures.

   TTR Mobility is not required to solve today's routing scaling
   problem.  It may be regarded as separate to Ivip, because it could be
   used with other CES architectures.  However, it is best to consider
   TTR Mobility as a natural extension of the basic Ivip architecture,
   which does not place any constraints on the basic architecture other
   than that its mapping system will need to scale to billions of
   (mostly mobile, handheld device) end-user networks.

5.7.  Elimination of encapsulation and PMTUD problems

   When ITRs use encapsulation to tunnel traffic packets to ITRs, there
   are serious problems with Path MTU Discovery (PMTUD) for the sending
   host.  If the packet with its encapsulation header is too long for
   the next hop link of a router between the ITR and ETR, then there
   needs to be a mechanism by which the sending host receives a valid
   ICMP Packet Too Big message, with an MTU value which will result in
   an encapsulated packet of the correct length.  The PTB generated by
   the router in the tunnel path will not be suitable for the sending
   host.

   It is challenging to solve this problem securely and without
   unreasonable amounts of state in the ITR.  Ivip's solution - ITR
   Probes Path MTU [PMTUD-Frag] - involves extra complexity and state in
   ITRs and to a lesser extent in ETRs.  This, and the transmission
   overhead of the encapsulation header (particularly heavy with IPv6
   VoIP packets) makes it desirable to either avoid encapsulation
   entirely, or to introduce Ivip with encapsulation, but in the long-
   term change to an alternative system which lacks these problems.

   Ivip has two techniques, known collectively as Modified Header
   Forwarding (MHF) which replace encapsulation as the ITR to ETR
   tunneling technique.  They are:



      1.  ETR Address Forwarding (EAF) - for IPv4.
          [I-D.whittle-ivip-etr-addr-forw]





Whittle                 Expires September 8, 2010              [Page 21]

Internet-Draft              Ivip Architecture                 March 2010


      2.  Prefix Label Forwarding (PLF) - for IPv6.  [PLF for IPv6].

   If Ivip is introduced with encapsulation, all ITRs and ETRs should be
   capable of supporting MHF.  At some date in the future, the DFZ
   routers will be upgraded to support this, probably without any
   significant cost.

   Ideally, it would be possible to establish Ivip from the outset
   without encapsulation.  This would save having to develop the more
   complex ITR and ETR functions required by encapsulation - especially
   the PMTUD functionality.  It would also eliminate the need to design
   a transition arrangement.

   I have not been able to reliably determine what proportion of current
   DFZ routers have firmware-based FIBs.  Any such router could be
   upgraded with a firmware update in order to support MHF.  As the
   years pass, there is an increasing probability that that most or
   essentially all DFZ routers could be upgraded in this way, for very
   little cost.  Initial deployment with MHF is a goal, with the
   alternative goal being eventual transition to MHF.

   For any near-term introduction of Ivip, such as to introduce TTR
   mobility services or simply to provide SPI space to non-mobile end-
   user networks, the organizations initiating these services will be
   unable to have all or perhaps any DFZ routers upgraded in time to
   start their services.  Since these services, especially TTR mobility
   services, appear to be commercially attractive in the near-term, the
   most likely outcome is that Ivip will be introduced with
   encapsulation.  If so, it is vital that all ITR and ETR software be
   updatable so that a future transition to MHF can be performed
   reliably and completely.

   MHF involves some restrictions on the location of ETRs.  For IPv4,
   only 30 bits are available for specifying the ETR address.  However,
   an alternative which I have not yet fully explored is to define a new
   protocol type with its own header to replace the IPv4 header.  In the
   new header at least 31 bits could be found - and probably 32.  If 32
   could be found , then the following paragraph would become
   irrelevant.

   This 30 bit MHF ETR address forwarding arrangement is incompatible
   with the initially desirable arrangement where any "core" address can
   be used for an ETR.  There is further work to do on this problem -
   but the solution is probably to avoid it with a new header format as
   noted above.  If a large number of end-user networks established
   their ETRs on a variety of addresses, such as the IP addresses of
   their existing single PA address services, then it may not be
   possible to have them alter these addresses in time for the



Whittle                 Expires September 8, 2010              [Page 22]

Internet-Draft              Ivip Architecture                 March 2010


   transition to MHF.  For instance, in an extreme case, four separate
   end-user networks may run four separate ETRs on four contiguous
   addresses 11.22.33.16, 11.22.33.17, 11.22.33.18 and 11.22.33.19.  Yet
   the current 30 bit IPv4 MHF technique can only tunnel packets to
   addresses specified with 30 bit precision - which covers all four
   addresses.  A workaround would be for a router at this ISP to perform
   a second lookup on the destination address of these tunnelled packets
   and to forward them to the correct service directly.

5.8.  No requirement for new host functionality

   It is a primary goal not to require any new host functionality - in
   stacks or applications.  However, as an option, the ITR function can
   be integrated into sending hosts when this is desired.

   Mobile hosts using the TTR Mobility approach will have a little extra
   functionality, which could be implemented in the stack or perhaps
   outside it, as a separate piece of software.  The IP stack itself and
   all applications remain unchanged and communicate with all other
   hosts, mobile or not, using current IPv4 and IPv6 protocols and
   addressing.

   One reason for avoiding the need for new host functionality is to
   enable the system to be widely enough adopted to solve the routing
   scaling problem, given the constraints imposed by the need for
   voluntary adoption.  [Constraints-Voluntary]

   Another more fundamental reason is to ensure there is no extra burden
   on hosts, which would be particularly a problem for hosts which are
   on slow, expensive and unreliable links.  This includes hosts on 3G
   wireless links - and in the foreseeable future it is reasonable to
   expect this to be true of the majority of hosts.

   While many people are attracted to the idea of hosts doing more, and
   leaving the network to be simple, there are objections to this.  I
   intend to write these up as an ID, but for now they are on a web-page
   and in RRG discussions.  [Host-Responsibilities] See also
   http://www.ietf.org/mail-archive/web/rrg/current/msg06162.html
   ("Recommendation suggestion from RW" 2010-03-04).

   In summary, it is highly undesirable for a new architecture to
   require all hosts to do more routing and addressing management than
   they currently do: just DNS lookups.  The delays which are inherent
   any such arrangement are highly undesirable and the way these delays
   are worsened by one or both hosts being on high latency, unreliable,
   wireless links is particularly objectionable.  Also, it is desirable
   not to enforce extra complexity or communication requirements on all
   hosts, since many of them will be constrained by battery power



Whittle                 Expires September 8, 2010              [Page 23]

Internet-Draft              Ivip Architecture                 March 2010


   limitations.

5.9.  Full benefits to all adopters irrespective of level of adoption

   Ivip provides the full benefits of portability, multihoming and
   inbound TE to all end-user networks which adopt its SPI space.

   In order to do this, packets from hosts in networks which lack ITRs
   must be forwarded to an ITR and tunneled to the correct ETR.

   This is achieved by placing a number of ITRs in the DFZ.  These are
   known as DITRs (Default ITRS in the DFZ) and were previously known as
   OITRDs (Open ITRs in the DFZ).  When Ivip was first announced
   [Ivip-2007-06-15] these were named (erroneously): "Anycast ITRs in
   the DFZ".  By placing DITRs widely around the Net, path lengths from
   any sending host to the ETR are minimised.

   LISP Proxy Tunnel Routers (PTRs) perform the same function.
   [I-D.lewis-lisp-interworking]

   For a scalable routing solution to be widely enough adopted, it must
   provide compelling benefits to all adaptors, including the earliest.
   Without DITRs, PTRs or their equivalent, only a small fraction of
   packets being sent to an end-user network would use the new system -
   those sent in networks with ITRs.  Yet the goal is for all adopters
   to use the new form of addressing entirely, and so not to have to use
   the existing unscaleable "advertise PI prefixes in the DFZ" approach
   to portability, multihoming and TE.

5.10.  Business incentives to deploy new infrastructure

   Some scalable routing proposals involve no additions to the network -
   just the adoption of new functionality in the end-user networks which
   use it.  These are generally "Core-Edge Elimination" (CES)
   architectures.  [C-E-Sep-Elim]

   No such proposal meets the constraints imposed by the need for
   widespread voluntary adoption.  Firstly, most or all of them involve
   changes to host stacks and applications, which is impractical in the
   absence of compelling motivation for the authors of this software to
   make such major changes.  Secondly all such proposals only provide
   portability, multihoming and TE benefits for packets sent from other
   networks which have adopted the scheme.  Therefore, only if all
   networks adopted it would any one network be able to abandon its
   current routing and addressing arrangements.  The benefits of
   scalable routing in a global sense, and for each adopter, the
   abandonment of unscaleable alternative routing and addressing
   arrangements, are only achieved after full (or almost full) adoption



Whittle                 Expires September 8, 2010              [Page 24]

Internet-Draft              Ivip Architecture                 March 2010


   by all networks.  Yet there is insufficient direct incentive for
   early adopters for even a fraction of networks to adopt it.

   A CES architecture with DITRs, PTRs or some equivalent functionality
   provides full benefits to all adopters, and so is capable of being
   widely enough adopted to solve the routing scaling problem.  Scalable
   routing benefits accrue in direct proportion to the number of
   adopting networks.  The problem can be substantially solved by
   widespread adoption.  Complete adoption is desirable, but not at all
   required.

   CES architectures do not require any changes to hosts - to stacks or
   applications.  They do however involve the creation of at least two
   items of infrastructure which are typically global in reach, before
   any end-user network can use the system.  Before DRTM, Ivip required
   a single coordinated global mapping distribution system, though the
   DITR systems could be operated by or for particular MABOCs (MAB
   Operating Companies) and need not cope with all the MABS in the Ivip
   system.  Now, with DRTM, there is no need for a single global mapping
   distribution system.  There will be multiple such systems, each
   handling a subset of the MABs.

   Ivip's technical structure lends itself to business models in which
   those who construct and run these two types of infrastructure can do
   so on a potentially profitable basis, by charging end-user networks
   according to the use they make of the mapping system and of the
   DITRs.  The DRTM arrangements [I-D.whittle-ivip-drtm] involve MABOCs
   (MAB Operating Companies) or TTR mobility companies establishing and
   running (or contracting other organizations to establish and run)
   multiple DITR-sites.  At each DITR-site there are DITRs and QSAs
   supporting the subset of MABs which are run by the one or more MABOCs
   the DITR-site is run for.

   Please see the DRTM ID for more information on how this system can
   develop without direct investment by ISPs, with MABOCs taking the
   initiative and making the investment in reaching out with DITR-sites
   to sending hosts in networks without ITRs, and with QSAs at those
   sites to help nearby ISPs run their own ITRs and QSRs.

5.11.  Maintenance of existing levels of security and robustness

   All scalable routing schemes complexify the Internet - so it is
   unlikely that the goals of not degrading security and robustness to
   any degree can be fully realized.  Only once Ivip is fully designed
   and carefully analysed can there be a realistic estimation of the
   security and robustness problems it will entail.

   It is a goal of Ivip to minimise and ideally to eliminate any such



Whittle                 Expires September 8, 2010              [Page 25]

Internet-Draft              Ivip Architecture                 March 2010


   degradation.

   Ivip's approach to handling the PMTUD problems inherent in
   encapsulation is intended to be secure against attacks - such as from
   spoofed ICMP Packet Too Big messages.

   Ivip is the only CES architecture to provide an inexpensive method of
   ETRs enforcing the source address filtering ISPs may impose on
   packets arriving at their Border Routers (BRs).  Such filtering is
   imposed to prevent outside attackers spoofing the address of any host
   inside the ISP's network - and includes dropping packets with private
   (RFC 1918) source addresses.

   This is achieved by the simple arrangement of the ITR using the
   sending host's address as the outer header source address in all the
   encapsulated packets in the tunnel to the ETR.  ETRs simply compare
   the inner source address with the outer, and drop any decapsulated
   packets where the two differ.  (With encapsulation, when the ITR
   occasionally probes the PMTU to an ETR, it sends an additional packet
   with the source address being that of the ITR, but this does not
   alter the ETR's ability to enforce BR source address filtering.)

   This also works well with packets tunneled from ITRs inside the ISP
   network.  Please see the section "ETR support for ISP border router
   source address filtering" in "Recommendation suggestion from RW"
   (http://www.ietf.org/mail-archive/web/rrg/current/msg06162.html or
   any later version of this) for a discussion of why it appears to be
   impossible for LISP ETRs to enforce this BR source address filtering.

   This approach - of the ETR dropping inner packets whose source
   address does not match the source address in the outer header - is
   only for encapsulation.  When MHF is used, there is no need for ETRs
   to perform any such task, since the original packet is sent across
   the DFZ, with the sending host's source address in the IP header - so
   BR filtering occurs normally and the ETR never receives a packet
   which violates these filtering rules.

5.12.  Avoiding the need for any one server to store or receive the
       complete mapping database

   With DRTM, QSAs store the complete mapping database for one or
   typically many MABs, and so require real-time feeds of mapping
   updates for those MABs.  At boot time, they need to be able to
   download snapshots of the databases and bring that information up-to-
   date with the updates sent since the snapshot was made, before the
   database can be used to answer mapping queries.  The same procedure
   would be executed if the QSA ever lost sync with the feed of mapping
   updates.



Whittle                 Expires September 8, 2010              [Page 26]

Internet-Draft              Ivip Architecture                 March 2010


   However, there is no requirement that any one QSA handle all the
   MABs.  There is no prohibition of this - for instance if a DITR-site
   handles every MAB in the Ivip system, this will be perfectly
   allowable.  Its just that the system is intended to work with
   multiple sets of DITR-sites, with the DITR-sites of each set handling
   a subset of the MABs.  To whatever extent there are scaling limits to
   the number of micronets a DITR-site and its one or more DITRs and
   QSAs can handle, this does not pose a problem for the scaling of the
   entire Ivip system, since the total load can be handled by multiple
   such DITR-sites.  QSRs can handle many sets of DITR sites - so there
   is no obvious limit to the scaling of the entire system.

   Before DRTM, each ISP with ITRs had to install two or more "QSDs"
   (full database query servers - the term is no longer part of Ivip).
   These were full-database for all MABs and so required real-time feeds
   of all mapping updates for all MABs.  This presented a scaling
   problem and an unfair burden on the ISP if its customers rarely or
   never sent packets to micronets for which a large number of updates
   were sent, or never sent packets to whole MABs which the QSD still
   had to store and receive updates for.  (These statements about ISPs
   also apply to any end-user network with ITRs which chooses to install
   its own QSR, or previously QSD, rather than use those of its one or
   more ISPs.)

   With DRTM, QSDs are replaced by QSRs - caching Resolving Query
   Servers.  So there is no need for ISPs to maintain a server which is
   full-database for any MAB.  This greatly reduces scaling problems.
   It will remain an option for a QSR to be full-database for one or
   more MABs - and in principle for it to be full-database for all MABs,
   in which case it would function just like the now-obsolete QSD.
   However, AFAIK, there will be no need to do this - since caching-only
   QSRs should scale well and cope with the largest imaginable numbers
   of micronets.

5.13.  Eliminating unfair burdens

   Prior to DRTM, Ivip had a "non-goal" of eliminating unfair burdens.
   This was because with full-database QSDs (as discussed above) it
   could not be ruled out that an ISP would face expenses running its
   one or more QSDs which in part depended on there being some large
   number of micronets, or large number of changes to micronets, which
   the ISP never gained any benefit from - because these did not affect
   packets sent by its customers.

   This unhappy situation is no longer a part of Ivip.

   Ivip's goal is to eliminate "unfair burdens", but no scalable routing
   system is likely to achieve this entirely.



Whittle                 Expires September 8, 2010              [Page 27]

Internet-Draft              Ivip Architecture                 March 2010


   An example of an "unfair burden" which remains with DRTM is that each
   QSR needs to automatically discover two or more typically "nearby"
   QSAs for every MAB in the Ivip system.  Yet perhaps the QSR and the
   ITRs which depend upon it will never send packets to some of these
   MABs.  This is unfair, but it is much less of a problem than before
   DRTM, where the QSD would need to store all the micronets of such
   MABs and receive all the updates to them as well.

   Ivip's goal is to minimise unfair burdens and to eliminate them where
   possible.  It should be able to achieve a huge improvement over the
   problem which lies at the heart of today's routing scaling problem -
   the unfair burden imposed on all DFZ router operators by the addition
   of each PI prefix by any end-user network in the world which is able
   to obtain the space and advertise it in the DFZ.





































Whittle                 Expires September 8, 2010              [Page 28]

Internet-Draft              Ivip Architecture                 March 2010


6.  Non-goals

6.1.  Isolation between core and edge networks is not required

   At least one CES architecture - APT (which is no longer being
   developed) - appeared to have a goal of completely separating (really
   "isolating") core networks from edge networks.  In this scenario,
   only ISPs would have core addresses and all end-user networks (or
   perhaps all end-user networks which needed portability, multihoming
   and TE) had edge addresses.  Then, in theory, it would be possible to
   prevent any host in an edge network from sending packets to the core
   - which was supposed to provide some security benefits.

   Ivip has no such goal.  For a discussion of my attempt to understand
   this aspect of APT, and how this may have affected the ways in which
   some people use and think about the term "Core-Edge Separation",
   please see: "CES & CEE: GLI-Split; GSE, Six/One Router; 2008 sep./
   elim. paper (v3)"
   (http://www.ietf.org/mail-archive/web/rrg/current/msg06110.html 2010-
   02-24, or any later version).

6.2.  Full adoption not required

   Ivip does not rely for its benefits (improvements to routing
   scalability, or the benefits for end-user networks) on complete
   adoption of SPI (edge) space by all end-user networks, or by the
   subset of them which want or need portability, multihoming and TE.

   Ideally, for scalability, the only prefixes advertised in the DFZ
   would be those of ISPs (including those used to serve many end-user
   networks with PA space) and the relatively small number of prefixes
   which encompass the SPI space.  "Relatively small" is in comparison
   to the very large number of micronets these prefixes contain and to
   the likewise very large numbers of end-user networks which are using
   this SPI space.

   The full benefits for end-user networks which adopt SPI space -
   portability, multihoming and TE - do not depend at all on how many
   other end-user networks adopt SPI space.

   The benefit of routing scalability depends on how many end-user
   networks which need or want portability, multihoming and TE actually
   do adopt SPI space, rather than the two undesirable alternatives of
   either not getting these benefits, or getting them by the unscaleable
   method of advertising conventional PI prefixes in the DFZ.

   In order to maximise routing scalability, the more end-user networks
   which adopt SPI space, the better.  But there is no need or intention



Whittle                 Expires September 8, 2010              [Page 29]

Internet-Draft              Ivip Architecture                 March 2010


   to have them all adopt it.

   A satisfactory outcome for scalable routing would be for some or many
   of the end-user networks which currently advertise PI prefixes in the
   DFZ to continue doing so - and for the great majority of all other
   end-user networks which want or need portability, multihoming and TE
   to use SPI space instead.

6.3.  Mapping changes need not be free of financial cost

   It appears that the designers of other CES architectures have a goal
   of mapping changes being free of financial cost.  This is not a goal
   of Ivip.

   Ivip is the only CES architecture to contemplate or assume that
   mapping changes will be paid for - by the end-user network whose
   micronet of SPI space the mapping applies to.  All other proposals
   avoid financial costs such as this.

   In the case of the global query server systems - LISP-CONS, LISP-ALT
   and TRRP there is no need for payment, since changing the mapping has
   no direct impact beyond the authoritative query server(s) in which
   the mapping is changed.  (Unless there are provisions for sending
   mapping changes to particular ITRs which might need it, which may be
   a part of LISP.)

   Ivip's arrangement for charging end-users for each mapping change,
   and for each change to the way their SPI space is divided into
   micronets, is intended to achieve two outcomes.

   Firstly, the payment - which goes to the MABOC - helps the MABOC
   cover its costs of maintaining multiple DITR-sites, each with their
   QSA authoritative query servers.  Each such change involves data
   transmission to these sites and may involve QSAs sending Cache Update
   commands to queriers (QSRs) to which mapping for the micronet has
   "recently" been sent in a map reply message, or in a Cache Update
   message.  This is fully described in the DRTM ID.

   It is also vaguely possible that if there are really large numbers of
   updates, ISPs and other networks with ITRs and QSRs may object to
   handling all these Cache Updates without some payment by the MABOC
   from whose QSAs they are sent.  So it is vaguely possible that MABOCs
   may need to use some of these fees to encourage ISPs to accept these
   Cache Updates.  Such frequent updates are most likely to arise from
   end-user networks doing short-timescale inbound TE changes - and they
   will do this as long as the cost of the mapping changes is lower than
   the benefit they derive from the inbound TE, which may be
   substantial.



Whittle                 Expires September 8, 2010              [Page 30]

Internet-Draft              Ivip Architecture                 March 2010


   Secondly, this fee per mapping change inhibits end-user networks from
   making so many mapping changes unless they have a suitably strong
   reason to do so.  This will lighten the load on the MABOC's systems,
   including especially the DITRs and QSAs it either runs, or pays
   another organization to run.

   The cost of changes should be low enough to be a trivial issue in the
   rare events of multihoming service restoration and portability to
   another ISP.  The cost should also be low enough to make reasonably
   frequent changes for TE attractive, when it allows significantly
   better utilization of multiple links to ISPs.  It should also be low
   enough to present no problems for TTR Mobility, whenever mapping
   changes due to the MN moving more than about 1000km.

6.4.  No attempt to cope with partially reachable ETRs

   Ivip's use of a single ETR address in the mapping is different from
   the use of multiple ETR addresses in the mapping information of all
   other CES architectures.  This gives rise to a potential benefit of
   those other schemes which is not a goal of Ivip.

   Ivip ITRs all over the Net tunnel packets which are addressed to any
   particular micronet to a single ETR at any one time.  (This is
   ignoring perhaps a second or less when the mapping is changed, and
   some ITRs receive the Cache Update message from their QSC or QSR
   query server earlier than others.)  It is up to the multihoming end-
   user network to ensure that the mapping changes in a manner which
   maximises the connectivity of its network during a multihoming
   service restoration event.

   For instance, an end-user network has two ISPs ISP-A and ISP-B, and
   can map its one or more micronets to either ETR-A or ETR-B.  Whether
   the ETRs are in the ISP or at the end-user site is not important.
   ETR-A's connection to the rest of the Net is via ISP-A and ETR-B's is
   via ISP-B.  In this example, only one micronet is considered, but the
   same principles apply with multiple micronets.

   When both ISPs and ETRs are working well - that is to say when the
   end-user network is reachable via both ETRs - the end-user network
   may have the mapping set to ETR-A.  If an external monitoring company
   (contracted by the end-user network) detects that the end-user
   network is no longer reachable via ETR-A, then it will issue a
   mapping change so that the micronet is mapped to ETR-B instead.  As
   long as ETR-B is connected to the end-user network and is reachable
   from any router in the DFZ, then this is a perfectly good outcome:
   full connectivity is restored within a few seconds of the mapping
   change being issued.




Whittle                 Expires September 8, 2010              [Page 31]

Internet-Draft              Ivip Architecture                 March 2010


   However, if ETR-B is unreachable from some subset of the DFZ routers
   (and therefore from a subset of sending hosts in end-user and ISP
   networks) AND this subset of DFZ routers can reach the end-user
   network via ETR-A, then Ivip cannot ensure complete connectivity,
   since the end-user network is not reachable to all hosts in all
   networks through just one ETR or the other.  (Actually, practical
   connectivity only concerns the fraction of DFZ routers and other
   networks with hosts which are currently sending packets to this end-
   user network - but the ideal is that the end-user network is always
   reachable from all other networks.)

   Other CES architectures such as LISP have a potential advantage in
   this scenario, since it is possible that all the ITRs which are
   currently sending packets may be able to discern the reachability of
   the two ETRs (or, if LISP is ever able to do this: determine the
   reachability of the end-user network through the two ETRs) and adapt
   their tunneling by choosing an ETR which enables the packets to get
   to the end-user network.  In this circumstance, the non-Ivip CES
   architectures would be able to restore full connectivity when Ivip
   could not.

   However, this set of circumstances - both ETRs being partially
   reachable and the patterns of reachability being complementary so
   from anywhere in the Net, at least one was reachable - is likely to
   be a transient state, since the DFZ routers will rapidly adapt their
   best-paths to restore full connectivity to both ISPs and their ETRs.
   Also, it cannot be assured or assumed that the non-Ivip ITRs would
   choose the reachable ETR fast enough to take advantage of such a
   situation.

   Nonetheless, it is possible that a non-Ivip ITR may be able to detect
   non-reachability of a particular ETR when the Ivip approach would
   not.  This is because with Ivip, multihomed end-user networks will
   typically contract another company to continually probe the
   reachability of their network through their two or more ETRs - and
   that company will do so from a finite number of servers in particular
   parts of the Net. There may be an outage affecting ITRs which are
   handling packets addressed to this end-user network which does not
   affect the set of servers the multihoming monitoring company is using
   - so that company will not detect the problem affecting these traffic
   handling ITRs.  In that case, the non-Ivip approach would be superior
   - if the non-Ivip ITR could detect the outage and correctly chose
   another ETR through which the end-user network was reachable.

   With Ivip, end-user networks will be able to choose between many
   Multihoming Monitoring (MM) companies and each company would have a
   range of options for how frequent the reachability probing occurs,
   how many servers in the DFZ are used to probe the path via each ETR



Whittle                 Expires September 8, 2010              [Page 32]

Internet-Draft              Ivip Architecture                 March 2010


   and how decisions should be made if there appears to be a
   reachability problem.  A MM company with probing servers scattered
   widely around the Net should be able to detect most reachability
   problems experienced by in any part of the DFZ, but it can't
   necessarily detect every one.  How the MM company decides which
   outages to respond to, with a mapping change, is a matter for the
   company and the end-user network to decide.

   Ivip's external, user-supplied, detection of reachability problems
   and creation of mapping changes can be the subject of ongoing
   innovation and choice, with the intention that it be more effective
   at restoring full connectivity than the individual, isolated, efforts
   of non-Ivip ITRs - which have a difficult task reliably and
   inexpensively testing reachability of the end-user network via
   various ETRs.  This is particularly the case if tens or hundreds of
   thousands of ITRs are tunneling to one ETR.  Such non-Ivip ITRs may
   not actually probe reachability of ETRs with ping or the like, but
   rely on ICMP messages due to traffic packets not reaching the ETR.  A
   difficulty with this (again for non-Ivip ETRs) is that ICMP messages
   may be lost or may not always be generated if there is an outage.
   Furthermore, it would be costly for these ITRs to be able to securely
   distinguish genuine ICMP messages from spoofed ICMP messages.

6.5.  No attempt to mix IPv4 and IPv6

   Ivip for IPv4 is intended to be a free-standing system completely
   independent of Ivip for IPv6.  An IPv4 ITR could be implemented in
   the same server or router as an IPv6 ITR - just as ITR, ETR and query
   server functions could be performed in the one device.

   Likewise, the DITR-site systems of DITRs, QSAs and the mapping
   distribution systems inside each system or DITR-sites for IPv4 and
   IPv6 are intended to be separate and independent - but there's
   nothing to prevent one server being used for both the IPv4 and IPv6
   systems.

6.6.  Not Locator - Identifier Separation

   There is considerable terminological inexactitude regarding the use
   of the term "Loc/ID Separation".  True Locator - Identifier
   separation involves hosts handling packets using two objects of
   different types, usually called Locator and Identifier, which
   therefore are in different namespaces.  The Locator is usually
   regarded as an "address" but the Identifier is not.

   If both types of object are numeric and a Locator and an Identifier
   were numerically identical they would refer to different things
   because this numeric value has different meanings in each namespace.



Whittle                 Expires September 8, 2010              [Page 33]

Internet-Draft              Ivip Architecture                 March 2010


   Further discussion of the meaning of "namespace" is at: [Namespace] .

   HIP and ILNP [I-D.rja-ilnp-intro] are examples of Locator /
   Identifier Separation.  LISP (Locator/Identifier Separation
   Protocol), Ivip, APT, TRRP and TIDR are not.

   An architecture which uses FQDNs as Identifiers and IP addresses
   (always PI, to ensure scalability) as Locators is also an example of
   true Loc/ID separation - for instance Name-Based Sockets [Vogt-2009].

   LISP, Ivip and other CES architectures do not present hosts with
   separate Locator and Identifier addresses.  The host sees only IP
   addresses, which perform both functions simultaneously - just as they
   do without Core-Edge Separation.  ITRs are the only devices which
   treat packets differently if their destination address is in the
   "edge" subset of the global unicast address range.

   The full arguments about why Core-Edge Separation cannot correctly be
   construed as "Locator / Identifier Separation" are at:
   [loc-id-sep-vs-ces].  For further discussion and why LISP is
   misnamed, please see the following RRG messages from early 2010:
   msg05864, msg05865, msg06110 and msg06190.





























Whittle                 Expires September 8, 2010              [Page 34]

Internet-Draft              Ivip Architecture                 March 2010


7.  Architectural Choices

7.1.  Core-Edge Separation rather than Elimination

7.1.1.  Core-Edge Elimination (CEE) architectures

   Core-Edge Elimination (CEE) involves hosts dealing with two kinds of
   entity for dealing with other hosts and to write into packet headers
   in order that they will get to their desired destination: Identifiers
   and Locators.  The simplest adaptation of existing protocols is to
   retain IP addresses as Locator addresses and develop a separate
   namespace for the Identifier addresses.  Some CEE architectures only
   modify the stack of each host, and use unmodified IPv6 applications.
   Other require modified stacks and applications.

   Each host retains its one or more Identifiers, no matter which one or
   more Locator addresses it is using.  The Locator addresses are global
   unicast addresses which are supplied by ISPs as PI space.  The
   simplest form of multihomed end-user network would gain a PI prefix
   from each of its ISPs and each of its hosts would use one address
   from each prefix as a Locator address.  Each such prefix is part of a
   larger (in terms of number of addresses - shorter in terms of prefix
   length) prefix the ISP advertises in the DFZ.  The ISP can split one
   such advertised prefix into many smaller (longer) prefixes for
   multiple end-user networks.  This solves the routing scaling problem
   because the total number of large (short) prefixes advertised by all
   ISPs is scalable, whereas - if not for the CEE architecture - the
   number of PI prefixes advertised in the DFZ by multihoming end-user
   networks would be an unacceptable burden on all DFZ routers and on
   the entire DFZ BGP control plane.

   Applications connect to other hosts solely in terms of their
   Identifier addresses.  It is the task of each host's stack (or
   perhaps its applications) to adapt to changes in other hosts'
   Locators, and to inform other hosts which need to know about this
   host's changed Locators.  The Identifier may be numeric or have some
   other form, and there is typically a DNS mapping from FQDNs to one or
   more Identifier addresses, just as there are to IP addresses today.

   Some key points about Core-Edge Elimination architectures include:



      1.  Identifiers are from a completely different namespace than
          Locators.  If both are numeric, and a Locator is numerically
          equal to an Identifier, there can be no confusion about the
          separate entities each refers to, since the Identifier is
          interpreted in a different namespace from that used for



Whittle                 Expires September 8, 2010              [Page 35]

Internet-Draft              Ivip Architecture                 March 2010


          Locators.  Therefore, if IP addresses are used as Locators, IP
          addresses cannot be used as Identifiers.

      2.  Host stacks are responsible for choosing which of a
          correspondent host's Locators to send a packet to.  This work
          is not done by network elements, such as routers.  (However
          some CEE architectures may have routers alter part or all of
          the outgoing destination address, or perhaps source address,
          to exert-network centric control over traffic flows.)

      3.  While there is typically a global, decentralised mapping
          system by which hosts can use another host's Identifier
          (perhaps in combination with one of its Locators) to look up
          that host's complete set of one or more Locators, the network
          itself remains simple and hosts take on more responsibilities
          than they have with existing IP protocols.  This is regarded
          as a virtue by many people, and represents an extension of
          TCP/IPs "dumb network, smart end-points" approach, especially
          when compared to the telephone network.

      4.  Since applications need to work with a different kind of
          address element than an IP address for establishing and
          maintaining communications with other hosts, the host stack,
          its API and applications themselves need to be substantially
          rewritten in order to be able to work with a CEE architecture
          - unless the system supports unmodified applications in some
          way.

      5.  While it may be possible to slowly introduce such an
          architecture, the benefits of portability, multihoming and TE
          only apply to packets sent between hosts using the new system
          - so substantial benefits to adopters only occur when all, or
          essentially all, hosts have been upgraded to the new system.

      6.  CEE architectures are subject to the critique that the extra
          management packets which hosts must send and receive as part
          of the new system is likely to create extra costs, delays
          and/or unreliability compared to current IP techniques.

      7.  This critique can be extended to argue that mobile hosts, due
          to their typically slow, not-necessarily reliable and
          potentially costly wireless links are especially impacted by
          these new responsibilities.

      8.  Core-Edge Elimination architectures typically do not apply to
          IPv4 and so are based on IPv6 or on entirely new arrangements.
          If CEE was used for IPv4, it would not be practical due to the
          inherent inefficiency of its use of global unicast address



Whittle                 Expires September 8, 2010              [Page 36]

Internet-Draft              Ivip Architecture                 March 2010


          space.  In IPv4, any end-user network which needs a /24 of
          address space for its hosts would require a /24 from each of
          its upstream ISPs.  So all multihomed end-user networks would
          consume at least twice the space they need - which is not
          practical with IPv4's address shortage.

   Points 4 and 5 constitute insurmountable barriers to the adoption of
   CEE architectures, since adoption must be very widespread, within a
   period of years, rather than decades, and since adoption must occur
   on a voluntary basis.  [Constraints-Voluntary]

   Point 6 is an argument that while CEE architectures are theoretically
   elegant and simple, the facts of delay and loss of packets across
   global query server systems such as DNS - or whatever mapping system
   is used to securely determine the full set of Locators which can be
   used for a host with a given Identity - will contribute to delays in
   sending application packets.  (All CEE architectures to date involve
   global query server systems with just one or a few authoritative
   query servers.  None involve "nearby" or "local" authoritative query
   servers, which is the only way to avoid excessive delays and risks of
   packet loss.)

   Also, if the two hosts have to exchange management packets with each
   other, for authentication purposes, before any application packets
   can be sent, then this will slow down the establishment of
   communications - especially if the hosts are far apart, on high
   latency links or if packets are lost.

   Point 7 implies that in order to create a network which performs
   best, given the vagaries of slow and unreliable last-mile links, all
   hosts should not have to perform these additional Routing and
   Addressing management functions - that such functions be handled by
   better-connected devices, such as routers in ISPs' data-centers.
   [Host-Responsibilities]

   The only existing routing scaling problem is in the IPv4 Internet.
   In early 2010 the IPv4 DFZ has about 300k prefixes with a doubling
   time of about 4.5 years.  The IPv6 DFZ has about 855 prefixes -
   1/350th the IPv4 number.  Even if IPv6 prefix numbers had a doubling
   time of 1.0 years, it would be mid 2018 before the number reached
   current IPv4 levels - which are not yet unworkable.  IPv6 adoption
   rates have consistently disappointed IETF expectations.  Despite the
   run-out of unallocated IPv4 space, there is no sign yet that large
   numbers of existing users can have their Internet needs adequately
   served via IPv6 addresses alone.

   For the reasons described in points 4 to 8, Ivip instead adopts a
   Core-Edge Separation approach.



Whittle                 Expires September 8, 2010              [Page 37]

Internet-Draft              Ivip Architecture                 March 2010


7.1.2.  Core-Edge Separation (CES) architectures

   Ivip uses a Core-Edge Separation (CES) Architecture.  CES does not
   involve the creation of new namespaces and does not require any
   changes to host stacks or applications.

   A subset of the global unicast address space is converted to a new
   type of address which, in Ivip, is known as Scalable PI (SPI) space.
   The addresses which remain once this new, scalable, "edge" subset of
   the global unicast space is separated out is known as "core" address
   space.

   (In LISP, the "edge" subset is known as EID (Endpoint Identifier) and
   the remainder is known as RLOC (Routing Locator).  However it is a
   mistake to think of these as being "Identifiers" and "Locators" or to
   think that LISP has anything to do with the Locator / Identifier
   Separation naming model.)

   This subset will consist of a growing number of prefixes, each of
   which is known as a MAB (Mapped Address Block).  Each MAB is
   advertised in the DFZ by as many DITRs as are at DITR-sites which
   support this MAB.  (The QSAs at those sites are also authoritative
   query servers for the MABs the site supports.)

   Within each MAB, the SPI space can be divided up amongst many
   (thousands to potentially millions) of separate end-user networks.
   If a network gains more than one basic unit of address space - an
   IPv4 address or an IPv6 /64 prefix - it can divide this space into
   multiple separately mapped "micronets".

   As more and more space is converted for use as SPI space, this "edge"
   space will grow to become a significant fraction of the total global
   unicast space.  There must always be some conventional, "core", non-
   SPI, space, since ETRs must be located on such addresses.  There are
   many uses of space within ISPs which do not need to be on SPI space -
   including the large numbers of IPv4 addresses, or in the future IPv6
   /64s, which are used for individual home and SOHO customers.  Each
   such customer gets what is effectively a small (long) prefix of PI
   space, which is suitable for their purposes because they do not want
   or need portability, multihoming or TE.

   As noted in the non-goals section, Ivip does not require or aim for
   complete conversion of all end-user networks to SPI space.  Many will
   be happy with existing PI arrangements, and some larger existing end-
   user networks with their own (unscaleable) PA prefixes will probably
   retain their current arrangements.  Nonetheless, SPI space is
   intended to be attractive to all end-user networks, including the
   largest corporations, universities and government departments.



Whittle                 Expires September 8, 2010              [Page 38]

Internet-Draft              Ivip Architecture                 March 2010


   CES involves the progressive repurposing of existing address space.
   It does not involve the creation of any separate namespaces.
   "Separation" in "Locator/Identifier Separation" means separate
   namespaces.  Only CEE architectures implement "Locator / Identifier
   Separation".

   CES can be introduced gradually, and with DITRs (or their LISP
   equivalent - PTRs) the benefits of portability, multihoming and TE
   can be supported for all packets sent to the adopting end-user
   network.  Therefore 100% of traffic receives these benefits, in
   contrast to CEE architectures where only the subset of traffic
   originating from other upgraded networks has these benefits.

   Assuming a CES architecture does not significantly reduce
   performance, robustness or security - and if it provides significant
   and immediate benefits to all adopters - then it meets the
   constraints due to the need for widespread voluntary adoption.
   [Constraints-Voluntary]

   All CES architectures I am aware of do not require hosts to perform
   additional work to manage routing and addressing.  So no CES
   architecture is subject to the critique which applies to CEE
   architectures, particularly with reference to mobile hosts:
   [Host-Responsibilities].

   The historical roots of Core-Edge Separation architectures can be
   found in the mid-1990s - Steve Deering's "Map & Encap" for IPv4
   [Deering-1996], Robert Hinden's "New Scheme for Internet Routing and
   Addressing (ENCAPS) for IPNG" (RFC 1955) and the 1992 crocker-ip-
   encaps-01.txt.

7.2.  Nearby authoritative query servers

   Probably the greatest challenge for a CES architecture is how to
   ensure ITRs can securely, reliably and rapidly obtain the mapping
   they need in order to be able to decide which ETR to tunnel a packet
   to.  There are four basic approaches to this problem:



      1.  The complete global set of mapping changes is sent to each
          ITR, which maintains an up-to-date copy of the full mapping
          database.

      2.  Local full-database query servers are located in ISP networks
          and potentially in end-user networks in which ITRs are based.
          The complete global set of mapping changes is sent to each
          such query server, which maintains an up-to-date copy of the



Whittle                 Expires September 8, 2010              [Page 39]

Internet-Draft              Ivip Architecture                 March 2010


          full mapping database.  ITRs query one or more of these and so
          obtain mapping quickly and reliably.

      3.  ITRs in an ISP network (or in an end-user network) send
          queries to local caching query servers - directly to a QSR or
          indirectly via one or more levels of QSC.  Both these types of
          server are caching query servers and are "local" in that they
          are in the same ISP network, or if the ITR is in an end-user
          network are either in that end-user network or in the networks
          of its one or more ISPs.  QSRs are the interface between the
          ITRs and the authoritative query servers which are not local -
          but which are typically "nearby".  (See following text of a
          definition of "nearby".)

      4.  No site or device stores a complete copy of the global mapping
          database.  Instead, there is a global network by which ITRs
          can send query to the authoritative query server for the
          particular micronet of addresses which match the destination
          address of the packet the ITR needs to tunnel.

   The only architecture to propose option 1 was LISP-NERD.  This is
   widely regarded as scaling poorly with large numbers of end-user
   networks.  LISP-NERD was to be retired, but a new version 07 ID
   appeared in early January 2010.  [I-D.lear-lisp-nerd]

   APT used option 2.  Ivip before DRTM (that is, before March 2010)
   also used option 2 - the local full database query servers were
   called QSDs.  In APT, they were also called Default Mappers, and also
   handle the encapsulation of some packets.

   Ivip with DRTM uses option 3.  The definition of "nearby" follows
   shortly.

   All other CES architectures to date use option 4.  The most prominent
   examples are LISP-CONS [I-D.meyer-lisp-cons], LISP-ALT and TRRP.

   In option 3, "nearby" means something like within a few thousand km.
   In fibre, 200km involves approximately 1ms delay.  So if the
   authoritative query server is 2000km away, the propagation delay in
   SiO2 sets a lower bound to the response time of 20ms.  It is assumed
   that if the ITR buffers any packets it has no mapping for but gets
   the mapping within some time like 50ms or perhaps 100ms, then this
   constitutes an insignificant delay in the establishment of initial
   communications for all applications and human users.  Therefore,
   "nearby" means close enough not to involve significant delay or risk
   of packet loss.  "Typically nearby" means that except for unusual
   error conditions - assuming MABOCs are looking after the interests of
   their SPI-leasing customers well, by placing multiple DITR-sites with



Whittle                 Expires September 8, 2010              [Page 40]

Internet-Draft              Ivip Architecture                 March 2010


   their QSAs in widely spread locations around the Net - that ITRs will
   usually be able to send packets within 50ms or so, which is assumed
   to be an insignificant delay.

   QSC, QSR and QSAs will all have response times, but it is reasonable
   to assume these will normally be a few ms, considering the enormous
   four-core 3GHz clock CPU power which inexpensive COTS servers now
   possess.

   The global query server network approach has obvious advantages in
   terms of there being no hardware-imposed limit to the number of query
   servers or end-user networks which can be supported.  Furthermore,
   changes to mapping impose no direct burden on any other devices -
   whereas for option 1 or 2, information must be sent to potentially
   hundreds of thousands of devices all around the world.

   However, global query server systems pose apparently insoluble
   problems of delay and potential unreliability - due the delays and
   risk of packet losses which are inherent in their global nature.
   Furthermore it seems to be impossible to make these systems scale to
   the very large numbers of EIDs required for ubiquitous mobile
   adoption.  [LISP-ALT-Critique]

   Typically "nearby" full-database query servers is the clear choice
   for Ivip because ITRs will normally not delay any packets to a
   significant degree and because this system avoids the avoid scaling
   problems which arise from any server being required to store the full
   mapping database of all MABs, and the need for a single, coordinated,
   mapping distribution system to drive these servers.

7.3.  Real-time mapping distribution

   By getting mapping changes to all ITRs which need it (all ITRs
   handling packets addressed to the micronet whose mapping just
   changed) in real-time - within a few seconds at most - Ivip achieves
   several major benefits.  Firstly, the mapping information can be more
   compact, since only a single ETR address is needed.  Secondly, ITRs
   can be much less complex, and do not need to do any reachability
   testing.  Thirdly, the real time control of all ITRs which is given
   to end-user networks modularly externalises the reachability,
   multihoming service restoration and TE decision making systems from
   the CES architecture itself.

7.4.  SPI address management

   Traditional IP techniques divide address space into binary boundary
   prefixes.  Ivip uses traditional prefixes for the largest unit of SPI
   space - the "Mapped Address Block" (MAB).  The smaller divisions of



Whittle                 Expires September 8, 2010              [Page 41]

Internet-Draft              Ivip Architecture                 March 2010


   this do not use prefixes or binary boundaries.  The units of dividing
   SPI space are IPv4 addresses and IPv6/64s.

   A MAB is a prefix of address space which is devoted to use as SPI
   space.  The single MAB is advertised in the DFZ, by all the DITRs at
   DITR-sites which support this MAB.  These DITRs attract packets
   addressed to any address in the MAB.  (It would also be possible to
   load share the MAB between multiple DITRs, each advertising a segment
   of it, but in general complete MABs will be advertised.)  For
   instance, an IPv4 MAB may be 11.22.0.0/16.

   A MAB might have previously been conventional PI space of an end-user
   network, and may now be used exclusively by this end-user network.
   In this case, it will presumably be used to serve the needs of many
   sites within this network, so achieving routing scaling by removing
   the need to advertise each such smaller (longer) prefix in the DFZ.
   In this case, the end-user network is the MABOC of this MAB, and it
   does not lease any of the space to any other organizations.

   Most MABs will be operated by MABOCs which are specialised companies
   - perhaps ISPs but not necessarily.  The MABOC typically acquires
   rights to multiple prefixes of global unicast space, advertises each
   of them in a global system of DITRs and then leases out smaller
   portions of the MABs, on an annual basis, to a large number of end-
   user networks.

   Each end-user network leases a section of the MAB - a User Address
   Block (UAB).  One end-user network might lease multiple non-
   contiguous UABs in the one MAB, and multiple UABs in multiple MABs.
   For simplicity, the following discussion assume they rent a single
   UAB, such as: 11.22.33.84 to 11.22.33.95 inclusive.  This is an 18 IP
   address UAB.  UABs could be as small as a single IPv4 address or IPv6
   /64 or could be very large, including as large as the MAB itself.

   The end-user network which rents this UAB is responsible for
   generating mapping changes to suit its needs - and for multihoming
   would typically hire a Multihoming Monitoring (MM) company and give
   them the credentials required to control the mapping via whatever
   mechanism the MABOC provides.

   The end-user network can split their UAB up as they wish into
   typically smaller sections, known as "micronets".  (Bill Herrin first
   used this term in TRRP.)  A micronet is a contiguous set of any
   number of IPv4 addresses or IPv6 /64s which fit within the one UAB.
   This 18 IP address UAB could be used as a single 18 IP address
   micronet, or it could be split in any way - such as into as many as
   18 single IP address micronets.




Whittle                 Expires September 8, 2010              [Page 42]

Internet-Draft              Ivip Architecture                 March 2010


   Each micronet is covered by a single Ivip mapping - it is mapped to a
   single ETR address.

   MABs and micronets are important to ITRs and most of the mapping
   system.  UABs are not needed for these, but are an administrative
   construct of SPI space which an end-user network is authorised to
   change the mapping for.

   The MABOC would provide a method by which the end-user network, or
   some other company it authorises, can change the mapping and the
   division of the UAB into micronets quickly and securely.  This would
   involve the end-user network having complete control, but being able
   to give a username and password to another party such as the MM
   (Multihoming Monitoring) company, by the MM company could control the
   mapping of some or all of the end-user's UAB space.

   The technical and administrative arrangements for this are not
   described at present, but as the Ivip system comes closer to being
   standardized, it would be desirable to provide a standard protocol or
   interface by which end-user networks or their appointees could issue
   mapping changes, rearrange the division of UABs into micronets etc.
   Also, it would be desirable to have a standardised way that an end-
   user network could allow its appointee to control the mapping for
   individual micronets within its UAB.  If this was universally adopted
   by all MABOCs, then multihoming monitoring systems would only need to
   work with this one system for controlling the mapping of micronets.

   For each mapping change and each change to the division of the UAB
   into micronets, the end-user network would typically incur a fee from
   the MAB company.

   The MAB company would charge fees for leasing the UAB space, and for
   the load placed on the DITRs which cover this MAB.  The MAB company
   may run its own DITRs - and their associated QSAs - or may contract
   this out to another company which specialises in this service.  It
   will be an important part of the MAB company's service to locate
   DITRs in all corners of the Net, to ensure good load sharing between
   them and to minimise the total path length from the sending host to
   whichever ETR the end-user network chooses to map their Micronet to.
   Likewise, the load-sharing between the QSAs at these sites, and the
   desirability of having QSAs "nearby" to the QSRs in ISP and other
   networks all over the world.

   This flexible integer-based approach to dividing SPI space is
   intended to maximise the efficiency with which it is can be used.
   Since a single physical site, such as a branch office, may be able to
   operate perfectly well on one or a few IPv4 addresses, or on a single
   IPv6 /64, a seemingly small UAB of 18 IPv4 addresses could be used to



Whittle                 Expires September 8, 2010              [Page 43]

Internet-Draft              Ivip Architecture                 March 2010


   serve the needs of as many branch offices.  Each such site could be
   multihomed with two or more local ISPs.

   As fresh expanses of IPv4 space disappear, there will be continuing
   pressure to slice and dice the address space more finely so it can be
   used by more and more ISPs and end-user networks.  However, the
   convention in the DFZ is not to propagate prefixes longer than /24.
   This 256 IP address granularity inherent in the current arrangement
   leads to considerable underutilization of space.  With SPI address
   able to be sliced and diced freely in the smallest possible
   increments, a much greater utilization can be expected, in a scalable
   fashion, than is possible with current techniques.

7.5.  IP in IP encapsulation

   When encapsulation is used, there is a simple IP-in-IP header.  There
   is no need for ITRs to communicate with ETRs, except for the purpose
   of PMTUD management.  So, when the ITR tunnels traffic packets
   ordinarily (in all cases except for the special Path MTU measurement
   protocol, which is only used rarely) there is no need for a UDP
   header to enclose a special header with extra information.
   Architectures with slow mapping distribution and which therefore
   require ITRs to choose between multiple ETRs typically require the
   ITRs and ETRs to communicate - but this is not needed for Ivip.

7.6.  MHF initially or in the long term to avoid encapsulation and PMTUD
      problems

   Both the IPv4 and IPv6 headers have un-used bits which can be
   employed to direct the packet from ITR to ETR.  This path is
   primarily across the DFZ but typically includes routers inside ISP
   and end-user networks.  These routers need to be upgraded - and in
   the long-term this can be done without significant cost, simply by
   building the new capabilities into new routers and implementing it in
   firmware updates.

7.7.  Outer header address is that of the sending host

   When encapsulation is used, it seems natural to use the ITR's address
   as the outer header's source address.  This is consistent with
   traditional tunneling, and ensures the ITR gets any ICMP messages,
   including especially Packet Too Big (PTB) messages.

   There are two problems with this conventional approach, which is used
   by LISP and other CES architectures.  Firstly, it is very expensive
   for the ITR to securely respond to PTB messages.  Secondly, this
   approach means that any ISP BR filtering (dropping) of incoming
   packets according to their source address will not affect the packets



Whittle                 Expires September 8, 2010              [Page 44]

Internet-Draft              Ivip Architecture                 March 2010


   at the BRs and must be replicated in the ETR.  For more than a few
   such blocked prefixes, this is extremely expensive too - and we want
   ETRs to be as simple as possible.

   The answer is to have the ITR use the sending host's source address
   in the outer header of the encapsulated packet.  All ITRs will
   therefore generate packets with identical inner and outer source
   addresses.  ISP BR filtering will drop the packets with source
   addresses matching any prefix inside the ISP's network and the ETR
   will never need to handle such packets.

   The ETR needs to enforce this in the case where an attacker sends a
   packet to the ETR, with an inner packet having a banned source
   address and the outer header having a source address which is
   allowable.  This enforcement is achieved by the ETR performing simple
   logic on each decapsulated packet: If its source address does not
   match the outer header's source address, the packet is dropped.

   This arrangement of the outer source address being that of the
   sending host requires a novel approach to Path MTU Discovery
   management.

7.8.  IPTM (ITR Probes Tunnel MTU) PMTUD management

   As long as encapsulation is used, there needs to be a method of
   informing sending hosts, via traditional RFC 1191 techniques of what
   length packet to send, so that once encapsulated, these packets may
   reach, but not exceed the MTU of the path between the ITR and ETR.
   This is true of any CES architecture which uses encapsulation.  It is
   a complex topic and there is a solution, but it requires considerable
   thought and significant complexity in all ITR and ETR.

   PMTUD management occurs naturally via RFC 1191 mechanisms for DF=1
   traffic packets if the router with the too-small MTU is between the
   sending host and the ITR, or between the ETR and the destination
   host.  Without encapsulation - with MHF - packet lengths are not
   increased in the ITR to ETR "tunnel", and the modified routers in
   this path will convert a too-long packet back to its original IP
   header format, before passing it to the ICMP PTB algorithm.

   The difficult task is to make PMTUD work for the path between the ITR
   and ETR, where the original packet is encapsulated.  I intend to
   write up IPTM in an ID.  For now, the fullest description is on a web
   page.  [PMTUD-Frag] Here is an overview of the process, which is much
   the same for IPv4 and IPv6.

   This system involves restrictions on the length of IPv4 DF=0
   (fragmentable) packets which are accepted by this system.  It is



Whittle                 Expires September 8, 2010              [Page 45]

Internet-Draft              Ivip Architecture                 March 2010


   reasonable to expect applications not to generate such packets, which
   place a serious burden on the network of they are too long.  Google
   servers have been observed sending 1470 byte DF=0 packets.
   [DFZ-unfrag-1470] Such companies could presumably be persuaded to
   refrain from sending DF=0 packets altogether by the time a scalable
   routing solution is deployed.  In the long-term, with EAF in place of
   encapsulation for IPv4, fragmentable packets addressed to SPI
   addresses will be dropped by all ITRs.

   A simple approach to PMTUD management would be to choose some packet
   length, marginally below 1500 bytes and require all ITRs to accept
   only packets which are the encapsulation overhead number of bytes
   shorter than this.  Longer packets would cause the ITR to generate a
   PTB and the sending host would send a suitably shortened packet
   instead.  This would be simple and perform reasonably well in today's
   DFZ, where the Path MTU can reasonably be assumed to be 1460 bytes or
   more.

   However, such a scheme would fail to take advantage of jumboframe
   sized MTUs whenever they appear in the DFZ.  ITR to ETR MTUs of
   around 9k bytes are likely to become more and more prevalent as more
   routers adopt Gigabit Ethernet interfaces, which handle these large
   packets.

   The encapsulated packet has the sending host's source address.  If
   such a packet reached a router with a next hop MTU which was longer
   than the packet, the router would transmit a PTB to the sending host.
   However, the sending host should ignore it, since the destination
   address in the enclosed packet headers will be that of the ETR, not
   of the destination host - and the rest of the enclosed headers will
   not match the packet it sent.  Also, the MTU figure in the PTB is
   higher than the figure the sending host needs to adhere to.

   So the challenge is for the ITR to generate RFC 1191 PTBs when
   necessary, in an inexpensive and secure manner, whilst adapting to
   potentially higher or lower MTUs to the ETR due to routing path
   changes - while making full use of jumboframe paths if and when they
   exist.  Security in this case means being immune to spoofed PTBs - a
   single one of which could greatly reduce the MTU for all traffic from
   the ITR to a given ETR for at least ten minutes.

   A careful decision will be made to assign a value such as 1200 bytes
   to a globally agreed constant MPMTU (Minimum Path MTU).  Once set,
   this value must remain agreed to indefinitely.  A BCP would require
   all DFZ routers, and all routers between the DFZ and any ITR or ETR
   (and of course the links between these) to handle packets of this
   length.




Whittle                 Expires September 8, 2010              [Page 46]

Internet-Draft              Ivip Architecture                 March 2010


   Any packets, which once encapsulated and so ENCAPS (Encapsulation
   overhead - 20 bytes for IPv4 and 40 for IPv6) bytes longer, have
   lengths less than or equal to MPTU are encapsulated without any extra
   processing.  No PMTUD problems exist for these packets.

   For any packet longer than this, assuming the ITR has not yet probed
   the PMTU to its ETR, the ITR performs some special processing.  The
   packet itself is split into two sections and two packets are sent to
   the ETR as part of the ITR's attempt to probe the MTU to this ETR.
   One packet uses UDP encapsulation to convey a nonce, some flags and
   most of the traffic packet - with the ITR's address in the outer
   header's source address.  This long packet is exactly the same length
   as the original packet would be once encapsulated.

   If this exceeds the PMTU to the ETR, then the ITR will be sent a PTB.
   Assuming this is received, the ITR will determine a new MTU to send
   in the PTB to the sending host.  This process will repeat until the
   sending host's packets, once encapsulated, no longer exceed the MTU
   of the path to the ETR.

   IPTM does not rely on these PTBs.  The ETR is instructed, in a
   shorter packet to report to the ITR whether the long packet arrives
   or not - and the ETR repeats this report for a while until it is
   acknowledged.  The long packet is accompanied by one or more copies
   of this shorter packet, which contains a matching nonce, flags and
   the remainder of the traffic packet.  The shorter packet has the
   sending host's address in the outer header, so ISP BR source address
   filtering is still enforced.

   The effect is that as the sending host (or multiple sending hosts
   whose packets must be tunneled to the one ETR) tries longer and
   longer packets, the ITR narrows its "zone of uncertainty" (cue
   Hammond organ, with reverb and ghostly sounds . . .) about the true
   MTU to this ETR.  If the traffic packets necessitate it, the ITR will
   exactly determine the MTU, and so be able to stop probing it for a
   while and send PTBs to sending hosts which generate packets which,
   once encapsulated, would be longer than this reliably determined MTU.
   Further elaborations are required for the ITR to adapt to changing
   conditions and discover longer or shorter MTUs.

   Without some kind of PMTUD system, CES architectures cannot use
   encapsulation.  These techniques will require further design work and
   extensive testing, but are more secure and less expensive than the
   only other obvious alternative - using the ITR's address in outer
   headers and having the ITR maintain a large cache of details about
   recently sent "long" packets, in order that it can securely accept
   PTBs if they are too long.




Whittle                 Expires September 8, 2010              [Page 47]

Internet-Draft              Ivip Architecture                 March 2010


8.  Architectural Elements

8.1.  ITRs

8.1.1.  Types of ITR and their addresses

   The ITR function can be implemented in a traditional hardware-based
   router, in a COTS (Commercial Off The Shelf) server, or as a piece of
   software in a sending host.  The functions are much the same, but an
   ITR in a sending host does not advertise anything in a routing system
   - it simply handles outgoing packets which are addressed to any MAB.

   If an ITR is built with software and a COTS server, it doesn't need
   to be a "router" in most ordinary respects.  For instance it doesn't
   need multiple interfaces.  It may have a single Gigabit Ethernet link
   and advertise MABs in the local routing system, forwarding its
   encapsulated packets to a router to be forwarded like any other
   packet.

   An ITR could be built into a DSL, HFC cable, fibre or WiMax / 3G
   router.  However, it is probably best to do this only when the ITR
   function is on a reliable, fast, inexpensive link.  Most wireless
   links are not like this and it would be better to let SPI packets
   flow out of the link, and be handled by ITRs in the ISP network,
   which have fast reliable paths to local query servers.

   An ordinary ITR (not in a sending host, and not a DITR in the DFZ) is
   a device within an ISP or end-user network which attracts packets
   addressed to SPI addresses.  It may do this by advertising every MAB
   - so the only packets forwarded to it, other than those addressed to
   the DITR itself, are those addressed to SPI addresses.
   Alternatively, if the ITR is a true router (hardware or software) it
   my advertise the entire address space and so be forwarded all packets
   not addressed to prefixes advertised by local routers.  Then, it
   would encapsulate packets which are addressed to SPI addresses and
   forward all other packets according to its ordinary router functions.

   The ITR's address - the address it uses for tunneling packets from,
   and which is used for communication with the ETR for PMTUD management
   - may be on conventional global unicast space or, if in an end-user
   network, on SPI space.  This address is also used for communication
   with local query servers (QSCs or QSRs) and for receiving PTB
   messages.

   Here is a description of what happens when a sending host in an ISP
   network, such as a QSC or QSR, on the ISP's conventional address
   space, sends a packet to a host in an end-user network on an SPI
   address - in this case an ITR or ITFH.  The packet will go to an ITR



Whittle                 Expires September 8, 2010              [Page 48]

Internet-Draft              Ivip Architecture                 March 2010


   in the ISP network (if the QSC or QSR doesn't have an ITFH installed)
   and then will be tunneled to the ETR for this end-user network.  This
   ETR sends the packet to the SPI-addressed host, in this case an ITR
   or ITFH.

   When MHF is used, there is no PMTUD management, no interaction with
   ETRs and no trace of the ITR's address in any outgoing packets.
   However, the ITR still needs an address for communicating with local
   query servers.  As just noted, this can be on conventional "core"
   space or "edge" (SPI) space.

8.1.2.  DITRs - Default ITRs in the DFZ

   DITRs are "Default ITRs in the DFZ".  This first use of "Default" is
   different from the use of "Default" in "Default-Free Zone".  (This
   term looks nonsensical when expanded fully: "Default ITRs in the
   Default-Free Zone".)

   The initial "Default" means that this ITR acts as one of (typically)
   many other such ITRs, all of them outside ISP and end-user networks.
   These DITRs advertise MABs from many places in the DFZ and so form
   multiple destinations which are the "default" - what happens to the
   packet if nothing else happens, meaning the packet does not go into
   any other ITR before reaching the DFZ.

   In principle, a DITR could advertise every MAB, or be an otherwise
   normal DFZ router and encapsulate every packet which is forwarded to
   it which is addressed to an SPI address.  However, there is a burden
   of work looking up mapping, encapsulating packets and on occasions
   handling the PMTUD management functions to ETRs, which involves
   sending PTBs to sending hosts.  It is unlikely that anyone running a
   DFZ router would want their device to do more work, unless they are
   paid for it by the beneficiaries.  The ultimate beneficiaries of
   DITRs are the end-user networks which the packets are addressed to -
   and these are the customers of the MABOCs who lease the space to them
   (except where the one end-user network runs a whole MAB for itself,
   and so is its own MABOC).

   The most likely arrangement for DITRs is that the MABOCs who lease
   SPI space to end-user networks will also run DITRs themselves or
   contract specialised companies to run DITRs all over the Net for
   them.  In this scenario, a DITR would advertise only those MABs of
   the MABOCs who are paying the operator for this service.  MABOCs
   would charge their SPI-renting end-user network companies for the
   traffic handled for their networks by DITRs, so DITRs in general
   would need to sample traffic reliably and generate reports in a form
   which would enable the MAB companies to bill their customers fairly.
   Only DITRs need this traffic sampling capability.  Other ITRs would



Whittle                 Expires September 8, 2010              [Page 49]

Internet-Draft              Ivip Architecture                 March 2010


   have monitoring and management functions, but would not need to
   collect usage statistics for billing.

   Theoretically, DITRs could advertise all MABs and so handle packets
   addressed to every MAB.  In practice, I expect DITRs will usually
   only handle packets addressed to specific MABs.  Other ITRs,
   including those in sending hosts, will handle packets addressed to
   any MAB.  Consequently, these non DITR ITRs all need a reliable
   method of downloading the latest set of MABs.  They will do this as
   part of discovering and communicating with their one or more local
   query servers.  The one or more QSRs they rely on will determine the
   current set of MABs by the DNS-based mechanism described in the Ivip-
   drtm ID.  Changes to this set will also need to be propagated to all
   QSCs and ITRs in the local system, by a mechanism which is yet to be
   designed.

   DITRs may be implemented in hardware based routers, or in COTS
   servers.  They are always located on conventional global unicast
   addresses - never on SPI addresses.  DITRs are likely to be busy, so
   it makes sense to locate them in major datacenters or Internet
   exchanges, close to one or more full database query servers.  DITRs
   advertise MABs to their neighbouring BGP routers, and have a default
   route to either one of these routers, or have the full set of DFZ
   routes with links to multiple neighbouring routers.  So (unless they
   are implemented behind a suitable BGP router) DITRs are BGP routers
   and may or may not be "DFZ" routers, depending on how they forward
   their outgoing packets.

8.1.3.  Modified Header Forwarding - MHF-only ITRs

   Ivip for IPv4 and for IPv6 separately may or may not begin with
   encapsulation.  If it does, then all ITRs and ETRs will also be
   capable of transitioning in the future to using MHF.

   The MHF techniques are discussed in a later section, but involve much
   less processing than encapsulation.  With MHF, there is no need for
   PMTUD management.

8.1.4.  Encapsulation and PMTUD management

   When the ITR function is implemented in software - either inside a
   sending host, or in a COTS server, it will be relatively
   straightforward to write C code or the like to implement the
   functions of analysing the packet's destination address, deciding
   whether to encapsulate it or not, deciding which ETR address to
   encapsulate it to, and encapsulating it.  Once encapsulated, the new
   packet is presented to the internal packet handling functions and
   forwarded normally.



Whittle                 Expires September 8, 2010              [Page 50]

Internet-Draft              Ivip Architecture                 March 2010


   This packet-handling code also needs to consider the length of the
   packet, with reference to a small set of variables it maintains for
   the ETR the packet will tunneled to.  So the packet's destination
   address would firstly be used to find an ETR address.  Generally,
   this would be found by reference to the ITR's cached mappings, but
   for initial packets in a new communication flow, the packet must be
   held for a few milliseconds or tens of milliseconds while the ITR
   retrieves the mapping information from its one or more local query
   servers.

   Once the destination ETR address is known, the length of the packet
   is considered.  If it is less than some constant, it can be
   encapsulated and sent without any further processing.  If it is
   longer than this constant, then the ITR needs to perform PMTUD
   management functions.  In this case, the ITR establishes, or has
   already established, some variables for this ETR.  These include an
   upper and a lower estimate of the MTU to this ETR.  If these are
   different, then there is a "zone of uncertainty" about the MTU.  If
   they are equal, then the ITR has already reliably established the
   MTU.  If the packet length, plus the encapsulation overhead, exceeds
   the range of possible MTU values the ITR has previously determined
   for the path to this ETR, then the ITR will send part of the packet
   back to the sending host in an ICMP PTB message.  If the encapsulated
   length would be less than the lower limit in the "zone of
   uncertainty" then the packet can be encapsulated without further
   processing.

   If the encapsulated length falls within the "zone of uncertainty",
   then the ITR emits two packets - a long one and a short one - and
   communicates with the ETR in a way which will usually raise the lower
   limit of this zone, or lower the upper limit.  In the former case,
   the ITR is able to determine that the encapsulated length did not
   exceed the MTU and that the ETR received it correctly.  The traffic
   packet's contents are mainly contained in the long packet, which has
   the same length as the traffic packet would have had if encapsulated.
   The remainder of the traffic packet is conveyed in a short packet, of
   which perhaps a few will be sent.  This is non-trivial process, which
   involves the ETR in some work - but it only occurs for packets whose
   encapsulated length falls within the "zone of uncertainty".

   Except for rare error conditions, each such operation reduces the
   size of the "zone of uncertainty" - and typically the zone will be
   reduced to zero.  Once this occurs, at least for the next 10 minutes
   or so, the ITR need not perform any such probing of the MTU.  Every
   encapsulated packet which is to be sent to this ETR will be either
   shorter than the MTU, in which case it is encapsulated without any
   further work - or is longer, in which case a PTB is sent back to the
   sending host, with an MTU value such that the host will generate



Whittle                 Expires September 8, 2010              [Page 51]

Internet-Draft              Ivip Architecture                 March 2010


   packets to this destination host of a length which, when
   encapsulated, will equal this reliably determined MTU.

   This encapsulation and some kind of PMTUD management is required for
   any CES architecture which uses encapsulation.  All other CES
   architectures use encapsulation exclusively.  There is at least one
   other approach to PMTUD management which is probably more expensive
   to perform as securely as this one.  The fact that this and other
   processes are explained in some detail in this Ivip ID and not in the
   IDs of other proposals does not mean that the other proposals, once
   developed to the point of proper operation, would be simpler than
   Ivip.

   The encapsulation itself is straightforward.  The sending host's
   address is used for the outer source address and the ETR's is used
   for the outer destination address.  For IPv4 packets, the Diffserv,
   TTL and other flags are copied to the outer header.  For IPv6,
   Traffic Class and Hop Limit bits are also copied.

8.1.5.  Mapping lookup and caching

   Apart from PMTUD management, looking up the mapping for an incoming
   packet is the most complex task that ITRs need to perform.  This task
   is the same for encapsulation in both IPv4 and IPv4 and for the IPv4
   approach to MHF: ETR Address Formatting (EAF).  For the IPv6 MHF
   technique - Prefix Label Forwarding (PLF) - the mapping lookup is
   similar, but only part of the ETR's address is actually needed for
   writing 19 or 20 bits into the header.

   When encapsulation is used, for IPv4 or IPv6, the result of the
   mapping lookup is an IP address of the ETR, which will become the
   destination address of the outer header.  The result of EAF is
   similar, and ETR address where the two least significant bits are
   zero.  This will be written into the modified IPv4 header.

   The result of the PLF mapping will be a 19 or 20 bit value is written
   into the modified IPv6 header and which identifies one of 2^19 or one
   of 2^20 contiguous DFZ advertised prefixes, each of which is
   advertised by a different ISP site.  These 20 bits do not uniquely
   identify an ETR if there are more than one at each ISP site, but they
   are sufficient for the packet to be forwarded across the DFZ to the
   nearest BR of that site, where a second mapping lookup may be
   performed on the destination address to determine which of multiple
   ETRs at that site the packet should be forwarded to.

   This following may appear somewhat complex, but it is a description
   of different approaches to handling ITR to ETR tunneling for both the
   IPv4 and IPv6 Internets.  Ideally, encapsulation won't be necessary



Whittle                 Expires September 8, 2010              [Page 52]

Internet-Draft              Ivip Architecture                 March 2010


   to at all.  At worst, it will be necessary until DFZ and other
   routers are upgraded to handle EAF or PLF modified header packets.

   The mapping lookup is driven entirely by the packet's destination
   address.  Ivip does not attempt to send packets of differing types,
   service class or differing source address to different ETRs.  (Nor do
   the other CES architectures.)

   After a packet arrives, and has been classified as being addressed to
   an SPI address (meaning it matches one of the MAB prefixes) the next
   step is to find out whether the ITR has any mapping cached for the
   packet's destination address.  For IPv4 the full destination address
   is used.  For IPv6, only the most significant 64 bits are used, since
   SPI space is divided on /64 boundaries.

   Busy ITRs may have tens or perhaps hundreds of thousands of mappings
   already cached.  An ITR function in a sending host may have only a
   handful or a few thousand for a busy web-server.  A carefully
   designed algorithm will be needed to find any existing mapping, or to
   determine that the destination address does not match any cached
   mapping.

   In the former case, the mapping consists of a starting address and
   ending address for the micronet which the destination address falls
   within - and a single ETR address.  This ETR address (or set of PLF
   bits) is then applied to the packet - by writing it to the outer
   header when encapsulating, or by writing into the modified header for
   EAF or PLF.  (PLF only uses 19 bits of the ETR address - just enough
   to distinguish between the 2^19 contiguous prefixes which are
   reserved for this system.  The resulting packet is then ready to be
   forwarded like any other - according to its outer header, or
   according to the bits just written into its modified header.

   If no cached mapping is found, the ITR buffers the packet and sends a
   map query to a local query server - a QSC or a QSR.  This includes a
   nonce which is used to secure the reply, and any later map update
   messages the query server sends if the mapping changes during the
   time the ITR caches it.

   The local query server sets the caching time on the mapping.  This
   time may be locally configured and could be set differently for
   different replies by various algorithms in the query server to
   optimise its interactions with the ITRs, and to limit the number of
   mappings the ITR caches.  (Further work: It may be desirable for each
   ITR to be able to communicate to its query server(s) the state of its
   cache and how close to any limits it is running, so the map replies
   can have their caching times adjusted downwards.)




Whittle                 Expires September 8, 2010              [Page 53]

Internet-Draft              Ivip Architecture                 March 2010


   In the future, caching times will be discussed fully in the Ivip-drtm
   ID.

   The ITR flushes from its cache any mappings whose cache times have
   expired.  The cache includes the starting and ending address of the
   micronet, the ETR address and the nonce which was sent in the query
   which returned this mapping.  The ITR can also be sent a Cache Update
   message to the effect of flushing the cached mapping for a given
   micronet - by a QSC or QSR which previously sent mapping for this
   micronet in a Map Reply message.  This is needed if the micronet has
   been deleted from the system, such as due to the end-user network
   changing the way their UAB is divided into micronets.  If the ITR
   receives a packet with a destination address which matches this
   micronet, then there will be no cached mapping and the ITR will
   request mapping - and so gain the mapping for whatever micronet this
   address is now within.

   At any time when a mapping is cached, the ITR may receive a Cache
   Update message from a QSR or QSC which previously sent it mapping for
   this micronet.  The Cache Update message, like the Map Request query
   and the Map Reply message, will be a UDP packet.  The Ivip-drtm ID
   has more information on these messages and their acknowledgement.

   The Cache Update will be secured by the nonce sent by this ITR in its
   original Map Request query which resulted in the QSC or QSR sending a
   Map Reply (also secured by that nonce) which specified the start and
   end address of this micronet, and its mapping (the ETR address).

   The most common update will be that this micronet is now mapped to a
   different ETR address.  Another type of update is that this micronet
   include it being mapped to no ETR (an ETR address of zero) - in which
   case the ITR will drop subsequent matching packets.  As noted above,
   the final kind of Cache Update is a command to flush the mapping
   cached for this micronet.  This could be encoded via special flags,
   but it may be simpler, for instance with IPv4, to define a particular
   ETR address such as 0.0.0.1 as meaning the mapping should be flushed.

   None of these Cache Updates reset the caching time.  So ITR's cached
   mappings will time out as usual, no matter how many Cache Updates
   have arrived to alter the ETR address stored in this mapping.  If the
   Cache Update message from the query server reset the caching timeout
   process, then continued Cache Updates would keep a mapping in the
   ITR's cache for excessive periods - including if the ITR was not
   handling any packets for this micronet.

   In this way, ITRs receive all the updated mapping they need, within a
   fraction of a second of the changed mapping being received by the
   nearby QSA.



Whittle                 Expires September 8, 2010              [Page 54]

Internet-Draft              Ivip Architecture                 March 2010


8.1.6.  ITFH - ITR Function in Host

   An ITR function in a sending host performs either encapsulation and
   PMTUD management or MHF as described above.  This function is only
   for packets generated in the host.  ITFH should only be used on hosts
   which have fast, reliable, connections to two or more local query
   servers.  If there are delays, or packet losses, then the extra
   management traffic between the ITR function and the local query
   servers may not function well enough to ensure there are no
   significant delays to traffic packets.

   In many settings, the software and hardware required to implement an
   ITR in the sending host will have zero incremental cost.  RAM and CPU
   capacity is now extremely inexpensive.  Hosts - such as desktop PCs
   and servers used in hosting farms and cloud systems - come bristling
   with multicore CPUs and gigabytes of RAM for the price of a good
   shirt.

   The host could be on a conventional global unicast address (PI or PA)
   or on an SPI address.  If it is thought desirable to enable ITFHs in
   hosts behind NAT, then at least two additional measures would need to
   be taken.  Firstly, if encapsulation was used, the PMTUD exchange
   with ETRs would need to work through the NAT - which it probably
   would.  Secondly, the ITFH would need to set up and maintain a two-
   way tunnel to two or more local QSCs.  I do not suggest that QSRs
   should have to maintain sessions with such ITFHs.  TCP with a
   keepalive might do, but SCTP would probably be much better.  Then,
   instead of UDP mapping queries, replies and updates, the same
   messages would be sent over SCTP.  It is not out of the question to
   link all ITRs, QSCs and QSRs with SCTP, rather than use UDP packets,
   since the SCTP will ensure reliable delivery of messages, and so
   reduce the complexity of the code for sending receiving and
   acknowledging messages.

8.1.7.  ITRs auto-discovering local query servers

   There is further work to do to enable ITRs to automatically discover
   the addresses of one or more local query servers - whichever two or
   more QSCs or QSRs the ITR or ITFH is supposed to send its Map Request
   queries to.  This is not absolutely necessary, but would greatly ease
   the deployment of ITRs in ISP and end-user networks.  The more ITRs
   there are, the less work each one has to do and so the greater the
   chance that they can be implemented with little cost in a COTS
   server, rather than an expensive hardware-based router.  This
   principle applies especially to ITFHs.

   Likewise, it would be desirable for QSCs to be able to automatically
   discover the upstream QSCs or QSRs they should send their Map Request



Whittle                 Expires September 8, 2010              [Page 55]

Internet-Draft              Ivip Architecture                 March 2010


   queries to.

8.2.  ETRs

8.2.1.  In servers or dedicated routers

   The ETR function can be performed in a dedicated router or in a
   server with appropriate software.

   Whether the ETR function is performed in a server with one or more
   Ethernet ports, or a router with multiple ports of various kinds,
   depends on how the traffic packets are to be forwarded to the one or
   more end-user networks being served by this ETR.  The methods of
   forwarding do not need to be part of the Ivip RFCs - just how ETRs
   handle the incoming packets, and for encapsulation, how they
   communicate with the ITR for PMTUD management purposes.

   In the TTR mobility system, the TTRs perform ETR functions.  The link
   to each end-user network is a separate two-way tunnel, established by
   the Mobile Node (MN) to the TTR.

8.2.2.  ETRs in ISP networks

   An ETR in an ISP network can, in principle, handle packets for many
   end-user networks - all from a single global unicast address.  This
   has a scaling benefit for IPv4 by supporting a potentially large
   number of end-user networks, with potentially large numbers of SPI
   addresses, while requiring only a one of the ISP's IP addresses.
   (For IPv6, inefficiency of address use is not a concern.)

8.2.3.  ETRs at the end-user network site

   A multihomed end-user network with two links to ISPs might have two
   ETRs - one for each link.  Each ETR will have a stable conventional
   (non-SPI) global unicast address to receive encapsulated packets on.
   So each ISP needs to devote at least one of its addresses, or more
   likely four, for each such ETR.  This saves the ISP from having to
   run an ETR for this customer - all the ISP provides is connectivity
   and this small amount of stable address space.

   There could be one physical ETR, with two links to the two ISPs,
   receiving encapsulated packets as above on the two addresses provided
   by the two links.  This device would be a router of some kind, even
   if implemented on a server, since it would also be deciding which
   link to send outgoing packets on.






Whittle                 Expires September 8, 2010              [Page 56]

Internet-Draft              Ivip Architecture                 March 2010


8.2.4.  MHF ETR functionality - EAF and PLF

   If Ivip is introduced with encapsulation, its ITR and ETR functions
   will contain Modified Header Forwarding functionality ready for a
   future migration from encapsulation to MHF exclusively.  The IPv4 MHF
   technique - ETR Address Forwarding (EAF) - is very similar to the
   encapsulation arrangement, so the same ETR could do both, from the
   same address.  However, with EAF, the ETR address is specified with
   the most significant 30 bits, giving a granularity of 4 IP addresses.
   (But see previous discussion about how this could probably be
   redesigned to involve a new header type which would allow 31 or 32
   bits to be used.)  To avoid having to change ETR addresses when
   encapsulation is turned off, only one ETR should be located in each
   /30 prefix.

   The IPv6 approach to MHF - Prefix Label Forwarding (PLF) - is
   conceptually different from the encapsulation approach in which the
   packet is tunneled to an ETR at a single IPv6 address.  The ITR uses
   the mapping to write 19 or 20 bits into the IPv6 header.  Upgraded
   routers in the DFZ forward the packet to ISP BRs (Border Routers,
   facing other ISPs and transit networks) advertising one of 2^19 or
   2^20 separate prefixes.  While the mapping still specifies an exact
   128 bit IP address for the ETR, before MHF can be turned on, all ETRs
   must be given addresses within the special set of DFZ-advertised
   prefixes which the MHF system can forward these packets to.

   On arrival at the BR, the packet itself contains no information of
   further use - it does not contain the ETR address, just 19 or 20 bits
   of the address bits which differentiate this contiguous set of
   prefixes.  If there is only one ETR for each such prefix, then the
   BRs (or perhaps single BR) needs only to forward the packet to the
   ETR.  Alternatively, the ETR function could be performed within the
   one or more BRs.

   However, if this prefix has multiple ETRs, then the BR needs to
   behave like an ITR and perform a second mapping lookup, using the
   destination address of the packet, to decide how to forward (or
   perhaps tunnel) the packet to the correct ETR.  There are various
   techniques for doing this, including the ISP using the PLF bits
   again, interpreted according to its own arrangements by its internal
   routers, to forward the packet to some internal prefix (perhaps in
   ULA space) which leads to the correct ETR.  I have not yet explored
   the various ways an ISP could use to get PLF-tunneled packets to the
   correct ETR, or how techniques and ETR placement arrangements for
   encapsulation can be made compatible with the PLF arrangements.

   With both EAF for IPv4 and PLF for IPv6, the work an ETR performs on
   each tunnelled packet is trivially simple: restore the altered bits



Whittle                 Expires September 8, 2010              [Page 57]

Internet-Draft              Ivip Architecture                 March 2010


   so the IP header has its standard form again, and forward the packet
   to the destination network.  The ETR does not communicate with the
   ITR or with any other part of the Ivip system, since the ITRs and
   ETRs have no Ivip-specific PMTUD problems to solve.

   If there resulting packet is too long for the next hop, the existing
   IP stack of the server or router in which the ETR function is
   performed will implement conventional RFC 1191 PMTUD and generate a
   PTB to the sending host.

8.2.5.  ETR functionality for encapsulation

   With encapsulation, ETRs receive IP-in-IP packets on a stable global
   unicast address.  The ETR recognises all such packets and decapsulate
   them.  If the outer header source address matches that of the inner
   packet, then the ETR forwards the packet to the end-user network.  If
   the ETR handles multiple end-user networks, then it will have
   appropriate configuration or router functionality to forward the
   packet to the correct end-user network.

   For PMTUD management, some more complex functionality is required.
   When the ITR uses special techniques to send a traffic packet, in two
   parts, as a probe of PMTU to this ETR, it sends a long packet and one
   short one (or multiple copies of the short one) to the ETR's address.
   However, these are not IP-in-IP encapsulated.  They are both UDP
   packets - the long one with the ITR's address as the source address,
   and the shorter one(s) with the sending host's address as the source
   address.

   If only the short packet arrives, then the long one was lost -
   probably due to it being longer than the PMTU from the ITR to this
   ETR.  The ETR informs the ITR of this non-reception, and receives an
   acknowledgement of this.  If both the long and short packets arrive,
   the ETR reconstructs the full traffic packet, forwards it to the end-
   user network, and informs the ITR that it has been received
   correctly.  This involves significant complexity in the ETR, but does
   not involve storing state for more than a few seconds.

   Once the traffic packet has been decapsulated, if the forwarding step
   leads to the packet being deemed too long for the next-hop MTU, then
   the conventional IP stack will generate a PTB to the sending host and
   RFC 1191 PMTUD will proceed just as it would if there had been no ITR
   to ETR encapsulation.

8.3.  QSRs - Resolving Query Servers

   Please see the Ivip-drtm ID for a description of QSRs.




Whittle                 Expires September 8, 2010              [Page 58]

Internet-Draft              Ivip Architecture                 March 2010


8.4.  QSCs - caching query servers

   A caching query server (QSC) is a relatively simple function,
   typically implemented as software in a server.  The software for
   ITRs, QSCs, QSRs and QSAs would share some common components.  A QSC
   receives and responds to Map Request queries from ITRs or other QSCs
   in the same manner as a QSR.  The QSC sends Map Request queries to a
   QSC or QSR in just the same way as was described above for an ITR -
   and likewise receives Map Reply and Cache Update messages the
   upstream QSC or QSR as just described.

   There could be zero, one, two or in principle any number of QSCs
   between an ITR and the one or more QSDs.  All these devices are
   typically in the same ISP network - or in an end-user network whose
   ITRs and QSCs use the QSCs and QSRs in the ISP network.  So
   communication between them is very fast, reliable and inexpensive.
   Typically, there will be little or no packet loss, but the protocols
   will need to cope with any losses in a robust manner.  If a querier
   sends out a Map Request query and does not get a reply within some
   quite short time, such as 100ms, then it should try sending the query
   (with a different nonce) to an alternative upstream query server.

   Further work: ITRs auto discovering query servers in general - and
   QSCs autodiscovering other QSCs and QSRs.  Manual configuration of
   the tree-like structures of these devices should also be possible.

   If the mapping needs of one ITR were completely uncorrelated with the
   mapping needs of other ITRs served by the same QSR, then there would
   be little or no benefit in deploying intermediate QSCs.  However,
   there is likely to be sufficient commonality between the mapping
   needs of tens or hundreds of ITRs and ITFHs to make QSCs a good
   investment in expanding the capacity of a single QSR to support more
   ITRs.

   If 20 ITRs send their queries to QSC1 and another 20 to QSC2, then
   the queries, replies and map update exchanges which must be performed
   by the one QSR which both QSC1 and QSC2 query will be significantly
   reduced.  This is because it will sometimes or frequently be the case
   that QSC1 will already be caching the mapping which is needed to
   answer a query from one of its 20 ITRs.  Without the QSCs, every ITR
   query would need to be handled by the QSR - and its querier cache
   (where the QSR retains records of the mappings it sent in Map Replies
   to various queriers, along with the caching time variables and the
   nonce which it was sent in the initial Map Request) would be
   correspondingly larger.  Furthermore, if more than one of QSC1's ITRs
   is caching mapping for a micronet for which the QSR receives a Cache
   Update, then the QSR only needs to send a single mapping update to
   QSC1, rather than sending one to each such ITR.



Whittle                 Expires September 8, 2010              [Page 59]

Internet-Draft              Ivip Architecture                 March 2010


   There is further work to do planning these protocols.  The caching
   times do not affect Ivip's ability to get the mapping updates to all
   ITRs in real-time.  Longer caching times will reduce the need for the
   querier, such as an ITR, to make another map request if it is still
   sending packets to the micronet.  Longer caching times also increase
   the number of mapping updates which need to be sent - and perhaps the
   time is so long that the querier no longer needs the mapping.
   Shorter caching times reduce the number of cached items, but increase
   the load of mapping queries and responses.

   There needs to be coordination between the caching times of Map
   Replies sent out by a QSA and those sent out by dependent QSRs and
   QSCs.

   Also, each querier needs to periodically check that any upstream
   query server it is caching any mapping from is still alive and has
   not been rebooted.  If the upstream server has died or been rebooted,
   there is a danger that the cached mapping in the querier should have
   been changed or flushed due to a Cache Update message which the
   upstream server would have sent if it had not died or been rebooted.
   This is for further work.

   While the exact details are TBD, it is clear that it will be possible
   to define relatively straightforward protocols by which ITRs,
   optional QSCs, QSRs and QSAs can be combined to efficiently support
   the mapping needs of many ITRs per QSR.

8.5.  MHF - Modified Header Forwarding

8.5.1.  EAF - ETR Address Forwarding for IPv4

   Please see [I-D.whittle-ivip-etr-addr-forw] and the discussion above
   in the ITR section.  To-do - rationalise the various mentions of MHF
   and especially EAF in this ID.

   EAF will not accept fragmented packets or fragmentable packets longer
   than some globally agreed constant, somewhat below 1500 bytes.  By
   the time Ivip is introduced, it will have been over 20 years since
   RFC 1191 PMTUD was introduced.  There's no need for fragments or
   fragmentable packets - and IPv6 does fine without them.

   EAF requires upgraded routers between ITRs and ETRs.  This does not
   necessarily include every DFZ router, but it is reasonable to
   approximate the requirement to this.  For instance, if a DFZ router
   never handles packets for networks which contain either ITRs or ETRs,
   then it does not need to handle EAF formatted packets.  EAF ETR
   addresses contain only the 30 most significant bits.  (But see
   previous notes on how with a new protocol number a new header could



Whittle                 Expires September 8, 2010              [Page 60]

Internet-Draft              Ivip Architecture                 March 2010


   carry 31 r probably 32 bits of ETR address.)  To avoid the need to
   change ETRs' addresses when encapsulation is transitioned to EAF,
   ETRs should not be placed closer than 4 IP addresses apart.  Perhaps
   they should be placed on the 01 address of these four.

   Since ITRs will commonly be placed deep within ISP and end-user
   networks, and ETRs may be deep within ISP networks (such as at an
   end-user site, at the end of the link from the ISP) any router
   between the DFZ and these devices also needs to handle EAF packets.

   It will be straightforward to build this capability into new routers,
   and into firmware updates for many existing routers.  The upgrade
   only concerns the FIB.  All that is altered is that the FIB forwards
   the packet according to the 30 (32?) bits ETR address bits in the
   header, rather than using the destination address.  There is no
   change to BGP functions, the RIB or how the RIB writes to the FIB.

   If it takes a few years before Ivip or the like is introduced, it is
   possible that by then, many or almost all of the installed DFZ
   routers will be able to do this with a firmware update.

   With a year or two's notice, upgrading all the DFZ routers, and
   likewise many internal routers, would enable Ivip to be introduced in
   its final mode of operation - without encapsulation overhead or its
   PMTUD problems.  This means all ITRs can be a lot simpler - and that
   ETRs can be trivially simple.  Reducing the complexity of ITRs is
   perhaps the biggest challenge in designing a CES architecture, since
   we want ITRs to be cheap and plentiful, including them being easy to
   add to the stacks of sending hosts.  Starting with EAF would also
   avoid the need for devising a transition mechanism from
   encapsulation.

8.5.2.  PLF - Prefix Label Forwarding, for IPv6

   The current state of PLF design is described in [PLF for IPv6].
   Please see this for more details, including why it is totally
   different from MPLS and how it could be extended to provide a similar
   2^19 or 2^20 destination forwarding system within each ISP (or end-
   user) network.

   While EAF is pretty much a functional replacement of IPv4's
   encapsulation system, PLF is rather different in that it only takes
   the packet to a BR of one of 2^19 or 2^20 DFZ-advertised prefixes.
   This would be a regular, contiguous, set of prefixes used only by
   ISPs - for this and for potentially other purposes.

   If Ivip for IPv6 began with encapsulation, then it would make sense
   for the ETRs to be already located in these special prefixes.



Whittle                 Expires September 8, 2010              [Page 61]

Internet-Draft              Ivip Architecture                 March 2010


   Otherwise, they would need to be moved there before EAF could be
   turned on.

   EAF may require a second lookup at the BR of the ISP's network - if
   there are more than one ETRs for that prefix.  One way of forwarding
   the packet from the BR to the correct ETR would be to use these PLF
   bits for a similar system within the ISP's network, with 2^19 or 2^20
   internal prefixes.  How the ISP uses these bits is a private matter.
   This could be a very powerful way of directing traffic inside a large
   provider network.  This would give rise to ePLF - the one system for
   the DFZ - and iPLF, as used inside an individual ISP network.

   Rapid adoption of IPv6 is still somewhere beyond the immediately
   foreseeable future.  So there's no hurry about deploying a scalable
   routing solution for IPv6.  I think the most likely scenario for
   widespread adoption of IPv6 is one or more large 3G systems using it
   to give each phone (or whatever) its own global unicast address.
   This in itself will not cause a scaling problem, since these will be
   large systems with few new prefixes to add to the DFZ.  However,
   there would then be a strong need for mobility - and the TTR approach
   has advantages over traditional MIP techniques, as discussed below.

   Perhaps by the time Ivip is deployed for IPv6, all the IPv6 DFZ
   routers will be upgradable to PLF with firmware updates - so scalable
   routing could be done without encapsulation.  PLF involves small
   changes to the FIB and to the RIB.  It does not involve any new BGP
   functionality.

8.6.  TTR Mobility

   TTR Mobility is fully described, with diagrams, in [TTR Mobility].
   This architecture will work equally well for IPv4 and IPv6.  The MN
   can be on any kind of address, including behind multiple layers of
   NAT, on DHCP addresses and on addresses provided by conventional
   Mobile IP protocols.  The MN can even be on an SPI address which is
   within another MN's micronet.  No stack or application changes are
   required and the hosts communicate normally with all other hosts,
   including of course others using TTR mobility.  There is no home-
   agent and paths to correspondent hosts are generally optimal.

   Mapping changes are not required when the MN gains a new address.
   They are not actually required at all, but are desirable if the MN
   moves to a part of the network which is far from its current TTR.
   This may be a distance of 1000km or more.  Then, it should establish
   a tunnel to a nearby TTR so the TTR company can change the mapping of
   its micronet to this new TTR.  With Ivip's real-time control of
   mapping, this means the MN could close the tunnel to the old TTR
   within five or so seconds of the mapping change being sent.  Changing



Whittle                 Expires September 8, 2010              [Page 62]

Internet-Draft              Ivip Architecture                 March 2010


   the mapping does not cause any glitch in connectivity, since the MN
   gets packets from both TTRs during the changeover.

   The MN needs some additional tunneling software - which is controlled
   by the TTR company.  This could be added alongside existing stacks,
   or integrated into the stack.  Ideally the MN to TTR interface would
   be standardised in RFCs, but this is not strictly necessary, since
   the MN only needs to interoperate with TTRs of the TTR company chosen
   by the MN's owner.  RFC-standardised MN and TTR functionality would
   be desirable, by allowing easy choice between TTR companies without
   the need to install software.  However, there is a lot of scope for
   innovation in this area, and it might be difficult to adequately
   develop a full range of desirable protocols soon enough for the
   expected rapid uptake of mass-market Mobility.

   I think this approach to mobility, for IPv4 and at some stage for
   IPv6, is so attractive that there would be a business case for a
   company setting up its own Ivip-like system just for this purpose -
   irrespective of the need for a scalable routing solution.  Such a
   system would need to use encapsulation.  Multiple such systems could
   exist at the same time - and a MN in one system A would be able to
   communicate directly with a MN in another system B via the following
   paths (->) or tunnels (==>): MN-A ==> TTR-A -> (via DFZ) -> ITR-B ==>
   TTR-B ==> MN-B.

   Any such systems should be designed to upgraded in the future to
   comply with future RFCs for an Ivip-like system, including initial or
   long-term adoption of Modified Header Forwarding rather than
   encapsulation.






















Whittle                 Expires September 8, 2010              [Page 63]

Internet-Draft              Ivip Architecture                 March 2010


9.  Security Considerations

   Security analysis can only be done in the years to come, once the
   protocols are designed in some detail.

   Ivip ITRs and ETRs are much simpler than those of LISP.

   Ivip ETRs easily enforce ISP BR source address filtering.  For LISP
   ETRs to enforce this would be at least administratively complex and
   very expensive for large numbers of filtered prefixes - and it may be
   impossible to do while allowing for ITRs in the local ISP network
   tunneling to this ETR.







































Whittle                 Expires September 8, 2010              [Page 64]

Internet-Draft              Ivip Architecture                 March 2010


10.  IANA Considerations

   [To do.]
















































Whittle                 Expires September 8, 2010              [Page 65]

Internet-Draft              Ivip Architecture                 March 2010


11.  Informative References

   [C-E-Sep-Elim]
              Jen, D., Zhang, L., Lan, L., and B. Zhang, "Towards a
              Future Internet Architecture: Arguments for Separating
              Edges from Transit Core", September 2008, <http://
              conferences.sigcomm.org/hotnets/2008/papers/18.pdf>.

   [Constraints-Voluntary]
              Whittle, R., "List of constraints on a successful scalable
              routing solution which result from the need for widespread
              voluntary adoption", April 2009,
              <http://www.firstpr.com.au/ip/ivip/RRG-2009/constraints/>.

   [Critique of draft-jen-mapping-00]
              Whittle, R., "draft-jen-mapping does not apply to the TTR
              Mobility architecture", January 2010, <http://
              www.ietf.org/mail-archive/web/rrg/current/msg05605.html>.

   [DFZ-unfrag-1470]
              Whittle, R., "Google sends 1470 byte unfragmentable
              packets", August 2008, <http://www.firstpr.com.au/ip/ivip/
              ipv4-bits/actual-packets.html>.

   [Deering-1996]
              Deering, S., "The Map & Encap Scheme for scalable IPv4
              routing with portable site prefixes", March 1996,
              <http://irl.cs.ucla.edu/references/Deering-encap.pdf>.

   [Host-Responsibilities]
              Whittle, R., "Objections to burdening hosts with more
              Routing and Addressing responsibilities", December 2009, <
              http://www.firstpr.com.au/ip/ivip/RRG-2009/
              host-responsibilities/>.

   [I-D.adan-idr-tidr]
              Adan, J., "Tunneled Inter-domain Routing (TIDR)",
              draft-adan-idr-tidr-01 (work in progress), December 2006.

   [I-D.ietf-lisp]
              Farinacci, D., Fuller, V., Meyer, D., and D. Lewis,
              "Locator/ID Separation Protocol (LISP)",
              draft-ietf-lisp-06 (work in progress), January 2010.

   [I-D.irtf-rrg-recommendation]
              Li, T., "Recommendation for a Routing Architecture",
              draft-irtf-rrg-recommendation-05 (work in progress),
              February 2010.



Whittle                 Expires September 8, 2010              [Page 66]

Internet-Draft              Ivip Architecture                 March 2010


   [I-D.jen-mapping]
              Jen, D. and L. Zhang, "Understand Mapping",
              draft-jen-mapping-00 (work in progress), October 2009.

   [I-D.lear-lisp-nerd]
              Lear, E., "NERD: A Not-so-novel EID to RLOC Database",
              draft-lear-lisp-nerd-06 (work in progress), December 2009.

   [I-D.lewis-lisp-interworking]
              Lewis, D., "Interworking LISP with IPv4 and IPv6",
              draft-lewis-lisp-interworking-00 (work in progress),
              December 2007.

   [I-D.meyer-lisp-cons]
              Brim, S., "LISP-CONS: A Content distribution Overlay
              Network Service for LISP", draft-meyer-lisp-cons-04 (work
              in progress), April 2008.

   [I-D.rja-ilnp-intro]
              Atkinson, R., "ILNP Concept of Operations",
              draft-rja-ilnp-intro-02 (work in progress), December 2008.

   [I-D.whittle-ivip-drtm]
              Whittle, R., "DRTM - Distributed Real Time Mapping for
              Ivip and LISP", draft-whittle-ivip-drtm-01 (work in
              progress), March 2010.

   [I-D.whittle-ivip-etr-addr-forw]
              Whittle, R., "Ivip4 ETR Address Forwarding",
              draft-whittle-ivip-etr-addr-forw-00 (work in progress),
              January 2010.

   [I-D.whittle-ivip-fpr]
              Whittle, R., "Fast Payload Replication mapping
              distribution for Ivip", draft-whittle-ivip-fpr-01 (work in
              progress), March 2010.

   [I-D.whittle-ivip-glossary]
              Whittle, R., "Glossary of some Ivip and scalable routing
              terms", draft-whittle-ivip-glossary-01 (work in progress),
              March 2010.

   [Ivip Summary and Analysis]
              Whittle, R., "Ivip Conceptual Summary and Analysis",
              December 2008,
              <http://www.firstpr.com.au/ip/ivip/Ivip-summary.pdf>.

   [Ivip-2007-06-15]



Whittle                 Expires September 8, 2010              [Page 67]

Internet-Draft              Ivip Architecture                 March 2010


              Whittle, R., "ViP: Anycast ITRs in the DFZ & mobile
              tunnels", June 2007, <http://www.ietf.org/mail-archive/
              web/ram/current/msg01518.html>.

   [LISP-ALT-Critique]
              Whittle, R., ""How can the ALT structure scale to 10^8,
              10^9 or 10^10 EIDs with minimal delay times and robustness
              against single points of failure?"", December 2009, <ALT
              structure, robustness and the long-path problem>.

   [Namespace]
              Whittle, R., "The meaning of the term *namespace* in
              addressing, computer networking etc.", April 2009,
              <http://www.firstpr.com.au/ip/ivip/namespace/>.

   [PLF for IPv6]
              Whittle, R., "Prefix Label Forwarding (PLF) - Modified
              Header Forwarding for IPv6", August 2008,
              <http://www.firstpr.com.au/ip/ivip/PLF-for-IPv6/>.

   [PMTUD-Frag]
              Whittle, R., "IPTM - Ivip's approach to solving the
              problems with encapsulation overhead, MTU, fragmentation
              and Path MTU Discovery", April 2008,
              <http://www.firstpr.com.au/ip/ivip/pmtud-frag/>.

   [TTR Mobility]
              Whittle, R. and S. Russert, "TTR Mobility Extensions for
              Core-Edge Separation Solutions to the Internets Routing
              Scaling Problem", August 2008,
              <http://www.firstpr.com.au/ip/ivip/TTR-Mobility.pdf>.

   [Vogt-2009]
              Vogt, C., "Simplifying Internet Applications Development
              With A Name-Based Sockets Interface", December 2009, <http
              ://christianvogt.mailup.net/pub/
              vogt-2009-name-based-sockets.pdf>.

   [loc-id-sep-vs-ces]
              Whittle, R., "Loc/ID Separation is different from Core-
              Edge Separation", January 2010,
              <http://www.firstpr.com.au/ip/ivip/loc-id-sep-vs-ces/>.









Whittle                 Expires September 8, 2010              [Page 68]

Internet-Draft              Ivip Architecture                 March 2010


Appendix A.  Acknowledgements

   Thanks to the following people for their help and encouragement: Juan
   Jo Aden, Noel Chiappa, Olivier Bonaventure, Brian Carpenter, Dino
   Farinacci, Vince Fuller, Joel M. Halpern, Geoff Huston, Ved Kafle,
   Eliot Lear, Simon Leinen, Tony Li, Jeroen Massar, Dave Meyer, Chris
   Morrow, Dave Oran, Robert Raszuk, Jason Schiller, John Scudder, K.
   Sriram, Markus Stenberg, Letong Sun, Christian Vogt, Kilian Weniger
   and Xiaoming Xu.

   This is not to imply that these people support Ivip.

   I especially thank Steve Russert, formerly of Boeing, for
   collaborating on the TTR Mobility paper for MobiArch '08.  The
   original draft wasn't accepted and by the time we revised it to the
   point of being happy with it, the paper was 2.5 times as long as the
   conference page limit.


































Whittle                 Expires September 8, 2010              [Page 69]

Internet-Draft              Ivip Architecture                 March 2010


Author's Address

   Robin Whittle
   First Principles

   Email: rw@firstpr.com.au
   URI:   http://www.firstpr.com.au/ip/ivip/












































Whittle                 Expires September 8, 2010              [Page 70]

