


Network Working Group                                         R. Whittle
Internet-Draft                                          First Principles
Intended status: Experimental                          February 26, 2010
Expires: August 30, 2010


         DRTM - Distributed Real Time Mapping for Ivip and LISP
                     draft-whittle-ivip-drtm-00.txt

Abstract

   Distributed Real Time Mapping (DRTM) is intended for Ivip, but may be
   useful for other Core-Edge Separation solutions to the routing
   scaling problem, such as LISP.  Companies which operate MABs (Mapped
   Address Blocks) of "edge" SPI (Scalable PI) address space establish a
   number of widely dispersed sites from which to operate DITRs (Default
   ITRs in the DFZ).  These DITRs are required to tunnel packets sent
   from hosts in networks without ITRs.  DITRs are caching ITRs closely
   connected to mapping query servers which are sent a real-time feed of
   mapping updates for all the MABs the site supports.  By making this,
   or a similar, query server publicly available, caching Map Resolvers
   (MRs) in nearby ISP networks can resolve the mapping queries of the
   ITRs in that ISP's network, and in the end-user networks which use
   this ISP.  The DITR-Site mapping servers securely inform MRs of any
   changes to mapping which occur during the caching time of the map
   replies, and the MRs perform the same algorithm and pass the updated
   mapping to the one or more ITRs which is caching the mapping returned
   in the original reply.  In this way, the tunneling behaviour of all
   ITRs the world over is controlled in real-time.  Unlike previous
   approaches to Ivip's mapping distribution system, there is no need
   for mapping servers which contain the full database of mapping for
   all MABs.  Nor is there a need for real-time mapping feeds to ISPs.
   Since the MABOC companies typically come most of the distance to ISPs
   all over the world, with their DITR sites, these DITR site query
   servers are typically close enough and numerous enough to scale well
   and provide very rapid mapping replies, with little loss of packets.
   This avoids the "lost and delayed initial packets" problem inherent
   in global query server systems such as LISP-ALT.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.



Whittle                  Expires August 30, 2010                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft        Distributed Real Time Mapping        February 2010


   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 30, 2010.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the BSD License.
























Whittle                  Expires August 30, 2010                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft        Distributed Real Time Mapping        February 2010


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   2.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   3.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   4.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8












































Whittle                  Expires August 30, 2010                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft        Distributed Real Time Mapping        February 2010


1.  Introduction

   This document is a placeholder.  Please refer to the description of
   DRTM on the ITRF Routing Research Group mailing list (2010-02-26]:
   http://www.ietf.org/mail-archive/web/rrg/current/msg06128.html and
   any discussion which results.













































Whittle                  Expires August 30, 2010                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft        Distributed Real Time Mapping        February 2010


2.  Security Considerations

   None.
















































Whittle                  Expires August 30, 2010                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft        Distributed Real Time Mapping        February 2010


3.  IANA Considerations

   None.
















































Whittle                  Expires August 30, 2010                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft        Distributed Real Time Mapping        February 2010


4.  Informative References

   [I-D.irtf-rrg-recommendation]
              Li, T., "Recommendation for a Routing Architecture",
              draft-irtf-rrg-recommendation-03 (work in progress),
              December 2009.













































Whittle                  Expires August 30, 2010                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft        Distributed Real Time Mapping        February 2010


Author's Address

   Robin Whittle
   First Principles

   Email: rw@firstpr.com.au
   URI:   http://www.firstpr.com.au/ip/ivip/












































Whittle                  Expires August 30, 2010                [Page 8]

