A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3374

        Title:      Problem Description: Reasons For Performing
                    Context Transfers Between Nodes in an IP Access
                    Network 
        Author(s):  J. Kempf, Ed.
        Status:     Informational
        Date:       September 2002
        Mailbox:    kempf@docomolabs-usa.com
        Pages:      14
        Characters: 28245
        Updates/Obsoletes/SeeAlso:    None

        I-D Tag:    draft-ietf-seamoby-context-transfer-problem-stat-04.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3374.txt


In IP access networks that support host mobility, the routing paths
between the host and the network may change frequently and rapidly.
In some cases, the host may establish certain context transfer
candidate services on subnets that are left behind when the host
moves.  Examples of such services are Authentication, Authorization,
and Accounting (AAA), header compression, and Quality of Service
(QoS).  In order for the host to obtain those services on the new
subnet, the host must explicitly re-establish the service by
performing the necessary signaling flows from scratch.  In some cases,
this process would considerably slow the process of establishing the
mobile host on the new subnet.  An alternative is to transfer
information on the existing state associated with these services, or
context, to the new subnet, a process called "context transfer".  This
document discusses the desirability of context transfer for
facilitating seamless IP mobility.

This document is a product of the Context Transfer, Handoff Candidate
Discovery, and Dormant Mode Host Alerting Working Group.

This memo provides information for the Internet community.  It does
not specify an Internet standard of any kind.  Distribution of this
memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.

