A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3132

        Title:      Dormant Mode Host Alerting ("IP Paging") Problem
                    Statement 
        Author(s):  J. Kempf
        Status:     Informational
        Date:       June 2001
        Mailbox:    james.kempf@sun.com
        Pages:      14
        Characters: 34985
        Updates/Obsoletes/SeeAlso:    None

        I-D Tag:    draft-seamoby-paging-problem-statement-03.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3132.txt


This memo describes paging, assesses the need for IP paging, and
presents a list of recommendations for Seamoby charter items regarding
work on paging.  The results are specifically directed toward the task
undertaken by the design team, and are not meant to be the definitive
word on paging for all time, nor to be binding on Seamoby or other
working groups, should the situation with regard to IP mobility
protocols or radio link support undergo a major change.

This document is a product of the Context and Micro-mobility Routing
Working Group of the IETF.

This memo provides information for the Internet community.  It does
not specify an Internet standard of any kind.  Distribution of this
memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.

