


CONEX                                                         B. Briscoe
Internet-Draft                                                        BT
Intended status: Informational                                 R. Woundy
Expires: December 23, 2010                                       Comcast
                                                       T. Moncaster, Ed.
                                                           Moncaster.com
                                                          J. Leslie, Ed.
                                                                 JLC.net
                                                           June 21, 2010


               Congestion Exposure Mechanism Description
                        draft-conex-mechanism-00

Abstract

   Internet Service Providers (ISPs) are facing problems where
   congestion prevents full utilization of the path between sender and
   receiver at today's "broadband" speeds.  ISPs desire to control the
   congestion, which often appears to be caused by a small number of
   users consuming a large amount of bandwidth.  Building out more
   capacity along all of the path to handle this congestion can be
   expensive; and network operators have sought other ways to manage
   congestion.  The current mechanisms all suffer from difficulty
   measuring the congestion (as distinguished from the total traffic).

   The ConEx Working Group is designing a mechanism to make congestion
   along any path visible at the Internet Layer.  This document
   discusses this mechanism.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 23, 2010.

Copyright Notice



Briscoe, et al.         Expires December 23, 2010               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft               ConEx Mechanism                   June 2010


   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Definitions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Existing Approaches to Congestion Management . . . . . . . . .  5
   4.  Exposing Congestion  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   5.  ECN - a Step in the Right Direction  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   6.  The Proposed Congestion Exposure Mechanism . . . . . . . . . .  8
   7.  Conex Use Cases  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     7.1.  Ingress policing for traffic management  . . . . . . . . . 10
     7.2.  Conex to incentivise scavenger transports  . . . . . . . . 11
     7.3.  Conex to mitigate DDoS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     7.4.  Conex as a form of differential QoS  . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     7.5.  Other issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   8.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   9.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   10. Acknowledgments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   11. References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
     11.1. Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
     11.2. Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17


















Briscoe, et al.         Expires December 23, 2010               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft               ConEx Mechanism                   June 2010


1.  Introduction

   The growth of "always on" broadband connections, coupled with the
   steady increase in access speeds [OfCom], has meant network operators
   are increasingly facing problems with congestion.  But congestion
   results from sharing network capacity with others, not merely from
   using it.  In general, today's "DSL" and cable-internet users cannot
   "cause" congestion in the absence of competing traffic.  (Wireless
   ISPs and cellular internet have different tradeoffs which we will not
   discuss here.)

   Actual congestion generally results from the interaction of traffic
   from an ISPs own subscribers with traffic from other users.  The
   tools currently available don't allow an operator to identify the
   causes of the congestion and so leave them powerless to properly
   control it.

   While building out more capacity to handle increased traffic is
   always good, the expense and lead-time can be prohibitive, especially
   for network operators that charge flat-rate feeds to subscribers and
   are thus unable to charge heavier users more for causing more
   congestion [BB-incentive].  For an operator facing congestion caused
   by other operators' networks, building out its own capacity is
   unlikely to solve the congestion problem.  Operators are thus facing
   increased pressure to find effective solutions to dealing with high-
   consuming users.

   The growth of "scavenger-class" services helps to reduce congestion,
   but actually make the ISPs problem less tractable.  These are
   services where participating users are not at all interested in
   paying more, but wish to make good use of the capacity of the path.
   Thus, users of such services may show very heavy total traffic up
   until the moment congestion is detected (at the Transport Layer), but
   immediately back off.  ISP monitoring (at the Internet Layer) cannot
   detect this congestion avoidance if the congestion in question is in
   a different domain further along the path; and must treat such users
   as congestion-causing users.

   We propose that Internet Protocol (IP) packets have two "congestion"
   fields.  The exact protocol details of these fields are for another
   document, but we expect them to provide measures of "congestion so
   far" and "congestion still expected".









Briscoe, et al.         Expires December 23, 2010               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft               ConEx Mechanism                   June 2010


2.  Definitions

   Since conex expects to build on Explicit Congestion Notification
   (ECN) [RFC3168], we use the term "congestion" in a manner consistent
   with ECN, namely that congestion occurs before any packet is dropped.

   We define five specific terms carefully:

   Congestion:  Congestion is a measure of the probability that a given
      packet will be ECN-marked or dropped as it traverses the network.
      At any given router it is a function of the queue state at that
      router.  Congestion is added in a combinatorial manner, that is,
      routers ignore the congestion a packet has already seen when they
      decide whether to mark it or not.

   Upstream Congestion:  The congestion that has already been
      experienced by a packet as it travels along its path.  In other
      words at any point on the path, it is the congestion between the
      source of the packet and that point.

   Downstream Congestion:  The congestion that a packet still has to
      experience on the remainder of its path.  In other words at any
      point it is the congestion still to be experienced as the packet
      travels between that point and its destination.

   Ingress Router:  The Ingress Router is the first router a packet
      traverses that is outside its own network.  In a domestic network
      that will be the first router downstream from the home access
      equipment.  In a commercial network it may be the first router
      downstream of the firewall.

   Egress Router:  The Egress Router is the last router a packet
      traverses before it enters the destination network.


















Briscoe, et al.         Expires December 23, 2010               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft               ConEx Mechanism                   June 2010


3.  Existing Approaches to Congestion Management

   Initial attempts to capture congestion situations have usually
   focused on the peak hours and aimed at rate limiting heavy users
   during that time.  For example, users who have consumed a certain
   amount of bandwidth during the last 24 hours got elected as those who
   get their traffic shaped if the total amount of traffic reaches a
   congestion situation in certain nodes within the operator's network.

   All of the current approaches suffer from some general limitations.
   First, they introduce performance uncertainty.  Flat-rate pricing
   plans are popular because users appreciate the certainty of having
   their monthly bill amount remain the same for each billing period,
   allowing them to plan their costs accordingly.  But while flat-rate
   pricing avoids billing uncertainty, it creates performance
   uncertainty: users cannot know whether the performance of their
   connection is being altered or degraded based on how the network
   operator manages congestion.

   Second, none of the approaches is able to make use of what may be the
   most important factor in managing congestion: the amount that a given
   endpoint contributes to congestion on the network.  This information
   simply is not available to network nodes, and neither volume nor rate
   nor application usage is an adequate proxy for congestion volume,
   because none of these metrics measures a user or network's actual
   contribution to congestion on the network.

   Finally, none of these solutions accounts for inter-network
   congestion.  Mechanisms may exist that allow an operator to identify
   and mitigate congestion in their own network, but the design of the
   Internet means that only the end-hosts have full visibility of
   congestion information along the whole path.  Conex allows this
   information to be visible to everyone on the path and thus allows
   operators to make better-informed decisions about controlling
   traffic.
















Briscoe, et al.         Expires December 23, 2010               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft               ConEx Mechanism                   June 2010


4.  Exposing Congestion

   We argue that current traffic-control mechanisms seek to control the
   wrong quantity.  What matters in the network is neither the volume of
   traffic nor the rate of traffic: it is the contribution to congestion
   over time -- congestion means that your traffic impacts other users,
   and conversely that their traffic impacts you.  So if there is no
   congestion there need not be any restriction on the amount a user can
   send; restrictions only need to apply when others are sending traffic
   such that there is congestion.

   For example, an application intending to transfer large amounts of
   data could use a congestion control mechanism like [LEDBAT] to reduce
   its transmission rate before any competing TCP flows do, by detecting
   an increase in end-to-end delay (as a measure of impending
   congestion).  However such techniques rely on voluntary, altruistic
   action by end users and their application providers.  ISPs can
   neither enforce their use nor avoid penalizing them for congestion
   they avoid.

   The Internet was designed so that end-hosts detect and control
   congestion.  We argue that congestion needs to be visible to network
   nodes as well, not just to the end hosts.  More specifically, a
   network needs to be able to measure how much congestion any
   particular traffic expects to cause between the monitoring point in
   the network and the destination ("rest-of-path congestion").  This
   would be a new capability.  Today a network can use Explicit
   Congestion Notification (ECN) [RFC3168] to detect how much congestion
   the traffic has suffered between the source and a monitoring point,
   but not beyond.  This new capability would enable an ISP to give
   incentives for the use of LEDBAT-like applications whilst restricting
   inappropriate uses of traditional TCP and UDP ones.

   So we propose a new approach which we call Congestion Exposure.  We
   propose that congestion information should be made visible at the IP
   layer, so that any network node can measure the contribution to
   congestion of an aggregate of traffic as easily as straight volume
   can be measured today.  Once the information is exposed in this way,
   it is then possible to use it to measure the true impact of any
   traffic on the network.

   In general, congestion exposure gives ISPs a principled way to hold
   their customers accountable for the impact on others of their network
   usage and reward them for choosing congestion-sensitive applications.







Briscoe, et al.         Expires December 23, 2010               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft               ConEx Mechanism                   June 2010


5.  ECN - a Step in the Right Direction

   Explicit Congestion Notification [RFC3168] allows routers to
   explicitly tell end-hosts that they are approaching the point of
   congestion.  ECN builds on Active Queue Mechanisms such as random
   early discard (RED) [RFC2309] by allowing the router to mark a packet
   with a Congestion Experienced (CE) codepoint, rather than dropping
   it.  The probability of a packet being marked increases with the
   length of the queue and thus the rate of CE marks is a guide to the
   level of congestion at that queue.  This CE codepoint travels forward
   through the network to the receiver which then informs the sender
   that it has seen congestion.  The sender is then required to respond
   as if it had experienced a packet loss.  Because the CE codepoint is
   visible in the IP layer, this approach reveals the upstream
   congestion level for a packet.

   Alas, this is not enough - ECN only allows downstream nodes to
   measure the congestion so far for any flow.  This can help hold a
   receiver accountable for the congestion caused by incoming traffic.
   But a receiver can only indirectly influence incoming congestion, by
   politely asking the sender to control it.  A receiver cannot make a
   sender install an adaptive codec, or install LEDBAT instead of TCP
   congestion-control.  And a receiver cannot cause an attacker to stop
   flooding it with traffic.

   What is needed is knowledge of the downstream congestion level, for
   which you need additional information that is still concealed from
   the network.























Briscoe, et al.         Expires December 23, 2010               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft               ConEx Mechanism                   June 2010


6.  The Proposed Congestion Exposure Mechanism

   The protocol we propose is based on a concept known as re-feedback
   [Re-Feedback], and builds on existing active queue management
   techniques like RED [RFC2309] and ECN [RFC3168] that network elements
   can already use to measure and expose congestion.

   We propose that packets have two "congestion" fields in their IP
   header:

   o  A congestion experienced field to record the upstream congestion
      level along the path.  Routers indicate their current congestion
      level by updating this field in every packet.  As the packet
      traverses the network it builds up a record of the overall
      congestion along its path in this field.  This data is sent back
      to the sender who uses it to determine its transmission rate.

   o  A whole-path congestion field that uses re-feedback to record the
      total congestion expected along the path.  The sender does this by
      re-inserting the current congestion level for the path into this
      field for every packet it transmits.

   Thus at any node downstream of the sender you can see the upstream
   congestion for the packet (the congestion thus far) and the whole
   path congestion (with a time lag of one round-trip-time (RTT)) and
   can calculate the downstream congestion by subtracting one from the
   other.

   So congestion exposure can be achieved by coupling congestion
   notification from routers with the re-insertion of this information
   by the sender.  This establishes information symmetry between users
   and network providers.



















Briscoe, et al.         Expires December 23, 2010               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft               ConEx Mechanism                   June 2010


7.  Conex Use Cases

   Conex is a simple concept that has revolutionary implications.  It is
   that rare thing -- a truly disruptive technology, and as such it is
   hard to imagine the variety of uses it may be put to.  However there
   are several obvious use cases that come to mind with a little
   thought.  The authors aren't claiming all of these have equal merit,
   nor are we claiming conex is the only conceivable solution to achieve
   these.  But these use cases represent a consensus among people that
   have been working on this approach for some years.

   In the following use cases we are assuming the most abstract version
   of the conex mechanism, namely that every packet carries two
   congestion fields, one for upstream congestion and one for
   downstream.  At every node that is congested the upstream congestion
   value will be incremented in some manner and the downstream
   congestion value will be decremented.  Assuming there is accurate
   feedback in the system then the aim should be for the downstream
   value to be zero or slightly positive by the time the packet reaches
   its destination.

   If conex information is to be useful it has to be accurate (within
   the limitations of the available feedback).  This raises three issues
   that need to be addressed:

   Distinguishing conex traffic from non-conex traffic:  On one level
      this seems pretty easy -- conex traffic needs to have the
      downstream congestion field in every packet.  However in practise
      it may not be as simple as this.  Re-ECN is one proposed
      implementation of conex.  Here the two congestion fields are
      unary-encoded into a stream of packets by effectively setting or
      clearing a single bit.  Assuming you are able to identify non-
      conex (or legacy) traffic, then you need to decide what to do
      about it.  An ISP may reasonably choose to do nothing different
      with this traffic.  Alternatively they might incentivise the conex
      traffic in order to give it marginally better service.

   Over-declaring congestion:  Conex relies on the sender accurately
      declaring the congestion they expect to see.  During TCP slow-
      start a sender is unable to predict the level of congestion they
      will experience and it is advisable to declare that expect to see
      some congestion on the first packet.  However, if any host or
      router marks more than a small fraction of total traffic,
      downstream routers are less likely to trust its congestion
      markings.  We do not initially propose any mechanism to deal with
      this issue.





Briscoe, et al.         Expires December 23, 2010               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft               ConEx Mechanism                   June 2010


   Under-declaring congestion:  Conex requires the sender to set the
      downstream congestion field in each packet to their best estimate
      of what they expect the whole path congestion to be.  If this
      expected congestion level is to be used for traffic management
      (see use cases) then it benefits the user to under-declare.
      Mechanisms are needed to prevent this happening.

      There are three approaches that may work (individually or in
      combination):

      *  An ingress router can monitor a user's feedback to see what
         their reported congestion level actually is.

      *  A conex-aware router can drop any packet with a downstream-
         congestion value of zero or less if that router is even
         slightly congested.

      *  An egress router can actively monitor some or all flows to
         check that they are complying with the requirement that the
         downstream congestion value should be zero or (slightly
         positive) when it reaches the egress.

   At any point of congestion, it is reasonable to treat conex-marked
   traffic differently:

   o  non-conex traffic will mostly be dropped (as now);

   o  conex-marked traffic which has exhausted its congestion allowance
      will (all) be dropped;

7.1.  Ingress policing for traffic management

   Currently many ISPs impose some form of traffic management at peak
   hours.  This is a simple economic necessity -- the only reason the
   Internet works as a commercial concern is that ISPs are able to rely
   on statistical multiplexing to share their expensive core network
   between large numbers of customers.  In order to ensure all customers
   get some chance to access the network, the "heaviest" customers will
   be subjected to some form of traffic management at peak times
   (typically a rate cap for certain types of traffic) [Fair-use].
   Often this traffic management is done with expensive flow aware
   devices such as DPI boxes or flow-aware routers.

   Conex enables a new approach that requires simple per-user policing
   at the ingress.  As described above, every packet a user sends should
   declare the total congestion that the sender expects that packet to
   encounter on its journey through the network.  Congestion volume has
   been defined [Fairer-faster] as the congestion a packet experiences,



Briscoe, et al.         Expires December 23, 2010              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft               ConEx Mechanism                   June 2010


   multiplied by the size of that packet.  In effect this is a measure
   of how much traffic was sent that was above the instantaneous
   transmission capacity of the network.  By extension the congestion
   rate would be the transmission rate multiplied by the congestion
   level.  A 1 Gbps router that is 0.1% congested implies that there is
   1 Mbps of excess traffic.

   At the Ingress Router an ISP can police the amount of congestion a
   user is causing by limiting the congestion volume they send into the
   network.  One system that achieves this is described in
   [Policing-freedom].  This uses a modified token bucket to limit the
   congestion rate being sent rather than the overall rate.  Such
   ingress policing is relatively simple as it requires no flow state.
   Furthermore, unlike many mechanisms, it treats all a user's packets
   equally.

7.2.  Conex to incentivise scavenger transports

   Recent work proposes a new approach for QoS where traffic is provided
   with a less than best effort or "scavenger" quality of service.  The
   idea is that low priority but high volume traffic such as OS updates,
   P2P file transfers and view-later TV programs should be allowed to
   use any spare network capacity, but should rapidly get out of the way
   if a higher priority or interactive application starts up.  One
   solution being actively explored is LEDBAT which proposes a new
   congestion control algorithm that is less aggressive in seeking out
   bandwidth than TCP.

   At present most ISPs assume a strong correlation between the volume
   of a flow and the impact that flow causes in the network.  This
   assumption has been eroded by the growth of interactive streaming
   which behaves in an inelastic manner.  Assuming the end-user is using
   conex marking on all traffic and that LEDBAT leads to the expected
   low level of congestion and the ingress ISP has deployed a conex-
   aware ingress policer, then the LEDBAT will not be penalised since it
   will be causing less congestion.  (If LEDBAT is not conex-marking
   traffic then the ISP will be forced to guess the congestion, probably
   based on the total volume).

   If the ISP has deployed a conex-aware ingress policer then they are
   able to incentivise the use of LEDBAT because a user will be policed
   according to the overall congestion volume their traffic generates.
   If all background file transfers are only generating a low level of
   congestion then the sender has more "congestion budget" to "spend" on
   their interactive applications.  It can be shown [Kelly] that this
   approach maximises social welfare -- in other words if you limit the
   congestion that all users can generate then everyone benefits from a
   better service.



Briscoe, et al.         Expires December 23, 2010              [Page 11]

Internet-Draft               ConEx Mechanism                   June 2010


7.3.  Conex to mitigate DDoS

   DDoS relies on subverting innocent end users and getting them to send
   flood traffic to a given destination.  This is intended to cause a
   rapid increase in congestion in the immediate vicinity of that
   destination.  If it fails to do this then it can't be called Denial
   of Service.  If the ingress ISP has deployed conex policers, that ISP
   will limit how much DDoS traffic enters the 'net.  If the compromised
   user tries to use the 'net during the DDoS attack, they will quickly
   become aware that something is wrong, and their ISP can show the
   evidence that their computer has become zombified.

7.4.  Conex as a form of differential QoS

   Most QoS approaches require the active participation of routers to
   control the delay and loss characteristics for the traffic.  For
   real-time interactive traffic it is clear that low delay and low
   jitter are critical and thus these probably always need different
   treatment at a router.  However if low loss is the issue then conex
   offers an alternative approach.  Assuming the ingress ISP has
   deployed conex-aware ingress policing then the only control on a
   user's traffic is dependent on the congestion that user has caused.
   If they want to prioritise some traffic over other traffic then they
   can allow that traffic to generate more congestion.  The price to pay
   will be to reduce the congestion that their other traffic causes.

7.5.  Other issues

   make a source believe it has seen more congestion than it has

   hijack a user's identity and make it appear they are dishonest at an
   egress policer

   clear or otherwise tamper with the conex markings

   ...















Briscoe, et al.         Expires December 23, 2010              [Page 12]

Internet-Draft               ConEx Mechanism                   June 2010


8.  Security Considerations

   This document proposes a mechanism tagging onto Explicit Congestion
   Notification [RFC3168], and inherits the security issues listed
   therein.  The additional issues from Congestion Expected markings
   relate to the degree of trust each forwarding point places in
   Congestion Expected markings it receives, which is a business
   decision mostly orthogonal to the markings themselves.

   One expected use of exposed congestion information is to hold the
   end-to-end transport and the network accountable to each other.  The
   network cannot be relied on to report information to the receiver
   against its interest, and the same applies for the information the
   receiver feeds back to the sender, and that the sender reports back
   to the network.  Looking at each in turn:

   o  The Network.  In general it is not in any network's interest to
      under-declare congestion since this will have potentially negative
      consequences for all users of that network.  It may be in its
      interest to over-declare congestion if, for instance, it wishes to
      force traffic to move away to a different network or simply to
      reduce the amount of traffic it is carrying.  Congestion Exposure
      itself won't significantly alter the incentives for and against
      honest declaration of congestion by a network, but we can imagine
      applications of Congestion Exposure that will change these
      incentives.  There is a perception among network operators that
      their level of congestion is a business secret.  Today, congestion
      is one of the worst-kept secrets a network has, because end-hosts
      can see congestion better than network operators can.  Congestion
      Exposure will enable network operators to pinpoint whether
      congestion is on one side or the other of any border.  It is
      conceivable that forwarders with underprovisioned networks may try
      to obstruct deployment of Congestion Exposure.

   o  The Receiver.  Receivers generally have an incentive to under-
      declare congestion since they generally wish to receive the data
      from the sender as rapidly as possible.  [Savage] explains how a
      receiver can significantly improve their throughput my failing to
      declare congestion.  This is a problem with or without Congestion
      Exposure.  [KGao] explains one possible technique to encourage
      receiver's to be honest in their declaration of congestion.

   o  The Sender.  One proposed mechanism for Congestion Exposure
      deployment adds a requirement for a sender to advise the network
      how much congestion it has suffered or caused.  Although most
      senders currently respond to congestion they are informed of, one
      use of exposed congestion information might be to encourage
      sources of excessive congestion to back off more aggressively.



Briscoe, et al.         Expires December 23, 2010              [Page 13]

Internet-Draft               ConEx Mechanism                   June 2010


      Then clearly there may be an incentive for the sender to under-
      declare congestion.  This will be a particular problem with
      sources of flooding attacks.  "Policing" mechanisms have been
      proposed to deal with this.

   In addition there are potential problems from source spoofing.  A
   malicious sender can pretend to be another user by spoofing the
   source address.  Congestion Exposure allows for "Policers" and
   "Traffic Shapers" so as to be robust against injection of false
   congestion information into the forward path.









































Briscoe, et al.         Expires December 23, 2010              [Page 14]

Internet-Draft               ConEx Mechanism                   June 2010


9.  IANA Considerations

   This document does not require actions by IANA.
















































Briscoe, et al.         Expires December 23, 2010              [Page 15]

Internet-Draft               ConEx Mechanism                   June 2010


10.  Acknowledgments

   The authors would like to thank Contributing Authors Bernard Aboba,
   Joao Taveira Araujo, Louise Burness, Alissa Cooper, Philip Eardley,
   Michael Menth, and Hannes Tschofenig for their inputs to this
   document.













































Briscoe, et al.         Expires December 23, 2010              [Page 16]

Internet-Draft               ConEx Mechanism                   June 2010


11.  References

11.1.  Normative References

   [RFC3168]           Ramakrishnan, K., Floyd, S., and D. Black, "The
                       Addition of Explicit Congestion Notification
                       (ECN) to IP", RFC 3168, September 2001.

11.2.  Informative References

   [BB-incentive]      MIT Communications Futures Program (CFP) and
                       Cambridge University Communications Research
                       Network, "The Broadband Incentive Problem",
                       September 2005.

   [Fair-use]          Broadband Choices, "Truth about 'fair usage'
                       broadband", 2009.

   [Fairer-faster]     Briscoe, B., "A Fairer Faster Internet Protocol",
                       IEEE Spectrum Dec 2008 pp38-43, December 2008.

   [KGao]              Gao, K. and C. Wang, "Incrementally Deployable
                       Prevention to TCP Attack with Misbehaving
                       Receivers", December 2004.

   [Kelly]             Kelly, F., Maulloo, A., and D. Tan, "Rate control
                       for communication networks: shadow prices,
                       proportional fairness and stability", Journal of
                       the Operational Research Society 49(3) 237--252,
                       1998,
                       <http://www.statslab.cam.ac.uk/~frank/rate.html>.

   [LEDBAT]            Shalunov, S., "Low Extra Delay Background
                       Transport (LEDBAT)",
                       draft-ietf-ledbat-congestion-01 (work in
                       progress), March 2010.

   [OfCom]             Ofcom: Office of Communications, "UK Broadband
                       Speeds 2008: Research report", January 2009.

   [Policing-freedom]  Briscoe, B., Jacquet, A., and T. Moncaster,
                       "Policing Freedom to Use the Internet Resource
                       Pool", RE-Arch 2008 hosted at the 2008 CoNEXT
                       conference , December 2008.

   [RFC2309]           Braden, B., Clark, D., Crowcroft, J., Davie, B.,
                       Deering, S., Estrin, D., Floyd, S., Jacobson, V.,
                       Minshall, G., Partridge, C., Peterson, L.,



Briscoe, et al.         Expires December 23, 2010              [Page 17]

Internet-Draft               ConEx Mechanism                   June 2010


                       Ramakrishnan, K., Shenker, S., Wroclawski, J.,
                       and L. Zhang, "Recommendations on Queue
                       Management and Congestion Avoidance in the
                       Internet", RFC 2309, April 1998.

   [Re-Feedback]       Briscoe, B., Jacquet, A., Di Cairano-Gilfedder,
                       C., Salvatori, A., Soppera, A., and M. Koyabe,
                       "Policing Congestion Response in an Internetwork
                       Using Re-Feedback", ACM SIGCOMM CCR 35(4)277--
                       288, August 2005, <http://www.acm.org/sigs/
                       sigcomm/sigcomm2005/techprog.html#session8>.

   [Savage]            Savage, S., Wetherall, D., and T. Anderson, "TCP
                       Congestion Control with a Misbehaving Receiver",
                       ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review , 1999.




































Briscoe, et al.         Expires December 23, 2010              [Page 18]

Internet-Draft               ConEx Mechanism                   June 2010


Authors' Addresses

   Bob Briscoe
   BT
   B54/77, Adastral Park
   Martlesham Heath
   Ipswich  IP5 3RE
   UK

   Phone: +44 1473 645196
   EMail: bob.briscoe@bt.com
   URI:   http://bobbriscoe.net/


   Richard Woundy
   Comcast
   Comcast Cable Communications
   27 Industrial Avenue
   Chelmsford, MA  01824
   US

   EMail: richard_woundy@cable.comcast.com
   URI:   http://www.comcast.com


   Toby Moncaster (editor)
   Moncaster.com
   Layer Marney
   Colchester  CO5 9UZ
   UK

   EMail: toby@moncaster.com


   John Leslie (editor)
   JLC.net
   10 Souhegan Street
   Milford, NH  03055
   US

   EMail: john@jlc.net










Briscoe, et al.         Expires December 23, 2010              [Page 19]


