


NFSv4                                                          M. Eisler
Internet-Draft                                            D. Kenchammana
Intended status: Standards Track                              J. Lentini
Expires: August 27, 2011                                  M. Shankararao
                                                                  NetApp
                                                                 R. Iyer
                                                       February 23, 2011


                    NFS space reservation operations
             draft-iyer-nfsv4-space-reservation-ops-02.txt

Abstract

   This document describes a set of NFS attributes and operations that
   are useful for applications like hypervisors to manage storage in a
   better manner.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 27, 2011.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as



Eisler, et al.           Expires August 27, 2011                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft      NFS space reservation operations       February 2011


   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Requirements notation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   3.  Use Cases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
     3.1.  Space Reservation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
     3.2.  Space freed on deletes  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   4.  Operations and attributes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
     4.1.  Attribute X: space_reserve  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
     4.2.  Attribute Y: space_freed  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
     4.3.  Attribute Z: max_hole_punch . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
     4.4.  Operation A: HOLE_PUNCH - Zero and deallocate blocks
           backing the file in the specified range.  . . . . . . . . . 6
   5.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   6.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   7.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8































Eisler, et al.           Expires August 27, 2011                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft      NFS space reservation operations       February 2011


1.  Requirements notation

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].


2.  Introduction

   This document describes a set of operations that allow applications
   such as hypervisors to reserve space for a file, report the amount of
   actual disk space a file occupies and freeup the backing space of a
   file when it is not required.

   In virtualized environments, virtual disk files are often stored on
   NFS mounted volumes.  Since virtual disk files represent the hard
   disks of virtual machines, hypervisors often have to guarantee
   certain properties for the file.

   One such example is space reservation.  When a hypervisor creates a
   virtual disk file, it often tries to preallocate the space for the
   file so that there are no future allocation related errors during the
   operation of the virtual machine.  Such errors prevent a virtual
   machine from continuing execution and result in downtime.

   Another useful feature would be the ability to report the number of
   blocks that would be freed when a file is deleted.  Currently, NFS
   reports two size attributes:

   o  size - The logical file size of the file.

   o  space_used - The size in bytes that the file occupies on disk

   While these attributes are sufficient for space accounting in
   traditional filesystems, they prove to be inadequate in modern
   filesystems that support block sharing.  Having a way to tell the
   number of blocks that would be freed if the file was deleted would be
   useful to applications that wish to migrate files when a volume is
   low on space.

   Since virtual disks represent a hard drive in a virtual machine, a
   virtual disk can be viewed as a filesystem within a file.  Since not
   all blocks within a filesystem are in use, there is an opportunity to
   reclaim blocks that are no longer in use.  A call to deallocate
   blocks could result in better space efficiency.  Lesser space MAY be
   consumed for backups after block deallocation.

   We propose the following operations and attributes for the



Eisler, et al.           Expires August 27, 2011                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft      NFS space reservation operations       February 2011


   aforementioned use cases:

   space_reserve:  This attribute specifies whether the blocks backing
      the file have been preallocated.

   space_freed:  This attribute specifies the space freed when a file is
      deleted, taking block sharing into consideration.

   HOLE_PUNCH:  This operation zeroes and/or deallocates the blocks
      backing a region of the file.

   max_hole_punch:  This attribute specifies the maximum sized hole that
      can be punched on the filesystem.


3.  Use Cases

3.1.  Space Reservation

   Some applications require that once a file of a certain size is
   created, writes to that file never fail with an out of space
   condition.  One such example is that of a hypervisor writing to a
   virtual disk.  An out of space condition while writing to virtual
   disks would mean that the virtual machine would need to be frozen.

   Currently, in order to achieve such a guarantee, applications zero
   the entire file.  The initial zeroing allocates the backing blocks
   and all subsequent writes are overwrites of already allocated blocks.
   This approach is not only inefficient in terms of the amount of I/O
   done, it is also not guaranteed to work on filesystems that are log
   structured or deduplicated.  An efficient way of guaranteeing space
   reservation would be beneficial to such applications.

   If the space_reserved attribute is set on a file, it is guaranteed
   that writes that do not grow the file will not fail with
   NFSERR_NOSPC.

3.2.  Space freed on deletes

   Currently, files in NFS have two size attributes:

   o  size - The logical file size of the file.

   o  space_used - The size in bytes that the file occupies on disk.

   While these attributes are sufficient for space accounting in
   traditional filesystems, they prove to be inadequate in modern
   filesystems that support block sharing.  In such filesystems,



Eisler, et al.           Expires August 27, 2011                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft      NFS space reservation operations       February 2011


   multiple inodes can point to a single block with a block reference
   count to guard against premature freeing.

   If space_used of a file is interpreted to mean the size in bytes of
   all disk blocks pointed to by the inode of the file, then shared
   blocks get double counted, over-reporting the space utilization.
   This also has the adverse effect that the deletion of a file with
   shared blocks frees up less than space_used bytes.

   On the other hand, if space_used is interpreted to mean the size in
   bytes of those disk blocks unique to the inode of the file, then
   shared blocks are not counted in any file, resulting in under-
   reporting of the space utilization.

   For example, two files A and B have 10 blocks each.  Let 6 of these
   blocks be shared between them.  Thus, the combined space utilized by
   the two files is 14 * BLOCK_SIZE bytes.  In the former case, the
   combined space utilization of the two files would be reported as 20 *
   BLOCK_SIZE.  However, deleting either would only result in 4 *
   BLOCK_SIZE being freed.  Conversely, the latter interpretation would
   report that the space utilization is only 8 * BLOCK_SIZE.

   Adding another size attribute, space_freed, is helpful in solving
   this problem. space_freed is the number of blocks that are allocated
   to the given file that would be freed on its deletion.  In the
   example, both A and B would report space_freed as 4 * BLOCK_SIZE and
   space_used as 10 * BLOCK_SIZE.  If A is deleted, B will report
   space_freed as 10 * BLOCK_SIZE as the deletion of B would result in
   the deallocation of all 10 blocks.

   The addition of this problem doesn't solve the problem of space being
   over-reported.  However, over-reporting is better than under-
   reporting.


4.  Operations and attributes

   In the sections that follow, one operation and three attributes are
   defined that together provide the space management facilities
   outlined earlier in the document.  The operation is intended to be
   OPTIONAL and the attributes RECOMMENDED as defined in section 17 of
   [RFC5661].

4.1.  Attribute X: space_reserve

   The space_reserve attribute is a read/write attribute of type
   boolean.  It is a per file attribute.  When the space_reserved
   attribute is set via SETATTR, the server must ensure that there is



Eisler, et al.           Expires August 27, 2011                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft      NFS space reservation operations       February 2011


   disk space to accommodate every byte in the file before it can return
   success.  If the server cannot guarantee this, it must return
   NFS4ERR_NOSPC.

   If the client tries to grow a file which has the space_reserved
   attribute set, the server must guarantee that there is disk space to
   accommodate every byte in the file with the new size before it can
   return success.  If the server cannot guarantee this, it must return
   NFS4ERR_NOSPC.

   It is not required that the server allocate the space to the file
   before returning success.  The allocation can be deferred, however,
   it must be guaranteed that it will not fail for lack of space.

   The value of space_reserved can be obtained at any time through
   GETATTR.

   In order to avoid ambiguity, the space_reserve bit cannot be set
   along with the size bit in SETATTR.  Increasing the size of a file
   with space_reserve set will fail if space reservation cannot be
   guaranteed for the new size.  If the file size is decreased, space
   reservation is only guaranteed for the new size and the extra blocks
   backing the file can be released.

4.2.  Attribute Y: space_freed

   space_freed gives the number of bytes freed if the file is deleted.
   This attribute is read only and is of type length4.  It is a per file
   attribute.

4.3.  Attribute Z: max_hole_punch

   max_hole_punch specifies the maximum size of a hole that the
   HOLE_PUNCH operation can handle.  This attribute is read only and of
   type length4.  It is a per filesystem attribute.  This attribute MUST
   be implemented if HOLE_PUNCH is implemented.

4.4.  Operation A: HOLE_PUNCH - Zero and deallocate blocks backing the
      file in the specified range.

   ARGUMENTS

           struct HOLE_PUNCH4args {
               /* CURRENT_FH: file */
               offset4        hpa_offset;
               length4        hpa_count;
           };




Eisler, et al.           Expires August 27, 2011                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft      NFS space reservation operations       February 2011


   RESULTS

                  struct HOLEPUNCH4res {
                      nfsstat4        hpr_status;
              };

   DESCRIPTION

   Whenever a client wishes to deallocate the blocks backing a
   particular region in the file, it calls the HOLE_PUNCH operation with
   the current filehandle set to the filehandle of the file in question,
   start offset and length in bytes of the region set in hpa_offset and
   hpa_count respectively.  All further reads to this region MUST return
   zeros until overwritten.  The filehandle specified must be that of a
   regular file.

   Situations may arise where hpa_offset and/or hpa_offset + hpa_count
   will not be aligned to a boundary that the server does allocations/
   deallocations in.  For most filesystems, this is the block size of
   the file system.  In such a case, the server can deallocate as many
   bytes as it can in the region.  The blocks that cannot be deallocated
   MUST be zeroed.  Except for the block deallocation and maximum hole
   punching capability, a HOLE_PUNCH operation is to be treated similar
   to a write of zeroes.

   The server is not required to complete deallocating the blocks
   specified in the operation before returning.  It is acceptable to
   have the deallocation be deferred.  In fact, HOLE_PUNCH is merely a
   hint; it is valid for a server to return success without ever doing
   anything towards deallocating the blocks backing the region
   specified.  However, any future reads to the region MUST return
   zeroes.

   HOLE_PUNCH will result in the space_used attribute being decreased by
   the number of bytes that were deallocated.  The space_freed attribute
   may or may not decrease, depending on the support and whether the
   blocks backing the specified range were shared or not.  The size
   attribute will remain unchanged.

   The HOLE_PUNCH operation MUST NOT change the space reservation
   guarantee of the file.  While the server can deallocate the blocks
   specified by hpa_offset and hpa_count, future writes to this region
   MUST NOT fail with NFSERR_NOSPC.

   The HOLE_PUNCH operation may fail for the following reasons (this is
   a partial list):





Eisler, et al.           Expires August 27, 2011                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft      NFS space reservation operations       February 2011


   NFS4ERR_NOTSUPP:  The Hole punch operations is not supported by the
      NFS server receiving this request.

   NFS4ERR_DIR:  The current filehandle is of type NF4DIR.

   NFS4ERR_SYMLINK:  The current filehandle is of type NF4LNK.

   NFS4ERR_WRONG_TYPE:  The current filehandle does not designate an
      ordinary file.


5.  Security Considerations

   There are no security considerations.


6.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no actions for IANA.


7.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC5661]  Shepler, S., Eisler, M., and D. Noveck, "Network File
              System (NFS) Version 4 Minor Version 1 Protocol",
              RFC 5661, January 2010.


Authors' Addresses

   Mike Eisler
   NetApp
   5765 Chase Point Circle
   Colorado Springs, CO  80919
   USA

   Phone: +1 719 599 9026
   Email: mike@eisler.com
   URI:   http://www.eisler.com









Eisler, et al.           Expires August 27, 2011                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft      NFS space reservation operations       February 2011


   Deepak Kenchammana
   NetApp
   475 East Java Drive
   Sunnyvale, CA  94089
   USA

   Phone: +1 408 822 4765
   Email: kencham@netapp.com


   James Lentini
   NetApp
   1601 Trapelo Rd, Suite 16
   Waltham, MA  02451
   USA

   Phone: +1 781 768 5359
   Email: jlentini@netapp.com


   Manjunath Shankararao
   NetApp
   3rd Floor, Fair Winds Block, EGL Software Park
   Bangalore, Karnataka  560085
   INDIA

   Phone: +91 80 4184 3397
   Email: rudra@netapp.com


   Rahul Iyer
   655 S Fair Oaks Ave Apt #I-314
   Sunnyvale, CA  94086
   USA

   Email: rahulair@yahoo.com















Eisler, et al.           Expires August 27, 2011                [Page 9]

