Network working group                                             X. Xu 
Internet Draft                                                   Huawei 
Category: BCP                                              M. Boucadair 
Expires: February 2011                                   France Telecom         
                                                                 Y. Lee 
                                                                Comcast 
                                                                G. Chen 
                                                           China Mobile 
                                                        August 24, 2010 
                                                                                
    Redundancy and Load Balancing Framework for Stateful Network Address 
                             Translators (NAT) 
                                      
                  draft-xu-behave-stateful-nat-standby-04 


Abstract 

   This document defines a framework for ensuring redundancy and/or 
   load balancing for stateful Network Address Translators (NAT), 
   including NAT44, NAT64 and NAT46. 

Status of this Memo 

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with 
   the provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79. 

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents 
   at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at   
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt. 

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at   
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 

   This Internet-Draft will expire on February 24, 2011. 

    



 
 
 
Xu, et al.            Expires Feburary 24, 2011               [Page 1] 

Internet-Draft        Redundancy and Load Balancing        August 2010 
                        Framework for Stateful NAT 

Copyright Notice 

   Copyright (c) 2009 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the    
   document authors.  All rights reserved. 

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal    
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents 
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of    
   publication of this document. Please review these documents 
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with 
   respect to this document.  

Conventions used in this document 

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [RFC2119]. 

Table of Contents 

    
   1. Introduction.................................................3 
   2. Terminology..................................................3 
   3. Reference Architecture.......................................5 
   4. Redundancy Mechanisms........................................6 
      4.1. Cold Standby Mechanism..................................7 
      4.2. Hot Standby Mechanism...................................9 
   5. Load Balancing Mechanisms...................................10 
   6. Election Protocol Considerations............................11 
   7. State Synchronization Protocol Considerations...............12 
   8. Security Considerations.....................................12 
   9. IANA Considerations.........................................12 
   10. Acknowledgments............................................12 
   11. References.................................................12 
      11.1. Normative References..................................12 
      11.2. Informative References................................12 
   Authors' Addresses.............................................14 









 
 
Xu, et al.           Expires September 24, 2011               [Page 2] 

Internet-Draft        Redundancy and Load Balancing        August 2010 
                        Framework for Stateful NAT 

    
1. Introduction 

   Network Address Translation (NAT) has been used as an efficient way 
   to share the same IPv4 address among several hosts. Recently, due to 
   IPv4 address shortage, several proposals have been elaborated to 
   rely on Carrier Grade NAT (CGN) (e.g., [NAT444], [DS-Lite] and 
   [NAT64]). In such models, CGN function (which MAY be embedded in a 
   router or be deployed in standalone devices) is deployed within 
   large-scale networks, such as ISP networks or enterprise ones, where 
   a large number of customers are located. These customers within a 
   network which is served by a single CGN device MAY experience 
   service degradation due to the presence of the single point of 
   failure. Therefore, redundancy and/or load-balancing capabilities of 
   the CGN devices are strongly desired in order to deliver highly 
   available services to customers. Failure detection and repair time 
   MUST be therefore shortened.  

   This document describes a framework of redundancy and/or load 
   balancing for stateful NAT including: NAT44 including DS-lite, NAT64 
   and NAT46. 

   Unless otherwise mentioned, NAT and CGN terms throughout this 
   document, pertain to stateful NAT and stateful CGN. Stateless NAT is 
   out of the scope of this memo. Except dealing with the exceptional 
   failures (e.g., power outage, OS crash-down or link failure, etc.), 
   the redundancy mechanism described in this document can also be used 
   for planned maintenance operations (i.e., graceful shutdown of the 
   Primary NAT due to maintenance needs). 

   The main purpose of this memo is analyzing means to ensure high 
   availability and load balancing in environments where carrier grade 
   NAT44, NAT64 and NAT46 are deployed. Some engineering 
   recommendations are provided for the selection of the IPv6 prefix to 
   build IPv4-Embedded IPv6 addresses [Format] and the routing 
   configuration. 

2. Terminology 

   This memo makes use of the terms defined in [RFC2663]. Below are 
   provided terms specific to this document: 

        - CGN (Carrier Grade NAT):  

        a NAT device placed within a large-scale network (e.g., ISP 
        network, enterprise network, or campus network). These devices 

 
 
Xu, et al.           Expires September 24, 2011               [Page 3] 

Internet-Draft        Redundancy and Load Balancing        August 2010 
                        Framework for Stateful NAT 

        MAY be placed at the boundary between the large-scale private 
        network and the public Internet, between a private network and 
        a large-scale public network or between two heterogeneous (i.e., 
        IPv4 and IPv6) IP realms. 

        - Prefix64:  

        an IPv6 prefix used for synthesizing IPv6 addresses for the 
        IPv4 hosts. See [Format] for more details. 

        - CGN internal address realm (internal realm for short):  

        a realm where the communication initiators (e.g., a client in 
        the context of client/server application) are located. For 
        NAT44, the internal realm refers to the private networks, as 
        opposed to the IPv4 Internet. For NAT64, the internal realm 
        means IPv6 network or IPv6 Internet. For NAT46, the internal 
        realm refers to IPv4 network or IPv4 Internet. Accordingly, the 
        hosts located in the internal realm are called internal hosts, 
        and the addresses used in the internal realm are called 
        internal addresses. In the context of DS-Lite architecture, the 
        internal address realm is assumed to be private IPv4 addresses 
        even if the transport mode used to convey exchanged traffic is 
        IPv6. A DS-Lite CGN device (a.k.a., Address Family Transition 
        Router element (AFTR)) is a special NAT44 device which allows 
        overlapping IPv4 private addresses and requires IPv6 
        capabilities and IPv6-specific information to perform its NAT 
        operation. Details can be found in [DS-Lite]. 

        - CGN external address realm (external realm for short):  

        a realm where the communication responders (e.g., a server in 
        the client/server application) are located. For NAT44, the 
        external realm refers to the IPv4 Internet. For NAT64, the 
        external realm means the IPv4 Internet or IPv4 network. For 
        NAT46, the external realm refers to the IPv6 Internet or IPv6 
        network. Accordingly, the hosts located in the external realm 
        are called external hosts, and the addresses used in the 
        external realm are called external addresses. 

        - Internal address pool:  

        an address pool used for assigning internal addresses to 
        represent the external hosts in the internal realm. Note that 
        this address pool is specific to NAT46 and NAT64. For NAT46, 
        the CGN will allocate one internal address (which is an IPv4 

 
 
Xu, et al.           Expires September 24, 2011               [Page 4] 

Internet-Draft        Redundancy and Load Balancing        August 2010 
                        Framework for Stateful NAT 

        address) from the pool to an external IPv6 host and map the 
        external IPv6 host's IPv6 address to this IPv4 address. For 
        NAT64, the CGN internal address pool is the Prefix64 [Format]. 
        This Prefix64 is used for synthesizing internal IPv6 addresses 
        to represent external IPv4 hosts in the internal realm. 

        - External address pool:  

        an address pool used by the CGN for assigning external 
        addresses to the internal hosts. For NAT44 and NAT64, the 
        external address pool contains a set of public IPv4 addresses. 
        For NAT46, the external IPv6 address pool is the Prefix64. The 
        Prefix64 is used by the CGN for synthesizing the external IPv6 
        addresses to represent internal IPv4 hosts in the external 
        realm. 

        - CPE (Customer Premises Equipment):  

        a device which is used to interconnect the customer premise 
        with the service provider's network.   

3. Reference Architecture 

   In a typical operational scenario, as illustrated in Figure 1, two 
   NAT devices are deployed for redundancy and/or load balancing 
   purposes. Hence, we describe the corresponding mechanisms based on 
   this scenario. Note that these mechanisms are also suitable in the 
   scenarios in which more than two NAT devices are used.   

        +-------------------------+     +-----------------------+ 
        |                         |     |                       | 
        |                       +-+-----+-+                     | 
        |                       |  NAT-A  |                     | 
   +----+-------------+         +-+-----+-+    +-------------+  | 
   |   Internal Host  |           |     |      |External Host|  | 
   +----+-------------+           |     |      +-------------+  | 
        |                       +-+-----+-+                     | 
        |                       |  NAT-B  |                     | 
        |    Internal realm     +-+-----+-+    External realm   | 
        |                         |     |                       | 
        +-------------------------+     +-----------------------+      

              Figure 1. General Scenario of Dual NAT Routers 

   The redundancy and load-balancing mechanisms for NAT44, NAT46 and 
   NAT64 are almost identical. In all cases, the NAT device or the 

 
 
Xu, et al.           Expires September 24, 2011               [Page 5] 

Internet-Draft        Redundancy and Load Balancing        August 2010 
                        Framework for Stateful NAT 

   immediate router of the NAT device announces the reachability of the 
   NAT device to the external realm. The slight difference is the NAT 
   reachability information. For example, NAT64 announces an IPv6 route 
   for the Prefix64; NAT44 announces an IPv4 default route; DS-Lite 
   AFTR announces an IPv6 route pointing to itself; and NAT46 announces 
   a route for its internal address pool. This difference does not 
   affect the general redundancy and load-balancing mechanisms, so the 
   mechanisms described in this memo can be applied to all NAT devices. 

4. Redundancy Mechanisms 

   The fundamental principle of NAT redundancy is to make two or more 
   NAT devices function as a redundancy group, and select one as the 
   Primary NAT and the other(s) as the Backup NAT through a dedicated 
   election procedure (see Section 6) or manual configuration. In the 
   nominal regime, datagrams exchanged between hosts in the internal 
   realm and those in the external realm are handled by the Primary NAT. 
   Once the Primary NAT is out of service (means to detect and to 
   notify this failure to the redundancy group SHOULD be activated), 
   the Backup NAT with the highest priority (if several Backup NAT 
   devices are deployed) takes over and provides the NAT services to 
   the internal hosts. This Backup NAT is then identified as new 
   Primary NAT. Once the former Primary NAT became operational, it 
   could either preempt the role of Primary NAT or stay as a candidate 
   in the redundancy group. This is part of administrative policies and 
   out of scope of this memo.  

   To ensure a coherent behavior when NAT device fails, this document 
   assumes that both Primary and Backup NAT devices are managed by the 
   same administrative domain. Thus, consistent configuration policies 
   SHOULD be enforced in all devices. Note that the election process 
   MUST be deterministic and does not lead to fuzzy situation where two 
   or more NAT devices will become Primary NAT. Moreover, the failover 
   MUST be quick to ensure service continuity.    

   Two redundancy mechanisms are described hereafter: the cold or the 
   hot standby mechanism:  

        The Cold Standby Mechanism is just to keep the NAT failover 
        transparent to the internal hosts. The NAT states are not 
        replicated from the Primary NAT to the Backup NAT. When the 
        Primary NAT fails, all the existing established sessions will 
        be flushed out. The internal hosts are required to re-establish 
        sessions to the external hosts;  



 
 
Xu, et al.           Expires September 24, 2011               [Page 6] 

Internet-Draft        Redundancy and Load Balancing        August 2010 
                        Framework for Stateful NAT 

        The Hot Standby Mechanism is to maintain established sessions 
        while failover happens. NAT states are replicated from the 
        Primary NAT to the Backup NAT. When the Primary NAT fails, the 
        Backup NAT will take over all the existing established sessions. 
        The internal hosts are not required to re-establish sessions to 
        the external hosts.  

   The following sub-sections provide more information about these two 
   modes.  

4.1. Cold Standby Mechanism 

   4.1.1 Internal Realm 

   For Cold Standby Mechanism, the internal addresses used to represent 
   the external hosts in the internal realm SHOULD be retained after 
   the NAT failover. The following assesses how this requirement is met 
   in each NAT flavor: 

        For NAT44 and DS-Lite, the external hosts' internal addresses 
        (i.e., the addresses used to represent the external hosts in 
        the internal realm) are unchanged (i.e., not NAT-ed). Therefore, 
        the above requirement is met without additional work.  

        For NAT64, the NAT devices belonging to a redundancy group 
        SHOULD be configured with an identical Prefix64. Since the 
        NAT64 uses stateless address translation for the external hosts, 
        using the same Prefix64 in the Backup NAT can guarantee the 
        internal hosts to see the same internal addresses for the 
        external hosts. 

        For NAT46, NAT devices in a redundancy group SHOULD be 
        configured with an identical IPv4 address pool. A subset of 
        translation state information SHOULD be synchronized among 
        these NAT devices through a dedicated state synchronization 
        protocol [NAT-Sync]. This translation state ensures that the 
        Backup NAT, once taking over as a Primary NAT, will assign the 
        same IPv4 addresses to the external IPv6 hosts for the internal 
        IPv4 hosts. 

   4.1.2 External Realm 

   Each NAT device in a NAT redundancy group is configured with a 
   different external address pool. A route to that external pool is 
   then announced into the external realm by the NAT device or the NAT 
   immediate router.  

 
 
Xu, et al.           Expires September 24, 2011               [Page 7] 

Internet-Draft        Redundancy and Load Balancing        August 2010 
                        Framework for Stateful NAT 

        For NAT44, DS-Lite and NAT64: NAT devices are configured with 
        different external IPv4 address pools. These address pools are 
        not overlapped. Otherwise, when the Primary NAT fails and the 
        Backup NAT takes over the Primary NAT, a NAT collision MAY 
        happen. For example, assuming a Primary NAT NAT-ed internal 
        host Host-A to IPv4-A. IPv4-A is an address belonging to the 
        external address pool. If the Backup NAT (i.e., the newly 
        elected Primary NAT) was configured with the same pool, the 
        Backup NAT MAY assign the same IPv4-A to another internal host 
        Host-B. This might cause confusion to the internal hosts. In 
        addition, by using different external address pools on each NAT 
        device, incoming datagrams of a given session from the external 
        hosts are ensured to always traverse the same NAT device even 
        after NAT failover happens.  

        For NAT46, the issue occurred in NAT44 and NAT64 cases will 
        not happen when Primary and Backup NAT use the same external 
        IPv6 address pool (i.e., the Prefix64). The NAT46 relies on 
        stateless address translation for the internal hosts. Hence the 
        external hosts can use any NAT46 to reach the internal hosts. 
        In Cold Standby mechanism, the Primary and Backup NAT MAY use 
        different Prefix64s. In contrast, the Primary and Backup NAT in 
        Hot Standby mechanism MUST use an identical Prefix64. 

   4.1.3 NAT Reachability Announcement 

   In order to force IP datagrams from the internal realm to always 
   traverse the Primary NAT to the external realm, the Primary NAT 
   SHOULD announce into the internal realm a route towards the external 
   realm.  

        For NAT44, the Primary NAT announces an IPv4 default route 
        into the internal realm.  

        For DS-Lite, the Primary NAT announces a host route into the 
        internal realm.  

        For NAT64, the Primary NAT announces a route for the Prefix64 
        into the internal realm.  

        For NAT46, the Primary NAT announces a route for the internal 
        address pool into the internal realm (If the internal address 
        pool can be aggregated to one prefix).  




 
 
Xu, et al.           Expires September 24, 2011               [Page 8] 

Internet-Draft        Redundancy and Load Balancing        August 2010 
                        Framework for Stateful NAT 

   The Primary NAT SHOULD attempt to withdraw its previously announced 
   route when it ceases the Primary role due to some reason, e.g., it 
   loses the connectivity to the external realm. 

   When the Primary NAT fails and the Backup NAT takes over, datagrams 
   from the internal hosts destined for the external realm SHOULD pass 
   through the Backup NAT. Hence, if the Primary NAT and the Backup one 
   are specified manually, the Backup NAT (or associated router) SHOULD 
   announce into the internal realm the same route towards the external 
   realm as that announced by the Primary NAT so as to prepare for the 
   failover, but the cost of this route MUST be set a much higher value 
   than that of the route announced by the Primary NAT. Alternatively, 
   the Primary NAT announces several more specific routes into the 
   internal realm while the Backup NAT announces an aggregate route. 
   Taken the NAT46 as an example, assuming the internal address pool is 
   10.0.0.0/8, the Primary NAT announces two more specific routes to 
   10.0.0.0/9 and 10.128.0.0/9 respectively while the Backup NAT 
   announces an aggregate route to 10.0.0.0/8. In case the Primary NAT 
   and the Backup NAT are automatically elected through a dedicated 
   election process, the Backup NAT would be elected as a new Primary 
   NAT once the old Primary one fails, so it is not necessary for the 
   Backup NAT to make the above route announcements until it is elected 
   as a new Primary NAT. 

   In order for the external hosts to route through the NAT to the 
   internal hosts, the Primary and Backup NAT SHOULD announce a route 
   of its own external address pool into the external realm, 
   respectively.. 

4.2. Hot Standby Mechanism 

   4.2.1 Internal Realm 

   This is identical to Section 4.1.1. 

   4.2.2 External Realm 

   To preserve the established sessions during the failover, in 
   addition to keeping the internal addresses for the external hosts 
   unchanged, the external addresses for the internal hosts MUST also 
   be preserved. To preserve the external address of the internal host 
   after NAT-ed, the NAT devices in a redundancy group MUST use an 
   identical external address pool. In addition, they MUST assign the 
   same external address (or address/port pair) to a given internal 
   host.  


 
 
Xu, et al.           Expires September 24, 2011               [Page 9] 

Internet-Draft        Redundancy and Load Balancing        August 2010 
                        Framework for Stateful NAT 

        For NAT46, the Primary NAT and Backup NAT MUST use an 
        identical Prefix64.  

        For NAT44, DS-Lite and NAT64, the NAT devices in a redundancy 
        group MUST use the same external address pool and the 
        translation states on the Primary NAT device MUST be 
        synchronized to the Backup NAT(s) in a timely fashion. 

   4.2.3 NAT Reachability Announcement 

   In order to force IP datagrams between the internal realm and the 
   external realm always traverse the Primary NAT, the Primary NAT (or 
   its associated router) SHOULD announce into the internal realm a 
   route towards the external realm and announces into the external 
   realm a route towards the external address pool. Once the 
   connectivity to either the external realm or the internal realm is 
   lost, the Primary NAT device itself or a third party SHOULD attempt 
   to withdraw the above routes. If the Primary NAT and the Backup NAT 
   are specified manually, the Backup NAT device (or its associated 
   router) SHOULD also announce those routes, but with higher enough 
   cost or larger granularity, so as to prepare for the failover. When 
   the Primary NAT fails, the datagrams towards the external realm will 
   pass through the Backup NAT device. In case the Primary NAT and the 
   Backup are automatically elected through a dedicated election 
   procedure, the Backup NAT would be elected as a new Primary NAT when 
   the old Primary NAT device fails. Consequently, it is not necessary 
   for the Backup NAT to make the above route announcement until it is 
   elected as a new Primary NAT. 

5. Load Balancing Mechanisms 

   Based on the above redundancy mechanisms, one can further realize 
   load balancing among a group of NAT devices. The basic idea is to 
   create two redundancy groups (e.g., Group A and Group B) on these 
   NAT devices, make one device as the Primary NAT for Group A and the 
   Backup NAT for Group B, while make the other as the Primary NAT for 
   Group B and the Backup NAT for Group A. Taking NAT64 as an example, 
   NAT devices are configured with two prefix64s (e.g., Prefix64-A and 
   Prefix64-B) corresponding to the two redundancy groups, and one 
   device is designated as the Primary NAT for Group A and the Backup 
   NAT for Group B, while the other as the Backup NAT for Group A and 
   the Primary NAT for Group B. Therefore, the IPv6 datagrams towards 
   the IPv4 external realm are balanced among these NAT devices 
   according to their destination addresses with different Prefix64s. 



 
 
Xu, et al.           Expires September 24, 2011              [Page 10] 

Internet-Draft        Redundancy and Load Balancing        August 2010 
                        Framework for Stateful NAT 

   For load balancing together with cold standby, each NAT device could 
   either use the same external address pool or different external 
   address pools corresponding to these redundancy groups. However, in 
   the case of NAT64, in order to easily determine which Prefix64 
   SHOULD be used for synthesizing IPv6 address of a given IPv4 host in 
   the return direction, it would be better to assign different address 
   pools for different redundancy groups. In this way, the Prefix64 can 
   be easily determined according to the destination IPv4 address in 
   the return packets sent from the IPv4 host. Besides, the external 
   address pools on one NAT device SHOULD NOT have any overlap with 
   those of the other NAT device. Otherwise, the same address or 
   address/port pair could be assigned occasionally to different 
   internal hosts. In contrast, for load balancing together with hot 
   standby, different external address pools SHOULD be configured for 
   these redundancy groups. Otherwise, the return packets towards the 
   internal realm MAY be forwarded to a wrong NAT device. 

6. Election Protocol Considerations 

   An election process and associated protocol(s) is used to 
   automatically elect one NAT device among a NAT redundancy group as 
   the Primary NAT and the others as Backup NATs. Once the Primary NAT 
   fails, the Backup NAT with the highest priority SHOULD take over the 
   Primary NAT role after a short delay. The election protocol is also 
   used to track the connectivity to the external realm and the 
   internal realm. Once connections to the external realm or the 
   internal realm lost, the NAT device is not qualified to be the 
   Primary NAT and it will withdraw the route towards the external 
   realm announced previously. In the case of hot standby, it SHOULD 
   also withdraw the route towards the external address pool. 

   As an implementation example, VRRP [RFC2338] can be used as the 
   automatic election protocol. In addition, an interface tracking 
   mechanism can also be used to adjust the priority to influence the 
   election results.  

   If two NAT devices are directly connected via an Ethernet network, 
   VRRP can run directly on the Ethernet interfaces. Otherwise, some 
   extra configuration or protocol changes need to be implemented. One 
   option is to create conditions for VRRP to run among these devices. 
   For example, to create a VPLS [RFC4761][RFC4762] instance and enable 
   IP functions and run VRRP on those VLAN interfaces which are bound 
   to that VPLS instance. If enabling IP on those interfaces is not 
   supported, the following trick to realize the same goal, but at a 
   cost of consuming two physical interfaces on each NAT router: create 
   a VPLS instance among a set of NAT devices, and on each of them one 

 
 
Xu, et al.           Expires September 24, 2011              [Page 11] 

Internet-Draft        Redundancy and Load Balancing        August 2010 
                        Framework for Stateful NAT 

   Ethernet interface is bound to that VPLS instance, and another IP-
   enabled Ethernet interface is locally connected with that interface. 
   Then VRRP can run on those IP enabled Ethernet interfaces which are 
   all connected to that VPLS instance. Another option is to extend 
   VRRP so that VRRP neighbors can be specified manually and VRRP 
   messages can be exchanged directly among VRRP neighbors in unicast. 

   VRRP is only an implementation example of the election process. 
   Other protocols MAY be used to manage the roles of Primary and 
   Backup. 

7. State Synchronization Protocol Considerations 

   [NAT-Sync] defines a candidate solution to NAT state synchronization 
   by using Server Cache Synchronization Protocol (SCSP) [RFC2334]. For 
   more information about the proposed solution, the reader is invited 
   to refer to [NAT-Sync]. 

8. Security Considerations 

   TBD. 

9. IANA Considerations 

   There are no IANA considerations for this document. 

10. Acknowledgments 

   The author would like to thank Dan Wing and Dave Thaler for their 
   insightful comments and reviews, and thank Dacheng Zhang and Xuewei 
   Wang for their valuable editorial reviews. 

11. References 

11.1. Normative References 

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate               
             Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997. 

11.2. Informative References 

   [RFC3022]  Srisuresh, P. and K. Egevang, "Traditional IP Network             
             Address NAT (Traditional NAT)", RFC 3022, January 2001. 




 
 
Xu, et al.           Expires September 24, 2011              [Page 12] 

Internet-Draft        Redundancy and Load Balancing        August 2010 
                        Framework for Stateful NAT 

   [RFC2663] Srisuresh, P. and M. Holdrege, "IP Network Address               
             NAT (NAT) Terminology and Considerations", RFC               
             2663, August 1999. 

   [RFC2766] Tsirtsis, G. and P. Srisuresh, "Network Address                    
             Translation - Protocol Translation (NAT-PT)",                     
             RFC 2766, February 2000. 

   [RFC4966] Aoun, C. and E. Davies, "Reasons to Move the Network 
             Address NAT - Protocol NAT (NAT-PT) to Historic Status", 
             RFC 4966, July 2007. 

   [RFC2338] Knight, S., et. al., "Virtual Router Redundancy Protocol",         
             RFC2338, April 1998. 

   [RFC2334] Luciani, J., Armitage, G., Halpern, J., and N. Doraswamy, 
             "Server Cache Synchronization Protocol (SCSP)", RFC 2334, 
             April 1998. 

   [RFC4761] Kompella, K. and Y. Rekhter, "Virtual Private LAN Service          
             (VPLS) Using BGP for Auto-Discovery and Signaling",RFC             
             4761, January 2007.  

   [RFC4762] Lasserre, M. and Kompella, V. (Editors), "Virtual Private 
             LAN Service (VPLS) Using Label Distribution Protocol (LDP) 
             Signaling", RFC 4762, January 2007.  

   [NAT64] Bagnulo, M., Matthews, P., and I. Beijnum, "Stateful               
             NAT64: Network Address and Protocol Translation from IPv6          
             Clients to IPv4 Servers", draft-ietf-behave-v6v4-xlate-
             stateful-12 (work in progress), July 2010.  

   [NAT444] Shirasaki, Y., Miyakawa, S., Nakagawa, A., Yamaguchi, J.,           
             and H. Ashida, "NAT444 with ISP Shared Address",              
             draft-shirasaki-nat444-isp-shared-addr-02 (work in              
             progress), September 2009. 

   [DS-Lite] Durand, A., Droms, R., Woodyatt, J., and Lee, Y., "Dual-
             stack lite broadband deployments post IPv4 exhaustion", 
             draft-ietf-softwire-dual-stack-lite-06 (work in progress), 
             Auguest 2010. 

    




 
 
Xu, et al.           Expires September 24, 2011              [Page 13] 

Internet-Draft        Redundancy and Load Balancing        August 2010 
                        Framework for Stateful NAT 

   [Format] Bao, C., Huitema, C., Bagnulo, M., Boucadair, M., and Li, 
             X., "Framework for IPv4/IPv6 Translation", draft-ietf-
             behave-address-format-10.txt (work in progress), August, 
             2010. 

   [Framework] Baker, F., Li,X., Bao,C., and Yin,K., "Framework for 
             IPv4/IPv6 Translation", draft-ietf-behave-v6v4-framework-
             07 (work in progress), February, 2010. 

   [NAT-Sync] Chen, D., Xu, X., Halpern, J., and Boucadair, M., "NAT 
             State Synchronization Using SCSP", draft-xu-behave-nat-
             state-sync-02 (work in progress), August, 2010. 

Authors' Addresses 

   Xiaohu Xu 
   Huawei Technologies, 
   No.3 Xinxi Rd., Shang-Di Information Industry Base,  
   Hai-Dian District, Beijing 100085 
   P.R. China 
   Email: xuxh@huawei.com 
    
   Mohamed Boucadair 
   France Telecom 
   3, av Francois Chateau 
   Rennes 35000 
   France 
   Email: mohamed.boucadair@orange-ftgroup.com 
    
   Yiu Lee 
   Comcast 
   1, Comcast center 
   Philadelphia, PA  19103 
   USA 
 
   Gang Chen 
   China Mobile 
   53A,Xibianmennei Ave.
   Beijing  100053
   P.R.China
   Email: phdgang@gmail.com 








Xu, et al.           Expires September 24, 2011              [Page 13]