Network working group                                             X. Xu 
Internet Draft                                                   Huawei 
Category: BCP                                              M. Boucadair 
Expires: March 2011                                      France Telecom         
                                                                 Y. Lee 
                                                                Comcast 
                                                                G. Chen 
                                                           China Mobile 
                                                     September 10, 2010 
                                                                                
    Redundancy and Load Balancing Framework for Stateful Network Address 
                             Translators (NAT) 
                                      
                  draft-xu-behave-stateful-nat-standby-05 


Abstract 

   This document defines a framework for ensuring redundancy and/or 
   load balancing for stateful Network Address Translators (NAT), 
   including NAT44, NAT64 and NAT46. 

Status of this Memo 

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with 
   the provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79. 

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents 
   at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at   
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt. 

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at   
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 

   This Internet-Draft will expire on March 10, 2011. 

    



 
 
 
Xu, et al.             Expires March 10, 2011                 [Page 1] 

Internet-Draft        Redundancy and Load Balancing     September 2010 
                        Framework for Stateful NAT 

Copyright Notice 

   Copyright (c) 2009 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the    
   document authors.  All rights reserved. 

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal    
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents 
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of    
   publication of this document. Please review these documents 
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with 
   respect to this document.  

Conventions used in this document 

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [RFC2119]. 

Table of Contents 

    
   1. Introduction.................................................3 
   2. Terminology..................................................3 
   3. Reference Architecture.......................................5 
   4. Redundancy Mechanisms........................................5 
      4.1. Cold Standby Mode.......................................7 
      4.2. Hot Standby Mode........................................9 
   5. Load Balancing Mechanisms...................................10 
      5.1. Framework..............................................10 
      5.2. Load Balancing Considerations..........................11 
   6. Election Protocol Considerations............................12 
   7. State Synchronization Protocol Considerations...............13 
   8. Security Considerations.....................................13 
   9. IANA Considerations.........................................14 
   10. Acknowledgments............................................14 
   11. References.................................................14 
      11.1. Normative References..................................14 
      11.2. Informative References................................14 
   Authors' Addresses.............................................15 







 
 
Xu, et al.             Expires March 10, 2011                 [Page 2] 

Internet-Draft        Redundancy and Load Balancing     September 2010 
                        Framework for Stateful NAT 

    
1. Introduction 

   Network Address Translation (NAT) has been used as an efficient way 
   to share the same IPv4 address among several hosts. Recently, due to 
   IPv4 address shortage, several proposals have been elaborated to 
   rely on Carrier Grade NAT (CGN) (e.g., [NAT444], [DS-Lite] and 
   [NAT64]). In such models, CGN function (which MAY be embedded in a 
   router or be deployed in standalone devices) is deployed within 
   large-scale networks, such as ISP networks or enterprise ones, where 
   a large number of customers are located. These customers within a 
   network which is served by a single CGN device MAY experience 
   service degradation due to the presence of the single point of 
   failure. Therefore, redundancy and/or load-balancing capabilities of 
   the CGN devices are strongly desired in order to deliver highly 
   available services to customers. Failure detection and repair time 
   MUST be therefore shortened.  

   This document describes a framework of redundancy and/or load 
   balancing for stateful NAT including: NAT44 including DS-Lite, NAT64 
   and NAT46. The main purpose of this memo is analyzing means to 
   ensure high availability and load balancing in environments where 
   carrier grade NAT44, NAT64 and NAT46 are deployed. Some engineering 
   recommendations are provided for the selection of the IPv6 prefix to 
   build IPv4-Embedded IPv6 addresses [Format] and the routing 
   configuration. Except dealing with the exceptional failures (e.g., 
   power outage, OS crash-down or link failure, etc.), the redundancy 
   mechanism described in this document can also be used for planned 
   maintenance operations (i.e., graceful shutdown of the Primary NAT 
   due to maintenance needs). 

   Unless otherwise mentioned, NAT and CGN terms throughout this 
   document, pertain to stateful NAT and stateful CGN. Stateless NAT is 
   out of the scope of this memo.  

2. Terminology 

   This memo makes use of the terms defined in [RFC2663]. Below are 
   provided terms specific to this document: 

        CGN (Carrier Grade NAT): a NAT device placed within a large-
        scale network (e.g., ISP network, enterprise network, or campus 
        network). These devices may be placed at the boundary between 
        the large-scale private network and the public Internet, 
        between a private network and a large-scale public network or 
        between two heterogeneous IP realms (i.e., IPv4 and IPv6). 

 
 
Xu, et al.             Expires March 10, 2011                 [Page 3] 

Internet-Draft        Redundancy and Load Balancing     September 2010 
                        Framework for Stateful NAT 

        Prefix64: an IPv6 prefix used for synthesizing IPv6 addresses 
        representing the external IPv4 hosts [Format]. 

        CGN internal address realm (internal realm for short): a realm 
        internal to the CGN. For NAT44, the internal realm refers to 
        the private networks. For NAT64, the internal realm means IPv6 
        network or IPv6 Internet. For NAT46, the internal realm refers 
        to IPv4 network or IPv4 Internet. For DS-Lite, the internal 
        address realm is assumed to be private IPv4 addresses even if 
        the transport mode used to convey exchanged traffic is IPv6. A 
        DS-Lite CGN device (a.k.a., Address Family Transition Router 
        (AFTR)) is a special NAT44 function which uses the IPv6 address 
        as a means to de-multiplex users sharing the same IPv4 address  
        [DS-Lite]. Furthermore, the hosts located in the internal realm 
        are called internal hosts, and the addresses used in the 
        internal realm are called internal addresses. 

        CGN external address realm (external realm for short): a realm 
        external to the CGN. For NAT44, the external realm refers to 
        the IPv4 Internet. For NAT64, the external realm means the IPv4 
        Internet or IPv4 network. For NAT46, the external realm refers 
        to the IPv6 Internet or IPv6 network. Furthermore, the hosts 
        located in the external realm are called external hosts, and 
        the addresses used in the external realm are called external 
        addresses. 

        Internal address pool: an address pool used for assigning 
        internal addresses to represent the external hosts in the 
        internal realm. This address pool is specific to NAT46 and 
        NAT64. For NAT46, the CGN will allocate one internal address 
        (which is an IPv4 address) from the pool to an external IPv6 
        host and map the external IPv6 host's IPv6 address to this IPv4 
        address. For NAT64, the CGN internal address pool is the 
        Prefix64 [Format]. This Prefix64 is used for synthesizing 
        internal IPv6 addresses to represent external IPv4 hosts in the 
        internal realm. 

        External address pool: an address pool used by the CGN for 
        assigning external addresses to the internal hosts. For NAT44 
        and NAT64, the external address pool contains a set of public 
        IPv4 addresses. For NAT46, the external IPv6 address pool is 
        the Prefix64. The Prefix64 is used by the CGN for synthesizing 
        the external IPv6 addresses to represent internal IPv4 hosts in 
        the external realm. 



 
 
Xu, et al.             Expires March 10, 2011                 [Page 4] 

Internet-Draft        Redundancy and Load Balancing     September 2010 
                        Framework for Stateful NAT 

        CPE (Customer Premises Equipment): a device which is used to 
        interconnect the customer premise with the service provider's 
        network.   

3. Reference Architecture 

   In a typical operational scenario, as illustrated in Figure 1, two 
   NAT devices are deployed for redundancy and/or load balancing. This 
   is the reference architecture for the mechanisms we describe in this 
   memo. Note that these mechanisms are also suitable in which more 
   than two NAT devices are used.   

        +-------------------------+     +-----------------------+ 
        |                         |     |                       | 
        |                       +-+-----+-+                     | 
        |                       |  NAT-A  |                     | 
   +----+-------------+         +-+-----+-+    +-------------+  | 
   |   Internal Host  |           |     |      |External Host|  | 
   +----+-------------+           |     |      +-------------+  | 
        |                       +-+-----+-+                     | 
        |                       |  NAT-B  |                     | 
        |    Internal realm     +-+-----+-+    External realm   | 
        |                         |     |                       | 
        +-------------------------+     +-----------------------+      

              Figure 1. General Scenario of Dual NAT Routers 

   The redundancy and load-balancing mechanisms for NAT44, NAT46 and 
   NAT64 are almost identical. In all cases, the NAT device or the 
   immediate router of the NAT device announces the reachability of the 
   NAT device to the external realm. The slight difference is the NAT 
   reachability information. For example, NAT64 announces an IPv6 route 
   for the Prefix64; NAT44 announces an IPv4 default route; DS-Lite 
   AFTR announces an IPv6 route pointing to itself; and NAT46 announces 
   a route for its internal address pool. This difference does not 
   affect the general redundancy and load-balancing mechanisms, so the 
   mechanisms described in this memo can be applied to NAT44, NAT64 and 
   NAT46 devices 

4. Redundancy Mechanisms 

   The fundamental principle of NAT redundancy is to make two or more 
   NAT devices function as a redundancy group, and select one as the 
   Primary NAT and the other(s) as the Backup NAT through a dedicated 
   election procedure (see Section 6) or manual configuration. In the 
   nominal regime, traffic exchanged between one host in the internal 

 
 
Xu, et al.             Expires March 10, 2011                 [Page 5] 

Internet-Draft        Redundancy and Load Balancing     September 2010 
                        Framework for Stateful NAT 

   realm and another host in the external realm is handled by the 
   Primary NAT. Once the Primary NAT is out of service, the Backup NAT 
   with the highest priority (if several Backup NAT devices are 
   deployed) takes over and provides the NAT services to the internal 
   hosts. This Backup NAT is then identified as new Primary NAT. Once 
   the former Primary NAT became operational, it could either preempt 
   the role of Primary NAT or stay as a candidate in the redundancy 
   group. This is part of administrative policies and out of scope of 
   this memo.  

   In order to implement the aforementioned procedure, means to detect 
   and to notify the failure of the Primary NAT to the redundancy group 
   SHOULD be activated. 

   To ensure a coherent behavior when NAT device fails, this document 
   assumes that both Primary and Backup NAT devices are managed by the 
   same administrative domain. Thus, consistent configuration policies 
   SHOULD be enforced in all devices. Note that the election process 
   MUST be deterministic and does not lead to ambiguous situation where 
   two or more NAT devices become Primary NAT. Moreover, the failover 
   SHOULD be quick to ensure service continuity and keep end-users from 
   perceiving service unavailability.    

   Three redundancy modes are described hereafter: the cold standby, 
   the hot standby and the partial hot standby modes:  

        The cold standby mode is simple. The NAT states are not 
        replicated from the Primary NAT to the Backup NAT. When the 
        Primary NAT fails, all the existing established sessions will 
        be flushed out. The internal hosts are required to re-establish 
        sessions to the external hosts;  

        The hot standby mode keeps established sessions while failover 
        happens. NAT states are replicated from the Primary NAT to the 
        Backup NAT. When the Primary NAT fails, the Backup NAT will 
        take over all the existing established sessions. The internal 
        hosts are not required to re-establish sessions to the external 
        hosts. 

        The partial hot standby mode is a flavor of the hot standby 
        mode described above. It is used to avoid replicating NAT 
        states of trivial sessions (e.g., short lifetime sessions) 
        while achieving hot standby for significant sessions (e.g., 
        critical protocols or applications, long lifetime sessions 
        etc.). Criteria for sessions to be replicated on backup NATs 


 
 
Xu, et al.             Expires March 10, 2011                 [Page 6] 

Internet-Draft        Redundancy and Load Balancing     September 2010 
                        Framework for Stateful NAT 

        SHOULD be explicitly configured on the NAT devices of a 
        redundancy group.  

   The following sub-sections provide more information about the cold 
   standby and the hot standby modes.  

4.1. Cold Standby Mode 

4.1.1 Internal Realm 

   The internal addresses used to represent the external hosts in the 
   internal realm SHOULD be retained after the NAT failover. The 
   following assesses how this requirement is met in each NAT flavor: 

        For NAT44 and DS-Lite, the external hosts' internal addresses 
        (i.e., the addresses used to represent the external hosts in 
        the internal realm) are unchanged (i.e., not NAT-ed). Therefore, 
        the above requirement is met without additional work.  

        For NAT64, the NAT devices belonging to a redundancy group 
        SHOULD be configured with an identical Prefix64. Since the 
        NAT64 uses stateless address translation for the external hosts, 
        using the same Prefix64 in the Backup NAT can guarantee the 
        internal hosts to see the same internal addresses for the 
        external hosts. 

        For NAT46, NAT devices in a redundancy group SHOULD be 
        configured with an identical IPv4 address pool. A subset of 
        translation state information SHOULD be synchronized among 
        these NAT devices through a dedicated state synchronization 
        protocol such as [NAT-Sync]. This translation state ensures 
        that the Backup NAT, once taking over as a Primary NAT, will 
        assign the same IPv4 addresses to the external IPv6 hosts for 
        the internal IPv4 hosts. 

4.1.2 External Realm 

   Each NAT device in a NAT redundancy group is configured with a 
   different external address pool. A route to that external pool is 
   then announced into the external realm by the NAT device or the NAT 
   immediate router.  

        For NAT44, DS-Lite and NAT64: NAT devices SHOULD be configured 
        with different external IPv4 address pools. These address pools 
        are not overlapped. Otherwise, when the Primary NAT fails and 
        the Backup NAT takes over the Primary NAT, a NAT collision may 

 
 
Xu, et al.             Expires March 10, 2011                 [Page 7] 

Internet-Draft        Redundancy and Load Balancing     September 2010 
                        Framework for Stateful NAT 

        happen. For example, assuming a Primary NAT NAT-ed internal 
        host Host-A to IPv4-A. IPv4-A is an address which belongs to 
        the external address pool. If the Backup NAT after taking over 
        the primary NAT was configured with the same pool, the Backup 
        NAT MAY assign the same IPv4-A to another internal host Host-B. 
        So, Host-B may receive datagrams originally targeted for Host-A. 
        This might cause confusion to Host-B. In addition, by using 
        different external address pools on each NAT device, incoming 
        datagrams of a given session from the external hosts are 
        ensured to always traverse through the Backup NAT device after 
        the Primary NAT failover happens.  

        For NAT46, the issue occurred in NAT44 and NAT64 cases will 
        not happen when Primary and Backup NAT use the same external 
        IPv6 address pool (i.e., the Prefix64). The NAT46 relies on 
        stateless address translation for the internal hosts. Hence the 
        external hosts can use any NAT46 to reach the internal hosts. 
        In Cold Standby mechanism, the Primary and Backup NAT MAY use 
        different Prefix64s. In contrast, the Primary and Backup NAT in 
        Hot Standby mechanism MUST use an identical Prefix64. 

4.1.3 NAT Reachability Announcement 

   In order to force the IP datagrams from the internal realm to always 
   traverse through the Primary NAT to the external realm, the Primary 
   NAT SHOULD announce into the internal realm a route towards the 
   external realm.  

        For NAT44, the Primary NAT announces an IPv4 default route 
        into the internal realm.  

        For DS-Lite, the Primary NAT announces a host route into the 
        internal realm.  

        For NAT64, the Primary NAT announces a route for the Prefix64 
        into the internal realm.  

        For NAT46, the Primary NAT announces a route for the internal 
        address pool into the internal realm (If the internal address 
        pool can be aggregated to one prefix).  

   The Primary NAT SHOULD attempt to withdraw its previously announced 
   routes when it ceases the Primary role due to pre-configured 
   conditions, e.g.- it loses the IP connectivity to the external realm. 



 
 
Xu, et al.             Expires March 10, 2011                 [Page 8] 

Internet-Draft        Redundancy and Load Balancing     September 2010 
                        Framework for Stateful NAT 

   When the Primary NAT fails and the Backup NAT takes over, datagrams 
   from the internal hosts destined for the external realm SHOULD pass 
   through the Backup NAT. Hence, when the Backup NAT is manually 
   configured to switch over to become the Primary NAT, the Backup NAT 
   (or associated router) SHOULD announce the same route into the 
   internal realm. but the routing cost of this route MUST be set to a 
   higher value than the route announced by the Primary NAT.  

   Alternatively, the Primary NAT announces several more specific 
   routes into the internal realm while the Backup NAT announces an 
   aggregate route. Taken the NAT46 as an example, assuming the 
   internal address pool is 10.0.0.0/8, the Primary NAT announces two 
   more specific routes to 10.0.0.0/9 and 10.128.0.0/9 respectively 
   while the Backup NAT announces an aggregate route to 10.0.0.0/8. In 
   case the Primary NAT and the Backup NAT are automatically elected 
   through a dedicated election process, the Backup NAT would be 
   elected as a new Primary NAT once the old Primary one fails, so it 
   is not necessary for the Backup NAT to make the above route 
   announcements until it is elected as a new Primary NAT. 

   In order for the external hosts to traverse through the NAT to reach 
   the internal hosts, the Primary and Backup NAT SHOULD announce a 
   route of its own external address pool into the external realm. 

4.2. Hot Standby Mode 

4.2.1 Internal Realm 

   The procedure is identical to Section 4.1.1. 

4.2.2 External Realm 

   To preserve the established sessions during the failover and to keep 
   the internal addresses unchanged for the external hosts, the 
   external addresses for the internal hosts MUST also be preserved. To 
   preserve the external address of the internal host after NAT-ed, the 
   NAT devices in a redundancy group MUST use an identical external 
   address pool. In addition, they MUST assign the same external 
   address (or address/port pair) to a given internal host.  

        For NAT46, the Primary NAT and Backup NAT MUST use an 
        identical Prefix64.  

        For NAT44, DS-Lite and NAT64, the NAT devices in a redundancy 
        group MUST use the same external address pool and the 


 
 
Xu, et al.             Expires March 10, 2011                 [Page 9] 

Internet-Draft        Redundancy and Load Balancing     September 2010 
                        Framework for Stateful NAT 

        translation states on the Primary NAT device MUST be 
        synchronized to the Backup NAT(s) in a timely fashion. 

4.2.3 NAT Reachability Announcement 

   In order to force IP datagrams between the internal realm and the 
   external realm always traverse through the Primary NAT, the Primary 
   NAT (or its associated router) SHOULD announce into the internal 
   realm a route towards the external realm and announce into the 
   external realm a route towards the external address pool.  

   Once the connectivity to either the external realm or the internal 
   realm is lost, the Primary NAT device itself or a third party SHOULD 
   attempt to withdraw the above routes. If the Primary NAT and the 
   Backup NAT are specified manually, the Backup NAT device (or its 
   associated router) SHOULD also announce those routes, but with 
   higher enough cost or larger granularity, so as to prepare for the 
   failover.  

   When the Primary NAT fails, the datagrams towards the external realm 
   will pass through the Backup NAT device. In case the Primary NAT and 
   the Backup are automatically elected through a dedicated election 
   procedure, the Backup NAT would be elected as a new Primary NAT when 
   the old Primary NAT device fails. Consequently, it is not necessary 
   for the Backup NAT to make the above route announcement until it is 
   elected as a new Primary NAT. 

5. Load Balancing Mechanisms 

5.1. Framework 

   Based on the above redundancy modes, one can further realize load 
   balancing among a group of NAT devices. The basic idea is to create 
   two redundancy groups (e.g., Group A and Group B) on these NAT 
   devices, make one device as the Primary NAT for Group A and the 
   Backup NAT for Group B, while make the other as the Primary NAT for 
   Group B and the Backup NAT for Group A.  

   Taking NAT64 as an example, NAT devices are configured with two 
   prefix64s (e.g., Prefix64-A and Prefix64-B) corresponding to the two 
   redundancy groups, and one device is designated as the Primary NAT 
   for Group A and the Backup NAT for Group B, while the other as the 
   Backup NAT for Group A and the Primary NAT for Group B. Therefore, 
   the IPv6 datagrams towards the IPv4 external realm are balanced 
   among these NAT devices according to their destination addresses 
   with different Prefix64s. 

 
 
Xu, et al.             Expires March 10, 2011                [Page 10] 

Internet-Draft        Redundancy and Load Balancing     September 2010 
                        Framework for Stateful NAT 

   For load balancing together with cold standby, each NAT device could 
   either use the same external address pool or different external 
   address pools corresponding to these redundancy groups. However, in 
   the case of NAT64, in order to easily determine which Prefix64 
   SHOULD be used for synthesizing IPv6 address of a given IPv4 host in 
   the return direction, it would be better to assign different address 
   pools for different redundancy groups. In this way, the Prefix64 can 
   be easily determined according to the destination IPv4 address in 
   the return packets sent from the IPv4 host. Besides, the external 
   address pools on one NAT device SHOULD NOT have any overlap with 
   those of the other NAT device. Otherwise, the same address or 
   address/port pair could be assigned occasionally to different 
   internal hosts. In contrast, for load balancing together with hot 
   standby, different external address pools SHOULD be configured for 
   these redundancy groups. Otherwise, the return packets towards the 
   internal realm may be forwarded to a wrong NAT device. 

5.2. Load Balancing Considerations 

   The NAT device which is used when translating outgoing packets MUST 
   be crossed by incoming packets. To achieve this, distinct external 
   IP addresses SHOULD be configured on each NAT device otherwise the 
   communication will fail.   

   Since distinct external IP addresses are used per NAT device, and 
   because a given customer should be seen with the same external IP 
   address, the same NAT device MUST be used for all the traffic issued 
   by the same customer. Therefore, the load balancing SHOULD NOT be 
   based on the traffic. 

   Criteria for distributing customers among a set of NAT devices MAY 
   be implemented during the IP configuration phase or during the 
   processing of actual traffic sent by the host. Below are listed some 
   examples:  

        For NAT64  

             DNS64 can be used as a means to load balance the hosts 
             among a group of NAT. In such case, DNS64 SHOULD be able 
             to assign the same NAT to the same hosts. Means to 
             identify the host should be supported. This is not 
             natively supported by DNS servers. A drawback of this mode 
             is that for traffic which does not require a DNS 
             resolution, the packets may flow using a distinct NAT 
             device, and therefore use a distinct external IP address. 


 
 
Xu, et al.             Expires March 10, 2011                [Page 11] 

Internet-Draft        Redundancy and Load Balancing     September 2010 
                        Framework for Stateful NAT 

             Another alternative is to rely on DHCP to provision 
             dedicated DNS64. The load of NAT devices may be provided 
             to assist the selection of the DNS64 to be used for a new 
             connecting host. 

        For DS-Lite: 

             The same IPv6 address is assigned to the internal IP 
             interface of the AFTR; hosts are distributed natively 
             among NAT devices which are operational (anycast-based 
             mode). The efficiency of this mode depends on the 
             underlying topology and routing engineering policies. An 
             AFTR may be overload if the routing is not appropriately 
             tuned.  

             Distributing the hosts among a set of AFTR devices is 
             achieved during the provisioning phase. Based on actual 
             load criteria, the service provisioning platform (e.g., 
             DHCP server) assigns a given AFTR to the requesting host. 
             Means to monitor the actual load of AFTR devices SHOULD be 
             supported. These means can be local (e.g., configure a 
             threshold of the number of customers to be services with 
             each AFTR device) or be dynamic based on the actual load 
             of AFTR devices. 

             Load balancing can be implemented during the DNS resolution 
             phase if a FQDN is provisioned to the host. During the DNS 
             resolution phase, an IP address is returned to the 
             requesting hosts based on the actual load of live AFTRs. 

             Another scheme when AFTRs are geo-graphically distributed, 
             the host uses the domain search name option together with 
             a generic FQDN name of the AFTR to retrieve the AFTR to 
             which the host is bound. This mode requires that 
             individual entries are configured in the DNS. No load-
             based machinery is supported by the DNS server.     

   An additional scheme would be the deployment of a farm of NAT 
   devices with a load-balancer which is able to redirect the traffic 
   to the appropriate NAT instance. Load-balancing can be based on the 
   actual load of each NAT instance. 

6. Election Protocol Considerations 

   An election process and associated protocol(s) is used to 
   automatically elect one NAT device among a NAT redundancy group as 

 
 
Xu, et al.             Expires March 10, 2011                [Page 12] 

Internet-Draft        Redundancy and Load Balancing     September 2010 
                        Framework for Stateful NAT 

   the Primary NAT and the others as Backup NATs. Once the Primary NAT 
   fails, the Backup NAT with the highest priority SHOULD take over the 
   Primary NAT role after a short delay. The election protocol is also 
   used to track the connectivity to the external realm and the 
   internal realm. Once connections to the external realm or the 
   internal realm lost, the NAT device is not qualified to be the 
   Primary NAT and it will withdraw the route towards the external 
   realm announced previously. In the case of hot standby, it SHOULD 
   also withdraw the route towards the external address pool. 

   As an implementation example, VRRP [RFC2338] can be used as the 
   automatic election protocol. In addition, an interface tracking 
   mechanism can also be used to adjust the priority to influence the 
   election results.  

   If two NAT devices are directly connected via an Ethernet network, 
   VRRP can run directly on the Ethernet interfaces. Otherwise, some 
   extra configuration or protocol changes need to be implemented. One 
   option is to create conditions for VRRP to run among these devices. 
   For example, to create a VPLS [RFC4761][RFC4762] instance and enable 
   IP functions and run VRRP on those VLAN interfaces which are bound 
   to that VPLS instance. If enabling IP on those interfaces is not 
   supported, the following trick to realize the same goal, but at a 
   cost of consuming two physical interfaces on each NAT router: create 
   a VPLS instance among a set of NAT devices, and on each of them one 
   Ethernet interface is bound to that VPLS instance, and another IP-
   enabled Ethernet interface is locally connected with that interface. 
   Then VRRP can run on those IP enabled Ethernet interfaces which are 
   all connected to that VPLS instance. Another option is to extend 
   VRRP so that VRRP neighbors can be specified manually and VRRP 
   messages can be exchanged directly among VRRP neighbors in unicast. 

   VRRP is only an implementation example of the election process. 
   Other protocols MAY be used to manage the roles of Primary and 
   Backup. 

7. State Synchronization Protocol Considerations 

   [NAT-Sync] defines a candidate solution to NAT state synchronization 
   by using Server Cache Synchronization Protocol (SCSP) [RFC2334]. For 
   more information about the proposed solution, the reader is invited 
   to refer to [NAT-Sync]. 

8. Security Considerations 

   TBD. 

 
 
Xu, et al.             Expires March 10, 2011                [Page 13] 

Internet-Draft        Redundancy and Load Balancing     September 2010 
                        Framework for Stateful NAT 

9. IANA Considerations 

   There are no IANA considerations for this document. 

10. Acknowledgments 

   The author would like to thank Dan Wing and Dave Thaler for their 
   insightful comments and reviews, and thank Dacheng Zhang and Xuewei 
   Wang for their valuable editorial reviews. 

11. References 

11.1. Normative References 

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate               
             Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997. 

11.2. Informative References 

   [RFC3022]  Srisuresh, P. and K. Egevang, "Traditional IP Network             
             Address NAT (Traditional NAT)", RFC 3022, January 2001. 

   [RFC2663] Srisuresh, P. and M. Holdrege, "IP Network Address               
             NAT (NAT) Terminology and Considerations", RFC               
             2663, August 1999. 

   [RFC2766] Tsirtsis, G. and P. Srisuresh, "Network Address                    
             Translation - Protocol Translation (NAT-PT)",                     
             RFC 2766, February 2000. 

   [RFC4966] Aoun, C. and E. Davies, "Reasons to Move the Network 
             Address NAT - Protocol NAT (NAT-PT) to Historic Status", 
             RFC 4966, July 2007. 

   [RFC2338] Knight, S., et. al., "Virtual Router Redundancy Protocol",         
             RFC2338, April 1998. 

   [RFC2334] Luciani, J., Armitage, G., Halpern, J., and N. Doraswamy, 
             "Server Cache Synchronization Protocol (SCSP)", RFC 2334, 
             April 1998. 

   [RFC4761] Kompella, K. and Y. Rekhter, "Virtual Private LAN Service          
             (VPLS) Using BGP for Auto-Discovery and Signaling",RFC             
             4761, January 2007.  



 
 
Xu, et al.             Expires March 10, 2011                [Page 14] 

Internet-Draft        Redundancy and Load Balancing     September 2010 
                        Framework for Stateful NAT 

   [RFC4762] Lasserre, M. and Kompella, V. (Editors), "Virtual Private 
             LAN Service (VPLS) Using Label Distribution Protocol (LDP) 
             Signaling", RFC 4762, January 2007.  

   [NAT64] Bagnulo, M., Matthews, P., and I. Beijnum, "Stateful               
             NAT64: Network Address and Protocol Translation from IPv6          
             Clients to IPv4 Servers", draft-ietf-behave-v6v4-xlate-
             stateful-12 (work in progress), July 2010.  

   [NAT444] Shirasaki, Y., Miyakawa, S., Nakagawa, A., Yamaguchi, J.,           
             and H. Ashida, "NAT444 with ISP Shared Address",              
             draft-shirasaki-nat444-isp-shared-addr-02 (work in              
             progress), September 2009. 

   [DS-Lite] Durand, A., Droms, R., Woodyatt, J., and Lee, Y., "Dual-
             stack lite broadband deployments post IPv4 exhaustion", 
             draft-ietf-softwire-dual-stack-lite-06 (work in progress), 
             Auguest 2010. 

   [Format] Bao, C., Huitema, C., Bagnulo, M., Boucadair, M., and Li, 
             X., "Framework for IPv4/IPv6 Translation", draft-ietf-
             behave-address-format-10.txt (work in progress), August, 
             2010. 

   [Framework] Baker, F., Li,X., Bao,C., and Yin,K., "Framework for 
             IPv4/IPv6 Translation", draft-ietf-behave-v6v4-framework-
             07 (work in progress), February, 2010. 

   [NAT-Sync] Chen, D., Xu, X., Halpern, J., and Boucadair, M., "NAT 
             State Synchronization Using SCSP", draft-xu-behave-nat-
             state-sync-02 (work in progress), August, 2010. 

Authors' Addresses 

   Xiaohu Xu 
   Huawei Technologies, 
   No.3 Xinxi Rd., Shang-Di Information Industry Base,  
   Hai-Dian District, Beijing 100085 
   P.R. China 
   Email: xuxh@huawei.com 
    
   Mohamed Boucadair 
   France Telecom 
   3, av Francois Chateau 
   Rennes 35000 
   France 

 
 
Xu, et al.             Expires March 10, 2011                [Page 15] 

Internet-Draft        Redundancy and Load Balancing     September 2010 
                        Framework for Stateful NAT 

   Email: mohamed.boucadair@orange-ftgroup.com 
    
   Yiu Lee 
   Comcast 
   1, Comcast center 
   Philadelphia, PA  19103 
   USA 
   Email: yiu_lee@cable.comcast.com 

   Gang Chen 
   China Mobile 
   53A,Xibianmennei Ave.
   Beijing  100053
   P.R.China
   Email: phdgang@gmail.com 
    
