Network working group                                             X. Xu 
Internet Draft                                                   Huawei 
Category: BCP                                              M. Boucadair 
Expires: March 2010                                      France Telecom         
                                                     September 25, 2009 
                                                                                
                                      
    Redundancy and Load Balancing Framework for Stateful Network Address 
                             Translators (NAT) 
                                      
                  draft-xu-behave-stateful-nat-standby-01 


Status of this Memo 

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with 
   the provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79. 

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents 
   at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at   
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt. 

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at   
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 

   This Internet-Draft will expire on March 25, 2010. 

Copyright Notice 

   Copyright (c) 2009 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the    
   document authors.  All rights reserved. 

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal    
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents in effect on the date of    
   publication of this document (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info).   
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your 
   rights and restrictions with respect to this document. 

     

 
 
 
Xu & Boucadair         Expires March 25, 2010                 [Page 1] 

Internet-Draft        Redundancy and Load Balancing     September 2009 
                        Framework for Stateful NAT 

    

Abstract 

   This document defines a framework for ensuring redundancy and/or 
   load balancing for stateful Network Address Translators (NAT), 
   including NAT44, NAT46 and NAT64. 

Conventions used in this document 

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [RFC2119]. 

Table of Contents 

    
   1. Introduction.................................................3 
   2. Terminology..................................................3 
   3. Reference Architecture.......................................4 
   4. Redundancy Mechanisms........................................5 
      4.1. Cold Standby Mechanism..................................6 
      4.2. Hot Standby Mechanism...................................8 
   5. Load Balancing Mechanisms....................................9 
   6. Election Protocol Considerations.............................9 
   7. State Synchronization Protocol Considerations...............10 
   8. Security Considerations.....................................10 
   9. IANA Considerations.........................................10 
   10. Acknowledgments............................................11 
   11. References.................................................11 
      11.1. Normative References..................................11 
      11.2. Informative References................................11 
   Authors' Addresses.............................................12 













 
 
Xu & Boucadair         Expires March 25, 2010                 [Page 2] 

Internet-Draft        Redundancy and Load Balancing     September 2009 
                        Framework for Stateful NAT 

    
1. Introduction 

   Network Address Translation (NAT) has been used as an efficient way 
   to share the same IPv4 address among several hosts. Recently, due to 
   IPv4 address shortage, several proposals have been elaborated to 
   rely on Large Scale NAT (LSN) (also denoted as Carrier Grade NAT 
   (CGN), e.g., [NAT444], [DS-Lite] and [NAT64]) as means to optimize 
   the address multiplicative factor [Shortage]. In such models, CGN 
   function (which may be embedded in a router or be deployed in 
   standalone devices) is activated within large-scale networks, such 
   as ISP networks or enterprise ones, where a huge amount of customers 
   are located. These customers within large-scale networks may 
   experience service degradation due to the presence of the single 
   point of failure. Therefore, redundancy and/or load-balancing 
   capabilities are strongly desired for these LSN/CGN devices in order 
   to provide highly available services to customers. Failure detection 
   and repair time must be therefore shortened.  

   This document describes a framework of redundancy and/or load 
   balancing for stateful NAT including: NAT46, NAT64 and NAT44. 
   Stateless NAT is out of the scope of this memo. Unless mentioned, 
   NAT and LSN/CGN terms throughout this document, pertain to stateful 
   NAT and stateful LSN/CGN. Except dealing with the exceptional 
   failures (e.g., power outage, OS crash-down or link failure etc.), 
   the redundancy mechanism described in this document can also be used 
   for planned maintenance operations (i.e., graceful shutdown of the 
   primary NAT due to maintenance needs). 

2. Terminology 

   This memo makes use of the terms defined in [RFC2663]. Below are 
   provided terms specific to this document: 

   - LSN (Large Scale NAT)/CGN (Carrier Grade NAT): a NAT device placed 
   within a large-scale network (e.g., ISP network, enterprise network, 
   or campus network). These devices may be placed at the boundary 
   between the large-scale private network and the public Internet, 
   between a private network and a large-scale public network or 
   between two heterogeneous (i.e., IPv4 and IPv6) IP realms. 

   - LSN/CGN internal address realm (internal realm for short): a realm 
   where the communication initiators (e.g., a client in the context of 
   client/server application) are located. For NAT44, the internal 
   realm refers to the private networks, as opposed to the IPv4 
   Internet. For NAT64, the internal realm means IPv6 network or IPv6 

 
 
Xu & Boucadair         Expires March 25, 2010                 [Page 3] 

Internet-Draft        Redundancy and Load Balancing     September 2009 
                        Framework for Stateful NAT 

   Internet. For NAT46, the internal realm refers to IPv4 network or 
   IPv4 Internet. Accordingly, the hosts located in the internal realm 
   are called internal hosts, and the addresses used in the internal 
   realm are called internal addresses. In the context of DS-lite 
   architecture, the internal address realm is assumed to be private 
   IPv4 addresses even if the transport mode used to convey exchanged 
   traffic is IPv6. A DS-lite CGN device is a NAT44 device which 
   requires IPv6 capabilities and IPv6-specific information to perform 
   its NAT operation. 

   - LSN/CGN external address realm (external realm for short): a realm 
   where the communication responders (e.g., a server in the 
   client/server application) are located. For NAT44, the external 
   realm refers to the IPv4 Internet. For NAT64, the external realm 
   means the IPv4 Internet or IPv4 network. For NAT46, the external 
   realm refers to the IPv6 Internet or IPv6 network. Accordingly, the 
   hosts located in the external realm are called external hosts, and 
   the addresses used in the external realm are called external 
   addresses. 

   - Internal address pool: an address pool used for assigning internal 
   addresses to represent the external hosts in the internal realm. 
   Note that this address pool is specific to NAT46 and NAT64. For 
   NAT46, the IPv4 address pool used for assigning internal IPv4 
   addresses to represent external IPv6 hosts is the internal address 
   pool. For NAT64, the prefix64 used for synthesizing internal IPv6 
   addresses to represent external IPv4 hosts in the internal realm 
   could be looked as a special internal address pool. 

   - External address pool: an address pool used for assigning external 
   addresses for the internal hosts. For NAT44 and NAT64, the IPv4 
   address pool is the external address pool. For NAT46, the prefix64 
   could be looked as a special external IPv6 address pool from which 
   synthesized IPv6 addresses are assigned to internal IPv4 hosts. 

   - CPE (Customer Premises Equipment): A device which is used to 
   interconnect the customer premise with the service provider's 
   network.   

   - Prefix64: an IPv6 prefix used for synthesizing IPv6 addresses for 
   the IPv4 hosts. See [Format] for more details. 

3. Reference Architecture 

   In a typical operational scenario, as illustrated in Figure 1, two 
   NAT devices are deployed for redundancy and/or load balancing 

 
 
Xu & Boucadair         Expires March 25, 2010                 [Page 4] 

Internet-Draft        Redundancy and Load Balancing     September 2009 
                        Framework for Stateful NAT 

   purposes. Hence, we describe the corresponding mechanisms based on 
   this scenario. Note that these mechanisms are also suitable in the 
   scenarios in which more than two NAT devices are used.  

        +-------------------------+     +-----------------------+ 
        |                         |     |                       | 
        |                       +-+-----+-+                     | 
        |                       |  NAT-A  |                     | 
   +----+-------------+         +-+-----+-+    +-------------+  | 
   |   Internal Host  |           |     |      |External Host|  | 
   +----+-------------+           |     |      +-------------+  | 
        |                       +-+-----+-+                     | 
        |                       |  NAT-B  |                     | 
        |    Internal realm     +-+-----+-+    External realm   | 
        |                         |     |                       | 
        +-------------------------+     +-----------------------+      

              Figure 1. General Scenario of Dual NAT Routers 

    

   Due to the fact that the redundancy and load-balancing mechanisms 
   for NAT44, NAT46 and NAT64 are almost the same except for the routes 
   towards the external realm advertised into the internal realm by the 
   NAT devices or outsourced to a router, e.g., a route to the prefix64 
   in the case of NAT64, a route to the IPv4 Internet (in the context 
   of [NAT444]) or the tunnel concentrator (in the context of [DS-Lite]) 
   in the case of NAT44, and a route to the IPv4 address pool in NAT46, 
   we describe these mechanisms in general. 

4. Redundancy Mechanisms 

   The fundamental principle of NAT redundancy is to make two or more 
   NAT devices function as a redundancy group, and select one as the 
   Primary NAT and the other(s) as the Backup NAT through a dedicated 
   election procedure (see Section 6) or manual configuration. In the 
   nominal regime, datagrams exchanged between hosts in the internal 
   realm and the external realm are handled by the Primary NAT. Once 
   the Primary NAT is out of service (means to detect and to notify 
   this failure to the redundancy group should be activated), the 
   Backup NAT with the highest priority (if several backup NATs are 
   deployed) takes over and is consequently elected (or selected) to be 
   responsible for handling received traffic. This Backup NAT is then 
   identified as new Primary NAT. Once the former Primary NAT became 
   operational, it could either preempt the role of Primary NAT or not. 


 
 
Xu & Boucadair         Expires March 25, 2010                 [Page 5] 

Internet-Draft        Redundancy and Load Balancing     September 2009 
                        Framework for Stateful NAT 

   This should be part of the policies to be configured by the 
   administrative entity managing a NAT redundancy group.  

   To ensure a coherent behavior in case of NAT failure, this document 
   assumes that both Primary and Backup NAT devices are managed by the 
   same administrative entity. Thus, consistent configuration policies 
   should be enforced in all involved nodes. Note that the election 
   process must be deterministic and does not lead to fuzzy behavior as 
   far as the election of new Primary NAT is concerned. Moreover, to 
   enhance the service availability the time to detect a failure and 
   the handover between the Primary and Backup NAT must be shortened.    

   Two redundancy mechanisms are described hereafter: the cold or the 
   hot standby mechanism:  

       The goal of the cold standby mechanism is just to keep the NAT 
        failover transparent to the communicating internal hosts;  

       In contrast, the purpose of the hot standby mechanism is to 
        maintain established sessions continuously during the NAT 
        failover.  

   The following sub-sections provide more information about these two 
   modes.  

4.1. Cold Standby Mechanism 

   To implement cold standby mode, the internal addresses used to 
   represent the external hosts in the local realm should be retained 
   despite the NAT failover. The following assesses how this 
   requirement is met in each NAT flavor: 

       In the context of NAT44, the external hosts' internal addresses 
        (i.e., the addresses used to represent the external hosts in 
        the internal realm) are the same as their external addresses. 
        Therefore, the above requirement is met naturally.  

       In a NAT64 context, NAT devices belonging to a redundancy group 
        should be configured with an identical IPv6 prefix prefix64.  

       As for NAT46, NAT devices in a redundancy group should be 
        configured with an identical IPv4 address pool and a subset of 
        translation state information should be synchronized among 
        these NAT devices through a dedicated state synchronization 
        protocol [NAT-Sync]. This is to ensure the Backup NAT, once 
        selected as the current Primary NAT, to assign the 

 
 
Xu & Boucadair         Expires March 25, 2010                 [Page 6] 

Internet-Draft        Redundancy and Load Balancing     September 2009 
                        Framework for Stateful NAT 

        communicating IPv6 hosts the same IPv4 addresses as those 
        assigned by the previous Primary NAT device. 

   Each NAT device in a NAT redundancy group is configured with a 
   different external address pool. A route to that external pool is 
   then announced into the external realm by the NAT device or 
   outsourced to another router.  

       In the cases of NAT44 and NAT64: NAT devices are configured 
        with different external IPv4 address pools (i.e., addresses to 
        represent the external hosts in the internal realm) without any 
        overlap. Otherwise, the same address or address/port pair, 
        which was assigned to some internal host by the previous 
        Primary NAT, may be occasionally assigned to a different 
        internal host by the current Primary NAT, and this will cause 
        some confusion. In addition, by using different external 
        address pools on each NAT device, the outgoing and returning 
        datagrams of a given session are ensured to always traverse the 
        same NAT device (i.e., the primary NAT device) in normal cases 
        except the NAT failover happens. 

       In the case of NAT46, the issue occurred in NAT44 and NAT64 
        cases will not happen when using the same external IPv6 address 
        pool (i.e., the IPv6 prefix prefix64) due to the stateless 
        address translation for the internal hosts. Hence each NAT 
        device can be configured with either the same prefix64 or not. 
        The case where different prefix64 is configured on distinct NAT 
        devices is called as the cold standby, as opposed to the hot 
        standby in which the same IPv6 prefix is used. 

   In order to make IP datagrams, destined to the external realm, 
   always traverse via the Primary NAT, the Primary NAT must announce 
   into the internal realm a route towards the external realm. In case 
   the Primary NAT and the Backup one are specified manually, the 
   Backup NAT (or associated router) should announce into the internal 
   realm a route towards the external realm to prepare for the failover. 
   However, in order to ensure the route advertised by the Primary NAT 
   (or by associated router), rather than that advertised by the Backup 
   NAT, is selected as the best by the routers in the internal realm 
   despite topology changes, the route advertised by the Backup NAT 
   should be set at a higher enough cost or larger granularity (for 
   example, the Backup NAT announces a route to 10.0.0.0/8, while the 
   Primary NAT announces two more specific routes to 10.0.0.0/9 and 
   10.128.0.0/9 respectively).  



 
 
Xu & Boucadair         Expires March 25, 2010                 [Page 7] 

Internet-Draft        Redundancy and Load Balancing     September 2009 
                        Framework for Stateful NAT 

   Once the connections to the external realm are lost, the route 
   towards the external realm previously announced should be withdrawn. 
   When the Primary NAT fails, datagrams destined to the external realm 
   will pass through the Backup NAT. If the Primary NAT and the Backup 
   NAT are automatically elected through a dedicated election process, 
   the Backup NAT would be elected as a new Primary NAT when the old 
   Primary one fails, so it is not necessary for the Backup NAT to make 
   the above route announcements. 

4.2. Hot Standby Mechanism 

   To preserve the established sessions during the failover, in 
   addition to keeping the internal addresses for the external hosts 
   unchanged, the external addresses for the internal hosts should also 
   be kept unchanged.  

   How to meet the first requirement will not be re-iterated since it 
   is similar to the cold standby mechanism (See previous sub-section).  

   To meet the second requirement, NAT devices in a redundancy group 
   should be configured with an identical external address pool and 
   they should assign the same external address and port for the same 
   internal host. In the case of NAT46, NAT devices should be 
   configured with an identical prefix64. For NAT44 and NAT64, in 
   addition to having the NAT devices configured with identical IPv4 
   address pools, the translation state on the Primary NAT device 
   should be synchronized to the Backup NAT device(s) in a timely 
   fashion. 

   The Primary NAT (or its associated router) announces into the 
   internal realm a route towards the external realm and announces into 
   the external realm a route towards the external address pool. If the 
   Primary NAT and the Backup NAT are specified manually, the Backup 
   NAT device (or its associated router) should also announce those 
   routes, but with higher enough cost or larger granularity. Once the 
   connection to either the external realm or the internal realm is 
   lost, the above routes should be withdrawn (either by the primary 
   NAT device itself or by a third party). When the Primary NAT fails, 
   the datagrams towards the external realm will pass through the 
   Backup NAT device. If the Primary NAT and the Backup are 
   automatically elected through a dedicated election procedure, the 
   Backup NAT would be elected as a new Primary NAT when the old 
   Primary NAT device fails. Consequently, it is not necessary for the 
   Backup NAT to make the above route announcement. 



 
 
Xu & Boucadair         Expires March 25, 2010                 [Page 8] 

Internet-Draft        Redundancy and Load Balancing     September 2009 
                        Framework for Stateful NAT 

5. Load Balancing Mechanisms 

   Based on the above redundancy mechanisms, one can further realize 
   load balancing among a group of NAT devices. The basic idea is to 
   create two redundancy groups (e.g., group A and group B) on these 
   NAT devices, make one device as the Primary NAT for group A and the 
   Backup NAT for group B, while make the other as the Primary NAT for 
   group B and the Backup NAT for group A. Taking NAT64 as an example, 
   NAT devices are configured with two IPv6 prefixes prefix64s (e.g., 
   prefix64-A and prefix64-B) corresponding to two different redundancy 
   groups (e.g., group A and group B) separately, and one device is 
   designated as the Primary NAT for group A and the Backup NAT for 
   group B, while the other as the Backup NAT for group A and the 
   Primary NAT for group B. Therefore, the IPv6 datagrams towards the 
   IPv4 external realm are balanced among these NAT devices according 
   to their destination addresses with different prefix64 prefixes. 

   For load balancing together with cold standby, each NAT device could 
   either use the same external address pool or different external 
   address pools corresponding to these redundancy groups. However, in 
   the case of NAT64, in order to easily determine which prefix64 
   should be used for synthesizing IPv6 address of a given IPv4 host in 
   the return direction, it would be better to assign different address 
   pools for different redundancy groups. In this way, the prefix64 can 
   be easily determined according to the destination IPv4 address in 
   the return packets sent from the IPv4 host. Besides, the external 
   address pools on one NAT device shouldn't have any overlap with 
   those of the other NAT device. Otherwise, the same address or 
   address/port pair could be assigned occasionally to different 
   internal hosts. In contrast, for load balancing together with hot 
   standby, different external address pools should be configured for 
   these redundancy groups. Otherwise, the return packets towards the 
   internal realm may be forwarded to a wrong NAT device. 

6. Election Protocol Considerations 

   An election process and associated protocol(s) is used to 
   automatically elect one NAT device among a NAT redundancy group as 
   the Primary NAT device and the others as Backup NAT devices. Once 
   the Primary NAT fails, the Backup device with the highest priority 
   should take over the Primary NAT role after a short delay. The 
   election protocol is also used to track the connectivity to the 
   external realm and the internal realm. Once connections to the 
   external realm or the internal realm lost, the NAT device is not 
   qualified to be the Primary NAT and it will withdraw the route 
   towards the external realm announced previously. In the case of hot 

 
 
Xu & Boucadair         Expires March 25, 2010                 [Page 9] 

Internet-Draft        Redundancy and Load Balancing     September 2009 
                        Framework for Stateful NAT 

   standby, it should also withdraw the route towards the external 
   address pool. 

   As an implementation example, VRRP [RFC2338] can be used as the 
   automatic election protocol. In addition, an interface tracking 
   mechanism can also be used to adjust the priority to influence the 
   election results.  

   If two NAT devices are directly connected via an Ethernet network, 
   VRRP can run directly on the Ethernet interfaces. Otherwise, some 
   extra configuration or protocol changes need to be implemented. One 
   option is to create conditions for VRRP to run among these devices. 
   For example, to create a VPLS [RFC4761][RFC4762] instance and enable 
   IP functions and run VRRP on those VLAN interfaces which are bound 
   to that VPLS instance. If enabling IP on those interfaces is not 
   supported, the following trick to realize the same goal, but at a 
   cost of consuming two physical interfaces on each NAT router: create 
   a VPLS instance among a set of NAT devices, and on each of them one 
   Ethernet interface is bound to that VPLS instance, and another IP-
   enabled Ethernet interface is locally connected with that interface. 
   Then VRRP can run on those IP enabled Ethernet interfaces which are 
   all connected to that VPLS instance. Another option is to enhance 
   VRRP so that VRRP neighbors can be configured manually and VRRP 
   messages can be exchanged directly between two neighbors in a 
   unicast fashion. 

   VRRP is only an implementation example of the election process. 
   Other protocols may be used to manage the roles of Primary and 
   Backup. 

7. State Synchronization Protocol Considerations 

   [NAT-Sync] defines a candidate solution to NAT state synchronization 
   by using Server Cache Synchronization Protocol (SCSP) [RFC2334]. For 
   more information about the proposed solution, the reader is invited 
   to refer to [NAT-Sync] 

8. Security Considerations 

   TBD. 

9. IANA Considerations 

   There are no IANA considerations for this document. 



 
 
Xu & Boucadair         Expires March 25, 2010                [Page 10] 

Internet-Draft        Redundancy and Load Balancing     September 2009 
                        Framework for Stateful NAT 

10. Acknowledgments 

   The author would like to thank Dan Wing and Dave Thaler for their 
   insightful comments and reviews, and thank Dacheng Zhang and Xuewei 
   Wang for their valuable editorial reviews. 

11. References 

11.1. Normative References 

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate               
             Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997. 

11.2. Informative References 

   [RFC3022]  Srisuresh, P. and K. Egevang, "Traditional IP Network             
             Address NAT (Traditional NAT)", RFC 3022, January 2001. 

   [RFC2663] Srisuresh, P. and M. Holdrege, "IP Network Address               
             NAT (NAT) Terminology and Considerations", RFC               
             2663, August 1999. 

   [RFC2766] Tsirtsis, G. and P. Srisuresh, "Network Address                    
             Translation - Protocol Translation (NAT-PT)",                     
             RFC 2766, February 2000. 

   [RFC4966] Aoun, C. and E. Davies, "Reasons to Move the Network 
             Address NAT - Protocol NAT (NAT-PT) to Historic Status", 
             RFC 4966, July 2007. 

   [RFC2338] Knight, S., et. al., "Virtual Router Redundancy Protocol",         
             RFC2338, April 1998. 

   [RFC2334] Luciani, J., Armitage, G., Halpern, J., and N. Doraswamy, 
             "Server Cache Synchronization Protocol (SCSP)", RFC 2334, 
             April 1998. 

   [RFC4761] Kompella, K. and Y. Rekhter, "Virtual Private LAN Service          
             (VPLS) Using BGP for Auto-Discovery and Signaling",RFC             
             4761, January 2007.  

   [RFC4762] Lasserre, M. and Kompella, V. (Editors), "Virtual Private 
             LAN Service (VPLS) Using Label Distribution Protocol (LDP) 
             Signaling", RFC 4762, January 2007.  



 
 
Xu & Boucadair         Expires March 25, 2010                [Page 11] 

Internet-Draft        Redundancy and Load Balancing     September 2009 
                        Framework for Stateful NAT 

   [NAT64] Bagnulo, M., Matthews, P., and I. Beijnum, "NAT64: Network 
             Address and Protocol Translation from IPv6 Clients to              
             IPv4 Servers", draft-ietf-behave-v6v4-xlate-stateful-01 
             (work in progress), July 2009. 

   [NAT444] Shirasaki, Y., Miyakawa, S., Nakagawa, A., Yamaguchi, J.,           
             and H. Ashida, "NAT444 with ISP Shared Address",              
             draft-shirasaki-nat444-isp-shared-addr-00 (work in              
             progress), October 2008. 

   [DS-Lite] Durand, A., "Dual-stack lite broadband deployments post 
             IPv4 exhaustion", draft-ietf-softwire-dual-stack-lite-01 
             (work in progress), July 2009. 

   [Format] Huitema, C., Bao, C., Bagnulo, M., Boucadair, M., Li, X., 
             "Framework for IPv4/IPv6 Translation", draft-ietf-behave-
             address-format-00.txt (work in progress), August, 2009. 

   [Framework] Baker, F., Li,X., Bao,C., Yin,K., "Framework for 
             IPv4/IPv6 Translation", draft-ietf-behave-v6v4-framework-
             01 (work in progress), September 2009. 

   [LSN] Nishitani,T., Miyakawa, S., Nakagawa, A., Ashida,H., "Common 
             Functions of Large Scale NAT (NAT)", draft-nishitani-cgn-
             01 (work in progress), November 2008. 

   [Shortage] Levis, P., Bouacadair, M., Grimault, J-L., Villefranque, 
             A., "IPv4 Address Shortage: Needs and Open Issues", draft-
             levis-behave-ipv4-shortage-framework-02 (work in progress), 
             June 2009. 

   [NAT-Sync] Chen, D., Xu, X., Halpern, J., Boucadair, M., "NAT State 
             Synchronization Using SCSP", draft-xu-behave-nat-state-
             sync-00 (work in progress), September, 2009 

Authors' Addresses 

   Xiaohu Xu 
   Huawei Technologies, 
   No.3 Xinxi Rd., Shang-Di Information Industry Base,  
   Hai-Dian District, Beijing 100085, P.R. China 
   Phone: +86 10 82836073 
   Email: xuxh@huawei.com 
    
    
   Mohamed Boucadair 

 
 
Xu & Boucadair         Expires March 25, 2010                [Page 12] 

Internet-Draft        Redundancy and Load Balancing     September 2009 
                        Framework for Stateful NAT 

   France Telecom 
   3, av Francois Chateau 
   Rennes 35000 
   France 
   Email: mohamed.boucadair@orange-ftgroup.com 









































 
 
Xu & Boucadair         Expires March 25, 2010                [Page 13] 

