



SIPREC                                                        P. Kyzivat
Internet-Draft                                                    M. Yan
Intended status: Informational                                    Huawei
Expires: November 17, 2013                                  May 16, 2013


                   Web Conference Recording Use Case
                draft-kyzivat-siprec-webconf-use-case-00

Abstract

   The current work of SIPREC will soon finish.  As its charter defined,
   SIPREC has covered industries like financial trading floors, contact
   center and emergency service bureaus.  But when talking about
   products or solutions like data or web conferencing, SIPREC is
   insufficient to record all aspects of calls with different
   interactive media channels.  This draft tries to show a use case for
   web conference recording and show how it can work well under SIPREC
   mechanism.

Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on November 17, 2013.









Kyzivat & Yan          Expires November 17, 2013                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft     Web Conference Recording Use Case            May 2013


Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
     1.1.  Web Conference  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
     1.2.  Multimedia Recording and Layout . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     1.3.  Recording Session . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   2.  Requirements for Web Conference Recording . . . . . . . . . .   4
   3.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   4.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   5.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6

1.  Introduction

1.1.  Web Conference

   In general, a basic video conference has participants with video
   channels and audio channels with DTMF ability.  A more complex
   multimedia conference would have text, interactive text and
   presentation graphics [RFC4597].  A web conference, known as a
   webinar or, for interactive conferences, online workshop, refers to a
   service that allows conferencing events to be shared with remote
   locations.  It has needs for recording as strong as those for
   financial trading floors and contact centers.  The host and
   participants, and even nonparticipants, would like to play back the
   conference recording for further purposes, like editing a conference
   summary, reviewing conference outlines or replaying the whole
   conference process.  The recording should reconstruct, as much as
   possible, the web conference including all media types not only audio
   /video but also IM, data sharing and even presentation information
   like layout.  Such an exhaustive reconstruction could give audiences
   more information and a better experience.




Kyzivat & Yan          Expires November 17, 2013                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft     Web Conference Recording Use Case            May 2013


1.2.  Multimedia Recording and Layout

   There is one use case covering the recording of a multi-channel and
   multimedia session in the existing use case document [RFC6341].
   Aside from audio, video and IM, it does not mention other interaction
   modalities.  The limitations of the multi-channel typies leads to
   poor support for web conference recording.  A web conference has
   various media types, including audio, video, IM, data sharing(desktop
   /document/application/whiteboard) and polling.  SIPREC is already
   mostly capable of recording any sort of RTP media sessions, including
   voice, DTMF, video, and text [RFC6341] with SDP negotiation
   [I-D.ietf-siprec-protocol].  But it is not evident how to support the
   remaining media.

   The media streams like desktop/document/application/whiteboard
   sharing could be managed as still images (snapshots with increments)
   or as dynamic streams (video streams) to cover details like
   annotating, direct editing or page turning.  The still image could be
   also treated as the payload in rtp stream.  For instance, one
   snapshot bitmap from desktop could be inserted as an I frame of a
   recording RTP stream that uses the SIP recording mechanism.  So those
   streams could be recorded via RTP stream.

   In many cases the conference server controls the layout views of
   media data, especially for video streams, on the screens of the
   participants in the conference.  In addition, participants or
   conference host might change the layout for their preferred pane
   assignment.  When participants act the SRC and make the recording for
   themselves, they might use their own layout for special purpose, like
   put the IM session into the larger pane temporarily for writing some
   key details into a summary, or permanently close the less significant
   participants' video stream outputs to earn a larger pane for slide
   sharing of a online class training . It would be useful to have
   information about how that was done for each participant, and the
   recommended way of doing it for after-the-fact viewers, as part of
   the recording, so that the playbacks can do a proper rendering.

   The layout of a web conference is used to decide how to organize the
   multi-windows, when playing back the recording, considered as a set
   of predefined video presentations offered by the server [RFC4597].
   Take video recording as an example.  There are some key crucial
   factors, like the desired recording resolution or largest active
   speaker, that affect SRC/SRS decisions about how many video streams
   (participants) are viewed at once and the layout of these video
   streams on the screen [RFC4597].  And the data sharing's content
   [RFC4796] could also effect the layout in a web conference when
   presenting with video channels together.  These layout metadata could
   be defined by SRC or by config/default setting on SRS.  If it is



Kyzivat & Yan          Expires November 17, 2013                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft     Web Conference Recording Use Case            May 2013


   defined by SRC, the metadata could be delivered to SRS at the
   beginning of the RS, and updated with the increments later.

   Below is a simple example for the layout of a web conference.  A is
   for participant list, B is for IM, while C is for desktop sharing.
   And D1, D2, D3 are to support different video windows from each
   participant.

                +----------------+----------------------------+
                |                |                            |
                |        A       |                            |
                |                |              C             |
                +----------------+                            |
                |                |                            |
                |        B       +--------+---------+---------+
                |                |   D1   |    D2   |    D3   |
                +----------------+--------+---------+---------+

                 Figure 1: The Layout of A Web Conference

1.3.  Recording Session

   One way for a conference focus to record a conference is introduced
   in [I-D.ietf-siprec-architecture].  This defines how the conference
   focus works as an SRC to deliver RTP streams and associate recording
   metadata to SRS.  It may choose the recording RTP stream type,
   separated or mixed.  There are more details about how to use SDP, RTP
   for recording by participant or by media type in
   [I-D.ietf-siprec-protocol].  The focus may setup different recording
   sessions for different media streams recorded separately, or one
   recording session for a mixed media stream created by the SRC, or
   even multiplexing different media streams in a single RTP recording
   session[I-D.ietf-siprec-protocol].

   But more is needed to support other media streams in a web
   conference.  There is need for a new type of "media stream" for data
   sharing, distinct from the main video streams, with different m-lines
   or metadata.  Other new "media stream" types are needed for delivery
   of SIP based IM message and polling message.  There is also need of a
   mechanism for the SRC to bound the number of media streams to be
   recorded, especially when the participant number in a conference is
   large.

   Recording XMPP based IM in CS is out of the scope for this proposal.
   It may be added later.

2.  Requirements for Web Conference Recording




Kyzivat & Yan          Expires November 17, 2013                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft     Web Conference Recording Use Case            May 2013


   1.  The mechanism MUST support MSRP media stream recording.

   2.  The mechanism MUST support data sharing recording, data sharing
       including desktop/document/application/whiteboard.

   3.  The mechanism MUST support polling recording.

   4.  The mechanism MUST support record the layout of web conference,
       if SRC offer the details.  The layout details can be adjusted by
       demand.

3.  IANA Considerations

   This document contains no IANA considerations.

4.  Security Considerations

   Not explicitly covered in this version.

5.  Informative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC3261]  Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., Camarillo, G., Johnston,
              A., Peterson, J., Sparks, R., Handley, M., and E.
              Schooler, "SIP: Session Initiation Protocol", RFC 3261,
              June 2002.

   [RFC4597]  Even, R. and N. Ismail, "Conferencing Scenarios", RFC
              4597, August 2006.

   [RFC4796]  Hautakorpi, J. and G. Camarillo, "The Session Description
              Protocol (SDP) Content Attribute", RFC 4796, February
              2007.

   [RFC6341]  Rehor, K., Portman, L., Hutton, A., and R. Jain, "Use
              Cases and Requirements for SIP-Based Media Recording
              (SIPREC)", RFC 6341, August 2011.

   [I-D.ietf-siprec-architecture]
              Hutton, A., Portman, L., Jain, R., and K. Rehor, "An
              Architecture for Media Recording using the Session
              Initiation Protocol", draft-ietf-siprec-architecture-07
              (work in progress), November 2012.

   [I-D.ietf-siprec-protocol]




Kyzivat & Yan          Expires November 17, 2013                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft     Web Conference Recording Use Case            May 2013


              Portman, L., Lum, H., Eckel, C., Johnston, A., and A.
              Hutton, "Session Recording Protocol", draft-ietf-siprec-
              protocol-09 (work in progress), December 2012.

   [I-D.ietf-siprec-metadata]
              R, R., Ravindran, P., and P. Kyzivat, "Session Initiation
              Protocol (SIP) Recording Metadata", draft-ietf-siprec-
              metadata-11 (work in progress), January 2013.

Authors' Addresses

   Paul H. Kyzivat
   Huawei

   Email: pkyzivat@alum.mit.edu


   Michael Yan
   Huawei

   Email: michael.yan@huawei.com





























Kyzivat & Yan          Expires November 17, 2013                [Page 6]
