


Network Working Group                                       B. Carpenter
Internet-Draft                                         Univ. of Auckland
Updates: 3697 (if approved)                                     S. Jiang
Intended status: Experimental               Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd
Expires: October 15, 2010                                 April 13, 2010


              Update to the IPv6 flow label specification
                  draft-carpenter-6man-flow-update-02

Abstract

   Various uses proposed for the IPv6 flow label are incompatible with
   its existing specification.  This document describes changes to the
   specification that permit additional use cases as well as allowing
   continued use of the previous specification.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on October 15, 2010.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.



Carpenter & Jiang       Expires October 15, 2010                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft              Flow Label Update                 April 2010


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Normative Notation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Changes to specification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   4.  Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   5.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   6.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   7.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   8.  Change log . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   9.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     9.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     9.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   Appendix A.  Alternative Approaches  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10




































Carpenter & Jiang       Expires October 15, 2010                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft              Flow Label Update                 April 2010


1.  Introduction

   The flow label field in the IPv6 header is reserved but left
   experimental by [RFC2460] and is specified by [RFC3697].  We quote
   three rules from that RFC:
   a.  "The Flow Label value set by the source MUST be delivered
       unchanged to the destination node(s)."
   b.  "IPv6 nodes MUST NOT assume any mathematical or other properties
       of the Flow Label values assigned by source nodes."
   c.  "Router performance SHOULD NOT be dependent on the distribution
       of the Flow Label values.  Especially, the Flow Label bits alone
       make poor material for a hash key."

   The second two rules appear to forbid a usage in which the bits of
   the flow label are encoded with a specific semantic meaning, or are
   assumed to have any particular property such as randomness.  However,
   both before and after these rules were laid down, a considerable
   number of proposals for use of the flow label have been published
   that seem incompatible with them.  Examples are
   [I-D.conta-ipv6-flow-label], [I-D.conta-diffserv-ipv6-fl-classifier],
   [I-D.chakravorty-6lsa], [I-D.banerjee-flowlabel-ipv6-qos],
   [I-D.metzler-ipv6-flowlabel], [LeeKim], [LinTseng], and [Prakash].
   These authors propose use cases in which some combination of the
   following options apply:
   o  The flow label may be changed by intermediate systems.
   o  It doesn't matter if the flow label is changed, because the
      receiver doesn't use it.
   o  Some or all bits of the flow label are coded: they have specific
      meanings understood by routers and switches along the path.
   o  The coding is related to the required quality of service, as well
      as identifying a flow.
   o  The label is used to control forwarding or switching in some way.

   These proposals all require either some form of encoding of semantics
   in the bits of the flow label, or the ability for routers to modify
   the flow label, or both.  Thus they appear to infringe the rules from
   RFC 3697 quoted above.

   Although [I-D.roberts-inband-qos-ipv6] does not explicitly consider
   the flow label, it requests hop-by-hop functionality in IPv6 packets
   very similar to what is needed by the above proposals.

   We can conclude that a considerable number of researchers and
   designers are stymied by RFC 3697.  On the other hand, proposals such
   as [I-D.martinbeckman-ietf-ipv6-fls-ipv6flowswitching],
   [I-D.martinbeckman-ietf-ipv6-amp-ipv6hcamp],
   [I-D.blake-ipv6-flow-label-nonce], and [I-D.carpenter-flow-ecmp]
   appear to be compatible with RFC 3697.  The latter two are based on



Carpenter & Jiang       Expires October 15, 2010                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft              Flow Label Update                 April 2010


   the originator of a packet choosing a pseudo-random flow label for
   each flow.  Thus, we can also conclude that there is a useful role
   for this approach too.  The proposal below is intended to resolve
   this dilemma by allowing both approaches to co-exist.


2.  Normative Notation

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].


3.  Changes to specification

   We note that although RFC 3697 requires the flow label to be
   delivered unchanged, it is not included in any transport layer
   pseudo-header checksums nor in IPsec authentication [RFC4302].  We
   also note that both RFC 2460 and RFC 3697 define the default flow
   label to be zero.  At the time of writing, this is the observed value
   in an overwhelming proportion of IPv6 packets; neither operating
   systems nor applications currently set it, and routers do not rely on
   it.  Thus there is no reason to expect operational difficulties if a
   careful change is made to the rules of RFC 3697.

   The purpose of the proposed change is that the flow label should be
   available for domain-specific use, with locally defined semantics,
   without preventing uses that are compatible with RFC 3697.  There
   should be no impact on specifications other than RFC 3697 and no
   impact on currently operational software and hardware.

   The rules of RFC 3697 are modified as follows:
   1.  If and only if the flow label in an IPv6 packet has the default
       value of zero, then a router MAY set it to a value between
       between 1 and 0xFFFFF.  This option modifies the rule that the
       flow label must be delivered unchanged, by allowing exactly one
       router to set it if the source host did not set it.
   2.  If this is done, all packets in a given flow MUST be given the
       same flow label value.  A flow is defined in this case as all
       packets with the same source and destination IPv6 addresses and
       port numbers and the same transport protocol number, i.e., the
       same final Next Header value [RFC2460].  This rule constrains the
       definition of a flow in RFC 3697 for the specific case that a
       router sets the flow label.  However, it does not constrain the
       bits of the flow label in any particular way.
   3.  An administratively defined domain containing hosts and routers
       MAY use a locally defined scheme for the bits of the flow label.
       This is known as a flow label domain, analogous to a



Carpenter & Jiang       Expires October 15, 2010                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft              Flow Label Update                 April 2010


       differentiated services domain [RFC2474].  Hosts in such a domain
       MUST be configured either to set a default (zero) flow label in
       all IPv6 packets, or to apply the locally defined scheme.  When a
       locally defined scheme is used, packets entering the flow label
       domain from outside might contain an invalid label according to
       that scheme.  Therefore, border routers MAY treat all packets
       entering the flow label domain as if they had a default (zero)
       flow label.  This option will be applied in any case where
       incorrect flow label formats might cause unpredictable behaviour.
   4.  Unless a locally defined scheme for the bits of the flow label is
       in use, the label, whether set by the source host according to
       RFC 3697, or by a router according to rules 1 and 2 above, SHOULD
       contain a pseudo-random value between 1 and 0xFFFFF.  The
       intention of this rule is to encourage load balancing solutions
       based on using the flow label as input to a hash function, e.g.,
       [I-D.carpenter-flow-ecmp], or to enable behaviour such as defined
       in [I-D.blake-ipv6-flow-label-nonce].  This recommendation
       constrains the choice of flow label value more than RFC 3697.

   The following are the consequences of the above rules combined with
   those in RFC 3697:
   o  Sending hosts that are not updated will in practice continue to
      send all-zero labels.  If there is no locally defined scheme in
      use along the path taken by a packet, the label will be delivered
      unchanged.
   o  Sending hosts wishing to rely only on RFC 3697 behaviour will
      choose labels between 1 and 0xFFFFF, which should be pseudo-random
      according to rule 4 above.
   o  Locally defined behaviour of the flow label will be limited to
      consistent administratively defined domains.
   o  Sending hosts wishing to use locally defined behaviour may
      continue to send all-zero labels, relying on a router in the local
      flow label domain to set a value according to rules 1, 2 and 3
      above.  Alternatively, they may set a label according to locally
      defined rules.
   o  Routers wishing to implement a locally defined behaviour will set
      a label according to rules 1, 2 and 3 above, if and only if the
      incoming flow label is all-zero; if the flow label is not all-zero
      they must not change it, according to rule 1 above.
   o  There is an exception to immutability for border routers of a flow
      label domain, when external packets arrive with a non-zero flow
      label.


4.  Discussion

   Hosts that set a default (zero) flow label and ignore the flow label
   on receipt will be unaffected by implementations of this



Carpenter & Jiang       Expires October 15, 2010                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft              Flow Label Update                 April 2010


   specification.  In general, it is assumed that hosts will ignore the
   flow label on receipt; it cannot be safely used as an end-to-end
   transport or application layer signal of any kind.

   Routers that ignore the flow label will be unaffected by
   implementations of this specification.

   Hosts that set a default (zero) flow label and are in a flow label
   domain where routers adopt rules 1, 2, and 3 or 4 in Section 3 will
   benefit from whatever flow label handling is used in the local
   domain.  Clearly, the rules b and c quoted from RFC 3697 in Section 1
   have no effect within the local domain, where the locally defined
   rules (whatever they are) replace them.

   Hosts and routers that adopt rule 4 by setting a pseudo-random flow
   label will enhance the performance of any load balancing devices that
   include the flow label in the hash used to select a particular path
   or server, even when packets leave the local domain.  Again, rules b
   and c have no effect.

   If a locally defined flow label scheme is used, so that rule 4 is not
   implemented, then packets leaving the local domain may contain flow
   label values that are not pseudo-random.  However, because of rule 2,
   the flow label will still be part of the signature of a single packet
   flow, so it may still be used as part of a load balancing hash.
   Rules b and c remain true but do not prevent such usage.  To allow
   for these rules, the load balancing hash function needs to be be
   designed to allow for a possibly non-random flow label, and traffic
   containing a non-random flow label might not gain full benefit from
   load balancing.

   The rules defined in this document are intended to allow both RFC
   3697 usage of the flow label in the general case, and a wide variety
   of locally defined schemes.  Such schemes do not need any global
   assignments of bits in the flow label, and should not have noticeable
   impact on backwards compatibility or on domains not using them.


5.  Security Considerations

   The flow label is not protected in any way and can be forged by an
   on-path attacker.  On the other hand, a pseudo-random flow label
   cannot be readily guessed by an off-path attacker.  See RFC 3697 for
   further discussion.







Carpenter & Jiang       Expires October 15, 2010                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft              Flow Label Update                 April 2010


6.  IANA Considerations

   This document requests no action by IANA.


7.  Acknowledgements

   The authors are grateful to Qinwen Hu for general discussion about
   the flow label and for his work in searching the literature.
   Valuable comments and contributions were made by Remi Despres, Mark
   Smith and participants in the 6man working group.

   This document was produced using the xml2rfc tool [RFC2629].


8.  Change log

   draft-carpenter-6man-flow-update-02: revised and simplified according
   to WG discussion, 2010-04-13

   draft-carpenter-6man-flow-update-01: revised according to mail list
   discussion, 2010-03-05

   draft-carpenter-6man-flow-update-00: original version, 2010-02-18


9.  References

9.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC2460]  Deering, S. and R. Hinden, "Internet Protocol, Version 6
              (IPv6) Specification", RFC 2460, December 1998.

   [RFC3697]  Rajahalme, J., Conta, A., Carpenter, B., and S. Deering,
              "IPv6 Flow Label Specification", RFC 3697, March 2004.

9.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.banerjee-flowlabel-ipv6-qos]
              Banerjee, R., "A Modified Specification for use of the
              IPv6 Flow Label for providing An  efficient Quality of
              Service using hybrid approach",
              draft-banerjee-flowlabel-ipv6-qos-03 (work in progress),
              April 2002.




Carpenter & Jiang       Expires October 15, 2010                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft              Flow Label Update                 April 2010


   [I-D.blake-ipv6-flow-label-nonce]
              Blake, S., "Use of the IPv6 Flow Label as a Transport-
              Layer Nonce to Defend Against Off-Path Spoofing Attacks",
              draft-blake-ipv6-flow-label-nonce-02 (work in progress),
              October 2009.

   [I-D.carpenter-flow-ecmp]
              Carpenter, B., "Using the IPv6 flow label for equal cost
              multipath routing in tunnels",
              draft-carpenter-flow-ecmp-01 (work in progress),
              February 2010.

   [I-D.chakravorty-6lsa]
              Chakravorty, S., Bush, J., and J. Bound, "IPv6 Label
              Switching Architecture", draft-chakravorty-6lsa-03 (work
              in progress), July 2008.

   [I-D.conta-diffserv-ipv6-fl-classifier]
              Conta, A. and J. Rajahalme, "Amodel for Diffserv use of
              the IPv6 Flow Label Specification",
              draft-conta-diffserv-ipv6-fl-classifier-01 (work in
              progress), November 2001.

   [I-D.conta-ipv6-flow-label]
              Conta, A. and B. Carpenter, "A proposal for the IPv6 Flow
              Label Specification", draft-conta-ipv6-flow-label-02 (work
              in progress), July 2001.

   [I-D.martinbeckman-ietf-ipv6-amp-ipv6hcamp]
              Beckman, M., "IPv6 Header Compression via Addressing
              Mitigation Protocol (IPv6 AMP)",
              draft-martinbeckman-ietf-ipv6-amp-ipv6hcamp-01 (work in
              progress), March 2007.

   [I-D.martinbeckman-ietf-ipv6-fls-ipv6flowswitching]
              Beckman, M., "IPv6 Dynamic Flow Label Switching (FLS)",
              draft-martinbeckman-ietf-ipv6-fls-ipv6flowswitching-03
              (work in progress), March 2007.

   [I-D.metzler-ipv6-flowlabel]
              Metzler, J. and S. Hauth, "An end-to-end usage of the IPv6
              flow label", draft-metzler-ipv6-flowlabel-00 (work in
              progress), November 2000.

   [I-D.roberts-inband-qos-ipv6]
              Roberts, L. and J. Harford, "In-Band QoS Signaling for
              IPv6", draft-roberts-inband-qos-ipv6-00 (work in
              progress), July 2005.



Carpenter & Jiang       Expires October 15, 2010                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft              Flow Label Update                 April 2010


   [LeeKim]   Lee, I. and S. Kim, "A QoS Improvement Scheme for Real-
              Time Traffic Using IPv6 Flow Labels", Lecture Notes in
              Computer Science Vol. 3043, 2004.

   [LinTseng]
              Lin, C., Tseng, P., and W. Hwang, "End-to-End QoS
              Provisioning by Flow Label in IPv6", JCIS , 2006.

   [Prakash]  Prakash, B., "Using the 20 bit flow label field in the
              IPv6 header to indicate desirable quality of service on
              the internet", University of Colorado (M.Sc. Thesis),
              2004.

   [RFC2474]  Nichols, K., Blake, S., Baker, F., and D. Black,
              "Definition of the Differentiated Services Field (DS
              Field) in the IPv4 and IPv6 Headers", RFC 2474,
              December 1998.

   [RFC2629]  Rose, M., "Writing I-Ds and RFCs using XML", RFC 2629,
              June 1999.

   [RFC4302]  Kent, S., "IP Authentication Header", RFC 4302,
              December 2005.


Appendix A.  Alternative Approaches

   Two more complex alternative approaches were considered and rejected.

   The first was to distinguish locally significant flow labels from
   those conforming to RFC 3697 by setting or clearing the most
   significant bit (MSB) of the flow label.  This led to quite
   complicated rules and was not considered practical.

   The second was to use a specific differentiated services code point
   (DSCP)[RFC2474] in the Traffic Class octet instead of the MSB of the
   flow label itself, to flag a locally defined behaviour.  A more
   elaborate version of this was proposed in
   [I-D.martinbeckman-ietf-ipv6-fls-ipv6flowswitching].  There are two
   issues with this approach.  One is that DSCP values are themselves
   only locally significant, inconsistent with the end-to-end nature of
   the original flow label definition.  Secondly, it seems unwise to
   meld the semantics of differentiated services, which are currently
   deployed, with the unknown future semantics of flow label usage.
   However, this approach, while not recommended, does not appear to
   violate any basic principles if applied strictly within a single
   differentiated services domain.




Carpenter & Jiang       Expires October 15, 2010                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft              Flow Label Update                 April 2010


Authors' Addresses

   Brian Carpenter
   Department of Computer Science
   University of Auckland
   PB 92019
   Auckland,   1142
   New Zealand

   Email: brian.e.carpenter@gmail.com


   Sheng Jiang
   Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd
   KuiKe Building, No.9 Xinxi Rd.,
   Shang-Di Information Industry Base, Hai-Dian District, Beijing
   P.R. China

   Email: shengjiang@huawei.com
































Carpenter & Jiang       Expires October 15, 2010               [Page 10]


