
A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3234

        Title:      Middleboxes: Taxonomy and Issues
        Author(s):  B. Carpenter, S. Brim
        Status:     Informational
        Date:       February 2002
        Mailbox:    brian@hursley.ibm.com, sbrim@cisco.com
        Pages:      27
        Characters: 62329
        Updates/Obsoletes/SeeAlso:  None

        I-D Tag:    draft-carpenter-midtax-03.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3234.txt


This document is intended as part of an IETF discussion about
"middleboxes" - defined as any intermediary box performing functions
apart from normal, standard functions of an IP router on the data
path between a source host and destination host.  This document
establishes a catalogue or taxonomy of middleboxes, cites previous
and current IETF work concerning middleboxes, and attempts to
identify some preliminary conclusions.  It does not, however, claim to
be definitive.

This memo provides information for the Internet community.  It does
not specify an Internet standard of any kind.  Distribution of this
memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.