


NVO3                                                        B. Carpenter
Internet-Draft                                         Univ. of Auckland
Intended status: Informational                                  S. Jiang
Expires: January 5, 2013                    Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd
                                                            July 4, 2012


 Layer 3 Addressing Considerations for Network Virtualization Overlays
                   draft-carpenter-nvo3-addressing-00

Abstract

   This document discusses network layer addressing issues for virtual
   network overlays in large scale data centres hosting many virtual
   servers for multiple customers.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 5, 2013.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2012 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.




Carpenter & Jiang        Expires January 5, 2013                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft              NVO3 Addresssing                   July 2012


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Aspects of addressing in virtual overlay networks . . . . . . . 3
     2.1.  Address Independence and Isolation  . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
     2.2.  Multiple Data Centres . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
     2.3.  Address mapping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
     2.4.  Address migration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
     2.5.  DNS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
     2.6.  Dual Stack Operation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   3.  Consequences for IPv4 address management  . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   4.  Consequences for IPv6 address management  . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   5.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   6.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   7.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   8.  Change log [RFC Editor: Please remove]  . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   9.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
     9.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
     9.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9































Carpenter & Jiang        Expires January 5, 2013                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft              NVO3 Addresssing                   July 2012


1.  Introduction

   A common technique in large data centres hosting servers and services
   for many customers is to use virtual layer 3 network overlays (NVO3)
   to organise, manage and separate the virtual servers used by
   individual customers.  The related problems are discussed in
   [I-D.narten-nvo3-overlay-problem-statement], and a framework for the
   main components of a solution is described in
   [I-D.lasserre-nvo3-framework].

   [Note: In this draft we do not yet give detailed references to the
   various NVO3 drafts, none of which discuss addressing issues in
   detail.]

   When emulating a large number of virtual hosts on whatever physical
   network topology is used, probably involving multiple LAN segments,
   virtual LANs at layer2, and both routers and switches, the question
   of the IP addressing scheme for the virtual hosts is not trivial.
   The intention of the present document is to describe the resulting
   consequences for IP address management in such an environment.
   Firstly the general aspects are discussed, and then the consequences
   for both IPv4 and IPv6 addressing schemes are described.


2.  Aspects of addressing in virtual overlay networks

2.1.  Address Independence and Isolation

   In a typical hosting centre, there will be a number of customers, who
   are quite possibly mutual competitors who happen to use the same
   hosting centre.  It is essential that virtual hosts assigned to one
   customer cannot communicate directly with, or even be aware of,
   virtual hosts assigned to any other customer.  It is also essential
   that virtual networks are operationally independent to the maximum
   possible extent.

   Therefore, to simplify operations by clearly separating independent
   virtual networks (VNs) from one another, and to enhance both real and
   perceived confidentiality of each network, it is desirable for the
   addresses used by each virtual layer 3 network to be allocated and
   managed independently of all the others.  A consequence of this is
   that it becomes reasonably straightforward to configure layer 3
   routing such that traffic from one VN can never unintentionally enter
   another one, because each network has its own well defined range of
   addresses.  Similarly, it is also reasonably straightforward to
   configure firewalls or filters to detect and block any unwanted
   traffic between VNs, even if there is a routing misconfiguration.




Carpenter & Jiang        Expires January 5, 2013                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft              NVO3 Addresssing                   July 2012


   For these reasons alone, it is necessary for each VN to have its own
   well-defined layer 3 address space that is managed independently of
   all other VNs.  This requirement is independent of whether the
   physical hosts that contain the virtual hosts are on one or more
   physical or bridged LANs or VLANs.  In other words, once the layer 3
   topology is virtualised, layer 2 address independence and isolation
   is neither necessary nor sufficient to guarantee layer 3 address
   independence and isolation.

   It should be understood that independent address allocation does not
   imply unique addresses.  In the IPv4 context, as further discussed
   below, it is very likely that multiple VNs will use the same
   ambiguous address space, running over the same physical network
   infrastructure.

2.2.  Multiple Data Centres

   A given customer might have virtual hosts spread across multiple data
   centres (DCs).  Furthermore, those data centres might be owned and
   operated by competing enterprises.  The only safe assumption is that
   a single address range cannot span multiple DCs, and that a virtual
   host being relocated to another DC might need to be renumbered.  The
   addressing scheme for virtual hosts must be compatible with such a
   situation.  Most likely this means extending the requirement for
   address independence and isolation to cover separate parts of a given
   customer's total set of virtual servers.  In other words the usage
   scenario for any given customer must be able to deal with virtual
   hosts in multiple independent and mutually isolated layer 3 address
   spaces, and with the risk of occasional virtual host renumbering.

   This complicates the issues of routing configuration and address
   filtering.  If a VN extends over multiple DCs, VN routing across DC
   borders must be supported for the address ranges concerned, and
   address filtering must also be applied in a consistent way at each DC
   hosting part of a given VN.

2.3.  Address mapping

   Several of the NVO3 documents state the need for an address mapping
   scheme.  Some aspects of this are discussed in
   [I-D.kreeger-nvo3-overlay-cp].  It is generally assumed that an NVO3
   system will be built using tunnels, and the required mapping is
   between virtual host addresses and tunnel end points.  The addressing
   scheme for virtual hosts needs to be consistent with the mapping
   system adopted and whatever dynamic update protocol is used for that
   mapping.

   In the case of a VN that covers multiple DCs, the mapping scheme must



Carpenter & Jiang        Expires January 5, 2013                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft              NVO3 Addresssing                   July 2012


   also support multiple DCs.  The mapping update protocol will need to
   exchange mapping information between tunnel endpoints at all DCs
   involved.  This information needs to be specified in some detail, and
   it must be decided whether this protocol needs to be run per VN or
   per DC, how this protocol decides which DCs it should talk with, etc.

2.4.  Address migration

   As discussed in [I-D.narten-nvo3-overlay-problem-statement], current
   virtual host mechanisms assume that a host's IP address is fixed.  If
   a workload is migrated from one physical host to another, the
   migration mechanisms assume that existing transport layer
   associations such as TCP sessions stay alive, and the succesful
   migration of a job in progress relies on this.

   As workload conditions change in a large data centre, virtual hosts
   may need to be migrated from one physical host to another, and quite
   possibly this will mean moving to a different physical LAN.  However,
   the virtual host address itself should remain constant as just
   mentioned.  The addressing scheme adopted needs to be consistent with
   this requirement.  Another way to view this is as an inverted form of
   renumbering - instead of the address of a given host changing, a
   given address is reassigned to a different physical host, thereby
   representing the move of a given virtual host.

   When such a move occurs, there will normally be changes in both the
   layer 2/layer 3 mapping (given by ARP, Neighbour Discovery, etc.) and
   the virtual host address to tunnel mapping mentioned above.  However,
   an address which is moved in this way should still remain part of the
   same aggregate for routing purposes.  Otherwise, an immediate change
   to the routing configuration will be needed as well.

   As mentioned above, if a virtual host needs to be migrated between
   DCs, it might be unavoidable for its virtual address to change.  In
   this case an application layer mechanism will be needed to recover
   from the resulting loss of transport layer sessions.

2.5.  DNS

   A Domain Name Service, which resolves queries for hostnames into IP
   addresses, can reduce the direct dependence of customer applications
   on IP addresses.  If a virtual host is always connected using its
   hostname, the renumbering issue during inter-DC migrations, mentioned
   in previous section, would be significantly mitigated.  However, this
   would imply a need for rapid DNS updates.






Carpenter & Jiang        Expires January 5, 2013                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft              NVO3 Addresssing                   July 2012


2.6.  Dual Stack Operation

   In the case of a dual stack deployment, where each virtual host has
   both an IPv4 and an IPv6 address, there will presumably be some sort
   of interdependency of the two addressing schemes.  At least, the
   virtual subnet topologies would usually be the same for the two
   addressing schemes, and virtual hosts would need to migrate
   simultaneously for IPv4 and IPv6 purposes.  If this was not the case,
   scenarios requiring IPv4/IPv6 interworking might arise unexpectedly,
   which would be inconvenient and inefficient.  A particular case would
   be the migration of a virtual host between two DCs, one of which
   supports dual stack and the other of which supports only a single
   stack.

   In general, these situations would require a layer 3 IPv4/IPv6
   translator within a VN.  This solution should be avoided if possible.


3.  Consequences for IPv4 address management

   In IPv4, it must be assumed that in many if not most cases, the
   virtual hosts will be numbered out of ambiguous private address space
   [RFC1918].  The only safe assumption for a general model is that any
   individual VN may use the same address space as any other.  This
   increases the importance of the requirements for address isolation,
   independence and mapping.  In fact, without address mapping (and in
   some scenarios network address translation) a large scale IPv4 NVO3
   system could not be made to work.

   Since the IPv4 addresses in use will be ambiguous, management tools
   must be carefully designed so that operators will never need to rely
   on addresses alone to identify individual servers.  For example, when
   an address is presented to an operator for any reason, it should
   always be tagged with some sort of VN identifier.  The same goes for
   any place that an address is logged or stored for any other reason.
   Legacy software and tools that do not do this should be avoided as
   much as possible.

   An interesting aspect of using, say, Net 10 for every VN instance is
   that the number of virtual hosts can be quite large, up to 2**24 (in
   excess of 16 million).  This frees the designer from traditional
   limits on the size of an IPv4 subnet.

   An unavoidable consequence of using RFC1918 addresses is that the
   virtual hosts, if accessed by outside users, will be hidden behind
   either an application layer proxy or a NAT.  In both cases these
   might be part of a load balancing system.




Carpenter & Jiang        Expires January 5, 2013                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft              NVO3 Addresssing                   July 2012


4.  Consequences for IPv6 address management

   In IPv6, there is no concept of ambiguous private space.  Each VN can
   have its own global-scope address prefix.  This removes the
   operational problems casued by ambiguous addresses in IPv4.

   Even a basic /64 prefix would allow for more virtual host addresses
   than would ever be possible in IPv4, so again the designer is not
   restricted by any absolute limit on subnet size.  Nevertheless, it is
   advisable to use a shorter prefix such as /48 or /56 for each VN, so
   that a VN can span more than one LAN using standard IPv6 routing
   without difficulty.  It is unclear that tunnels and address mapping
   are needed for IPv6-based VNs, due to the absence of ambiguous
   addresses.

   A choice can be made between a regular IPv6 prefix from the
   customer's own IPv6 space or from ISP-assigned space, and a Unique
   Local Address prefix [RFC4193], [I-D.liu-v6ops-ula-usage-analysis].
   The latter has the advantage of needing no administrative procedure
   before assigning it, and it is also routinely blocked by site and ISP
   border routers, like an RFC1918 prefix.  However, apart from that the
   choice of IPv6 prefix has little external importance and is mainly a
   matter of convenience.

   There is no requirement for IPv6 prefix translation [RFC6296] between
   the virtual hosts and any outside users.  However, the presence of
   such translation, or of some form of load balancing, cannot be
   excluded.


5.  Security Considerations

   Routing configurations and filters in firewalls and routers should be
   constructed such that, by default, packets from virtual hosts in one
   VN cannot be forwarded into another VN.  Traffic to and from a given
   VN should only be allowed for the designated users of that VN, and
   for the VN management and operations tools.

   An independent and isolated addressing scheme is not by itself a
   security solution.  While it might avoid the most trivial and
   straightforward penetration attempts, it is in no way a substitute
   for a security solution that responds to specific threat models in
   the NVO3 situation.


6.  IANA Considerations

   This document requests no action by IANA.



Carpenter & Jiang        Expires January 5, 2013                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft              NVO3 Addresssing                   July 2012


7.  Acknowledgements

   Valuable comments and contributions were made by ... and others.

   This document was produced using the xml2rfc tool [RFC2629].


8.  Change log [RFC Editor: Please remove]

   draft-carpenter-nvo3-addressing-00: original version, 2012-07-04.


9.  References

9.1.  Normative References

   [RFC1918]  Rekhter, Y., Moskowitz, R., Karrenberg, D., Groot, G., and
              E. Lear, "Address Allocation for Private Internets",
              BCP 5, RFC 1918, February 1996.

   [RFC2460]  Deering, S. and R. Hinden, "Internet Protocol, Version 6
              (IPv6) Specification", RFC 2460, December 1998.

   [RFC4193]  Hinden, R. and B. Haberman, "Unique Local IPv6 Unicast
              Addresses", RFC 4193, October 2005.

9.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.kreeger-nvo3-overlay-cp]
              Black, D., Dutt, D., Kreeger, L., Sridhavan, M., and T.
              Narten, "Network Virtualization Overlay Control Protocol
              Requirements", draft-kreeger-nvo3-overlay-cp-00 (work in
              progress), January 2012.

   [I-D.lasserre-nvo3-framework]
              Lasserre, M., Balus, F., Morin, T., Bitar, N., and Y.
              Rekhter, "Framework for DC Network Virtualization",
              draft-lasserre-nvo3-framework-02 (work in progress),
              June 2012.

   [I-D.liu-v6ops-ula-usage-analysis]
              Liu, B., Jiang, S., and C. Byrne, "Analysis and
              recommendation for the ULA usage",
              draft-liu-v6ops-ula-usage-analysis-02 (work in progress),
              March 2012.

   [I-D.narten-nvo3-overlay-problem-statement]
              Narten, T., Sridhavan, M., Dutt, D., Black, D., and L.



Carpenter & Jiang        Expires January 5, 2013                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft              NVO3 Addresssing                   July 2012


              Kreeger, "Problem Statement: Overlays for Network
              Virtualization",
              draft-narten-nvo3-overlay-problem-statement-02 (work in
              progress), June 2012.

   [RFC2629]  Rose, M., "Writing I-Ds and RFCs using XML", RFC 2629,
              June 1999.

   [RFC6296]  Wasserman, M. and F. Baker, "IPv6-to-IPv6 Network Prefix
              Translation", RFC 6296, June 2011.


Authors' Addresses

   Brian Carpenter
   Department of Computer Science
   University of Auckland
   PB 92019
   Auckland,   1142
   New Zealand

   Email: brian.e.carpenter@gmail.com


   Sheng Jiang
   Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd
   Q14, Huawei Campus
   No.156 Beiqing Road
   Hai-Dian District, Beijing  100095
   P.R. China

   Email: jiangsheng@huawei.com



















Carpenter & Jiang        Expires January 5, 2013                [Page 9]

