


Network Working Group                                     H. Santos, Ed.
Internet-Draft                                 Santronics Software, Inc.
Intended status: Standards Track                               E. Harris
Expires: April 26, 2012                                    puremagic.com
                                                        October 24, 2011


           SMTP Service Extension for Greylisting Operations
                        draft-santos-smtpgrey-00

Abstract

   GREYLIST is a SMTP extension to formalize the widely supported
   Greylisting mail filtering method and to help support SMTP rejected
   transports by following a new formal structured 4yz server temporary
   rejection response by including a retry=time tag string which SMTP
   clients can use to optimize the rescheduling of the mail delivery
   attempts.  With adoption, network overhead reduction in wasteful mail
   delivery attempts will be realized.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 26, 2012.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must



Santos & Harris          Expires April 26, 2012                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                  SMTPGREY                    October 2011


   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.1.  Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.2.  Document Conventions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     1.3.  Definitions and Acronyms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     1.4.  Out of Scope Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   2.  Greylisting Basic Framework  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     2.1.  Recording Sender Information (Triplet) . . . . . . . . . .  7
     2.2.  SMTP Server Rejection Points . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
       2.2.1.  Connection Greeting  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
       2.2.2.  MAIL FROM  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
       2.2.3.  RCPT TO  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
       2.2.4.  DATA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     2.3.  4yz Format Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
       2.3.1.  421 vs 45z Reply Codes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     2.4.  Recommended Blocking Times . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   3.  SMTP Service Keyword . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     3.1.  SMTP Client/Server Implementation  . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
       3.1.1.  SMTP Server Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
       3.1.2.  SMTP Client Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   4.  Examples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   5.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   6.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   7.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   8.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
     8.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
     8.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   Appendix A.  Additional Greylist Parameters  . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   Appendix B.  Augmenting Other Standard Email Filters Methods . . . 16
   Appendix C.  TO DO LIST  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17














Santos & Harris          Expires April 26, 2012                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                  SMTPGREY                    October 2011


1.  Introduction

   In 2003, a non-IETF technology called GreyListing was invented by
   Evan Harris [HARRIS] as a very effective method of enhancing the
   abilities of SMTP [RFC5321] mail systems to limit the amount of
   unwanted, abusive mail that they receive and deliver to their users.
   Mail systems supporting GreyListing has grown over the years to
   become a "pseudo standard" among many SMTP operations.

   This specification provides a formal IETF specification to the
   Greylisting framework, learned practices and introduces a SMTP
   extension to reduce the network, traffic overheads and mail delivery
   delays associated with SMTP Greylisting operations.

1.1.  Background

   Greylisting was originally tested on a few small scale mail hosts
   (less than 100 users, though with a fairly diverse set of senders
   from all over the world, and volumes over 10,000 email attempts a
   day).  Currently, Greylisting is in use on many mail servers,
   including ones processing several millions of messages per day.  It
   was designed to be scalable and marginal impact to both
   administrators and users, and should be acceptable for use on a wide
   range of systems.  Of course, performance issues are very dependent
   on implementation details.

   _How does Greylisting work?_

   Greylisting works by leveraging the standard SMTP client design
   expectation to retry sending mail after an initial 4yz temporary
   rejection response is issued by the server.  When the greylisted
   recorded SMTP client reschedules and retries the same transaction,
   the GreyListing server will allow the greylisted recorded sender to
   continue with the transaction.

   While the idea of using an intentional 4yz rejection to force SMTP
   clients to retry sending mail would naturally be considered a radical
   concept for the IETF purist and most likely would not have been
   endorsed as an IETF standard protocol, the proof of concept has long
   been established as a very effective means to control certain types
   of malicious and abusive mail senders and today, Greylisting is a
   widely recognized mail filtering method and Greylisting SMTP Servers
   are widely implemented by many in the IETF mail community.

   _What sort of mail senders does Greylisting address?_

   By leveraging the SMTP retry expectation for clients, Greylisting is
   very effective against mail senders who anonymously and randomly



Santos & Harris          Expires April 26, 2012                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                  SMTPGREY                    October 2011


   perform a "Single Shot" mail sending attempt and will never repeat
   the same transaction after the sender has been initially rejected.
   The high payoff has been the nearly 100% of all mail senders behaving
   as "single shot" mail senders are abusive and/or malicious in nature.

   Greylisting can not address abusive mail senders using compliant SMTP
   mail clients.  However, it has been observed that many abusive mail
   senders will retry again and often immediately within a short time
   delay.  Hence, the Greylisting concept includes the idea of using a
   "Blocking Time" factor where a greylisted recorded mail sender is
   blocked for a certain time period.  Only when the blocking time has
   expired, will the GreyListing server finally allow the mail sender to
   continue with the transaction.

   _What sort of impact has Greylisting had with Mail Delivery?_

   Greylisting has been designed since its conception to satisfy certain
   criteria:

   o  Enforce SMTP compliance with expected SMTP retry strategies,

   o  Limit abusive mail senders ability to circumvent the blocking,

   o  Have minimal impact on users, and

   o  Require minimal maintenance at both the user and administrator
      level.

   The first immediate impact are the increasing delays in mail delivery
   due to the wide range in Greylisting blocking time values which can
   be seconds, minutes to hours.  Since SMTP has a standard
   recommendation to implement a Progressive Retry queuing strategy (see
   section 4.5.4.1 in RFC5321 [RFC5321]) where the first few attempts
   have short delays (i.e. two attempts within the first hour) with a
   progressive back off longer delay before the maximum attempts (i.e.
   over 4-5 days) are exhausted, there are increasing wasted attempts
   and foremost higher delays in delivering mail.  When a SMTP client
   implements an initial retry lower than the remote GreyListing Server
   blocking time, the SMTP client will have increasing wasted attempts
   overhead.  When the SMTP client implements an initial retry delay
   higher than the remote GreyListing Server blocking time, the SMTP
   client will have unnecessary wasted mail delays in delivering mail.

   With the increasing deployment of Greylisting mail servers, the
   second impact is such that even the SMTP server who does not employ
   Greylisting, will more than likely increasingly connect to a remote
   mail server that does employ Greylisting and will experience the
   temporary rejection overhead requiring additional mail sending



Santos & Harris          Expires April 26, 2012                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                  SMTPGREY                    October 2011


   retries.

   The third impact is that many GreyListing servers now use the
   rejection idea at the connection level using a 421 greeting response
   which may be a different retry condition than a 45z rejection
   response issued at the MAIL FROM or DATA state.  Since many MTA
   clients see a 421 as a possible loading limit, it may use this to
   immediately reschedule a retry using a different MX/IP host..

   Overall, Greylisting was designed to address the high abuse of
   "single shot" anonymous mail senders, however it was done at the
   expense of legitimate mail senders experiencing wasted mail attempts
   and increasing delivery delays and with improper GreyListing server
   and client settings, SMTP clients may now have to revisit their
   queuing strategies to address the Greylisting overhead related
   issues.

   This specification provides insights into preparing a low impact
   Greylisting Server by providing some recommendations for blocking
   delays and defining a formal structure GreyListing server to
   optionally include a suggested retry=time information in the server's
   4yz temporary text responses.

   This specification does not attempt to alter existing IETF standard
   SMTP and non-IETF standard Greylisting protocols other than to
   provide augmented Greylisting techniques to help alleviate the
   overhead associated with Greylisting in the client/server SMTP
   transport process.

   The Greylisting method specified in this document is a complementary
   method to any other existing mail filtering control systems, and is
   not intended as a replacement for those other methods.  In fact, it
   is expected that abusive mail senders will eventually try to minimize
   the effectiveness of this method of blocking, and Greylisting is
   designed to limit options available to the mail senders when
   attempting to do so.  The positive outcome of Greylisting is that the
   only methods of circumventing it will tend to make other mail
   filtering control techniques just that much more effective (primarily
   DNS and other methods of blacklisting based on IP address) even after
   any adaptation by the abusive mail senders has occurred.

1.2.  Document Conventions

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].





Santos & Harris          Expires April 26, 2012                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                  SMTPGREY                    October 2011


1.3.  Definitions and Acronyms

   MTA  Mail Transfer Agent.  Sender or Receiver of mail.  Generally
        viewed as a router within a MSA intra-network where there is a
        inherent authentication.


   MUA  Mail User Agent.  Online or offline mail reader/writer software.
        Typically has its own MTA component for sending mail.


   MSA  Mail Submission Agent.  Generally associated with a MUA sending
        message to a ISP or ESP where there is an authorized or
        authenticated association with the MUA.


   MDA  Mail Destination Agent.  Generally associated as the final
        destination of the message where the message is typically
        targeted for a local user.  If the MDA is going to route the
        mail, then its behaving more as a MSA or MTA.


1.4.  Out of Scope Considerations

   The following are out of scope considerations in this specification:

      o how Greylisting information is recorded in databases,

      o what additional mail information is recorded in databases beyond
      the Triplet recording, and

      o server reasons for an 4yz response outside a Greylisting reason,
      such as SMTP Traffic Control concepts.


2.  Greylisting Basic Framework

   The basic idea of GreyListing is:

   1.  MTA Client initiates a mail delivery attempt to a remote
       GreyListing compliant mail receiver (MDA),


   2.  The GreyListing Server collects first time session information
       about the sender such as connection IP, MAIL FROM and RCPT TO
       called the Triplet.





Santos & Harris          Expires April 26, 2012                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                  SMTPGREY                    October 2011


   3.  If the Triplet was never recorded before, the Triplet is recorded
       and a 4yz rejection server response with a recommended retry=time
       hint is issued where the time reflects the blocking time the
       sender can attempt again and proceed with the transaction.


   4.  If the Triplet was recorded, a check is performed to determine if
       the blocking time has expired.  If not, another 4yz rejection
       response with a new retry=time hint reflecting the new blocking
       time is issued.


   5.  When the sender tries again with the same recorded information
       after the blocking time has expired, then the sender has passed
       the server's greylist test and is allowed to proceed to send the
       mail.

   One of the essential goals of this specification is to reduce the
   network and communications overhead in sender attempts and to reduce
   mail delivery delays by implementing the server retry=time hints in
   the 4yz greylist responses.

2.1.  Recording Sender Information (Triplet)

   In the classic Greylisting protocol described in HARRIS [HARRIS], a
   Triplet is the unique combination of connection IP, the reverse
   address (MAIL FROM) and the forwarding address (RCPT TO) used to
   track the sender.  When the sender retries with the same triplet, a
   lookup can be perform to determine its Greylist status.  However,
   depending on the Greylist server implementation, it can reject at
   different points in the SMTP state machine and may not collect the
   entire triplet information.

   While it is out of scope how a SMTP session Triplet is collected and
   what SMTP session data points it contains, the key point is a
   specific Triplet used to track the MTA for an initial transaction
   attempt and subsequent retries in order to control it during the
   Greylisting Server blocking time.

   The following is an implementation example for triplet recording:

   Sender-Triplet = triplet-alg(CIP, RPATH, FPATH)

   where

   CIP          is the connection IP address of the client,
   RPATH        is the MAIL FROM reverse-address or domain,
   FPATH        is the RCPT TO forwarding address



Santos & Harris          Expires April 26, 2012                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                  SMTPGREY                    October 2011


   triplet-alg  is the algorithm used to generate a database tracking key

   One example of a triplet-alg is using a standard hashing algorithm as
   such SHA1 with BASE32 encoding.

      BASE64(SHA1(CIP, RPATH, FPATH))

   Other tracking methods such as index keys in SQL database tables are
   often common with Greylisting server implementations.  This
   specification does not define an formal triple-alg method.  Any SMTP
   data can be used as long as it represents Greylisting servers method
   for consistent tracking transactions , its initial rejection and
   subsequent acceptance with expected retries.

2.2.  SMTP Server Rejection Points

   Greylisting assumes a triplet recording (IP, FROM and TO), however a
   Greylisting server can reject at any point in the SMTP state machine
   by recording less information about the sender.  This specification
   hopes to assist the MTA to determine when a temporary rejection is
   greylist related apart from other reasons which can be a factor in
   how an MTA client will reschedule new attempts.

2.2.1.  Connection Greeting

   Many SMTP servers will use a 421 response during the greeting as a
   way to limit connections and control load.

   A GreyListing server deciding to greylist a client at the connection
   greeting MUST use a 421 reply code and SHOULD include a retry=time
   hint as part of the text response.

   The retry=time hint will help the MTA decide what sort of rejection
   was imposed by distinguishing between loading limit or greylist
   rejection.  Without the retry=hint, a MTA can try an alternative MX
   immediately (without delay) and the rejection may still occur.
   Including the retry=hint will assist the MTA to better reschedule the
   retry.

   A GreyListing Server rejecting at the connection level is recording
   only the connection IP to track the sender.

2.2.2.  MAIL FROM

   A GreyListing server deciding to greylist a client as a response to
   the MAIL FROM command SHOULD use a 451 reply code and SHOULD include
   a retry=time hint as part of the text response.  The retry=time hint
   will help the MTA decide when a new attempt should be attempted.



Santos & Harris          Expires April 26, 2012                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                  SMTPGREY                    October 2011


   A GreyListing Server rejecting at the MAIL FROM is recording the
   connection IP and MAIL FROM sender address.

2.2.3.  RCPT TO

   A GreyListing server deciding to greylist a client as a response to
   the RCPT TO command SHOULD use a 451 reply code and SHOULD include a
   retry=time hint as part of the text response.  The retry=time hint
   will help the MTA decide when a new attempt should be attempted.

   A GreyListing Server rejecting at the RCPT TO is recording the
   connection IP, MAIL FROM and RCPT TO addresses.

2.2.4.  DATA

   A GreyListing server deciding to greylist a client as a response to
   the DATA End of Data (EOD) SHOULD use a 451 reply code and SHOULD
   include a retry=time hint as part of the text response.  The
   retry=time hint will help the MTA decide when a new attempt should be
   attempted.

   Generally, a GreyListing server will allow the DATA command in order
   to capture the actual RFC5322 [RFC5322] message before a greylist
   response is issued.  The reasons are beyond the scope of this
   specification.

   A GreyListing Server rejecting at the DATA may be recording more
   information besides the triplet information, i.e.  Message-Id header.

2.3.  4yz Format Structure

   Many current Greylisting Servers use varying text responses with
   informal language try again time text information.  The following are
   known forms of existing Greylisting Servers which expose a form of
   time hints within the text response:

      421 This server implements greylisting, please try again in #
      seconds

      450 4.7.1 <RCPT>: Recipient address rejected: Greylisted for #
      minutes

      450 4.7.1 <RCPT>: Recipient address rejected: Greylisted for #
      seconds

      451 4.7.1 Greylisting in action, please come back in HH:MM:SS





Santos & Harris          Expires April 26, 2012                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft                  SMTPGREY                    October 2011


      451 Greylisted for # seconds

      451 Greylisted, please try again in # seconds

      451 Greylisting enabled, try again in # minutes

   It is possible for existing MTA clients currently supporting the
   parsing and extraction of the time factor with the known informal
   responses from existing Greylisting servers and this specification
   does not attempt to limit specific MTA client implementations which
   may already exist.

   This specification offers a formal structure the Greylisting Server
   MAY use within their 4yz responses and the MTA client MAY use to
   detect and extract the retry information consistently without error
   using a single format within the 4yz response containing the
   following structured "retry=" tag:

      retry=[DD-]HH:MM:SS

   The [DD-]HH:MM:SS part is the time delay the MTA SHOULD wait before
   attempting to send the mail again.  It is not a specific time of day,
   but rather the amount of GreyListing Server blocking time expected by
   the server before the client SHOULD try again.  An MTA client
   ignoring this information, attempting again before the blocking time
   has expired, is a wasted attempt and can delay the mail delivery well
   beyond the GreyListing server blocking time.

   In ABNF, GreyListing server response syntax is:

Reply-Line     = ( Reply-Code [ SP textstring [SP retrytime] ] CRLF ) /
                       ( Reply-Code "-" [ SP textstring ] CRLF
                         *( Reply-Code "-" [ SP textstring ] CRLF )
                         Reply-Code [ SP textstring [SP retrytime ] ] CRLF )

textstring     = 1*(%d09 / %d32-126) ; HT, SP, Printable US-ASCII

retrytime       =   "retry=" [days "-"] hours ":" minutes ":" seconds

days            =   2DIGIT   ; 00-99

hours           =   2DIGIT   ; 00-23

minutes         =   2DIGIT   ; 00-59

seconds         =   2DIGIT   ; 00-59

Reply-code     =  "421 / 450 / 451"



Santos & Harris          Expires April 26, 2012                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft                  SMTPGREY                    October 2011


   Examples:
Single line responses:

451 4.7.1. Greylist enabled. retry=00:02:00

451 Temporary rejection. retry=00:00:30

450 Temporary Greylist rejection. retry=01-00:10:00

451 retry=01:00:00 Try again at the suggested retry time.

421 Your connection is greylisted. Please try again later (retry=00:01:00)

Multiple lines response:

451-Greylisted. See policy http://example.com/GreyList-Policy
451 Retry=00:02:00

   The retrytime MUST be provided in the first and only line for a
   single line response or the last line for a multiple line response.

2.3.1.  421 vs 45z Reply Codes

   GreyListing Servers may issue 421 or 45z responses at any point in
   the SMTP session.  However, RFC5321 recommends 421 be used at the
   greeting and for server interruption events.  This specification
   recommends keeping with the SMTP RFC5321 recommendations for 421 and
   only use 45z for non-Greeting rejections responses.  All SMTP
   compliant MTA will always follow 4yz for scheduling a retry, but the
   difference is a 421 can trigger an immediate retry attempt without
   delay at the next MX IP address, if any, where a GreyListing server
   will most likely reject the new attempt due to the blocking time.

      IMPLEMENTATION NOTE: RFC5321 recommends a specific 450 reply code
      for temporary rejections related to local policy reasons.  HARRIS
      used 451 to make it distinctive as a greylist response.  This
      specification recommends using 450, however, it is recognized that
      many existing Greylisting servers already use 451 as the reply
      code.  MTA MUST NOT depend on 450 or 451 to make retry decisions.
      All 4yz responses MUST be interpreted as a temporary rejection.

   When the retry=time hint is implemented in the response, compliant
   MTA will be able to determine the difference between a load
   restriction and a greylisted rejection to appropriately reschedule a
   new attempt at the GreyListing server's suggested time hint.






Santos & Harris          Expires April 26, 2012                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft                  SMTPGREY                    October 2011


2.4.  Recommended Blocking Times

   This specification does not impose any specific blocking delay value
   when 4yz rejections are issues by servers, other than to suggest that
   timely delivery of mail to users remains to be an inherent
   expectation by SMTP clients and SMTP servers.

   The GreyListing server blocking times vary greatly in practice, but
   there is empirical evidence a majority of systems use a 1 to 5 minute
   delay.  Many use 10 minutes or 15 minutes.  Many use less than 1
   minute, like 30 to 55 seconds.  The latter tend to be systems who
   wish to lower impact with immediate and timely mail delivery delays.
   However, this can be wasteful attempts when the MTA is operating
   blindly with unknown blocking times imposed by Greylisting Servers.

   When it comes to a recommendation, there is no GreyListing logic to
   suggest that long delays be use when the goal of Greylisting senders
   is to address the anonymous random "single shot" senders where their
   triplet will never be the same.  Delaying good SMTP senders for
   extended unreasonable periods defeats the goal of Greylisting.

   Since there is no clear recommendation for a blocking time delay
   (other than to keep it short as possible), this specification offers
   the retry=time hint as a method to alleviate the uncertainty in the
   wasted attempts and delays in timely mail delivery.


3.  SMTP Service Keyword

   GREYLIST is a new ESMTP [RFC1651] service keyword.  The GreyListing
   Server MAY add this optional keyword as a response to EHLO command.
   EHLO response Format:

   250-GREYLIST [server-options]

   If the GREYLIST keyword is presented as part of the EHLO response, it
   means the server has Greylisting implemented and 4yz responses are
   possible due to a Greylist decision by the server to impose on the
   client.  The keyword is not necessary and the server can still
   provide 4yz temporary rejections.

   The optional server-options provides space separated attributes
   reflecting the server Greylisting information the server wishes to
   expose.  Currently the following optional attributes are defined:







Santos & Harris          Expires April 26, 2012                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft                  SMTPGREY                    October 2011


   RETRY  means that 4yz responses related to GreyListing will have
      retry=time information.  The attribute is optional and not
      required to issue 4yz responses with retry=time hints.

3.1.  SMTP Client/Server Implementation

3.1.1.  SMTP Server Implementation

   The SMTP server MAY add support for the GREYLIST keyword in the EHLO
   response.

   The SMTP Server MAY add "retry=" tag support to 4yz responses.

3.1.2.  SMTP Client Implementation

   The SMTP client MAY use the GREYLIST keyword exposed by the EHLO
   response.

   The SMTP client MAY support the usage of the "retry=" tag in 4yz
   responses and are not obligated to honor the SMTP servers recommended
   retry delay.


4.  Examples

   Example with no extended codes:

            S: serverdomain.com, welcome ESMTP v2.0
            C: EHLO mail.clientdomain.com
            S: 250-GREYLIST
            S: 250-HELP
            C: MAIL FROM:<jqpublic@emaildomain.com>
            S: 250 User OK
            C: RCPT TO:<localuser@serverdomain.com>
            S: 451 Greylisted. Please Disconnect now. retry=00:05:00
            C: QUIT
            S: 221 Goodbye

   Example with extended codes:












Santos & Harris          Expires April 26, 2012                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft                  SMTPGREY                    October 2011


         S: serverdomain.com, welcome ESMTP v2.0
         C: EHLO mail.clientdomain.com
         S: 250-ENHANCEDSTATUSCODES
         S: 250-GREYLIST
         S: 250-HELP
         C: MAIL FROM:<jqpublic@emaildomain.com>
         S: 250 2.1.0 User OK
         C: RCPT TO:<localuser@serverdomain.com>
         S: 450 4.7.1 Greylisted. Please Disconnect now. retry=2 minutes
         C: QUIT
         S: 221 Goodbye

   Example of connection rejection:

            S: 421 4.7.1 Greylist enabled. Try again later. retry=5 minutes


5.  IANA Considerations

   This document makes no request of IANA.

   Note to RFC Editor: this section may be removed on publication as an
   RFC.


6.  Security Considerations

   One possible security concern envisioned is a DoS attack when
   retry=time information is exposed by the GreyListing server where by
   a malicious sender may attempt to overwhelm the server during the
   server's retry time exposing a time window when the server has
   indicated system availability for mail acceptability.  However, since
   security measures to mitigate DoS is a required operational factor, a
   GreyListing Server will inherently be prepared for DoS attacks with
   managed loading limits with or without retry=time Greylist responses,
   thus there is no expected technical concern by exposing Greylist
   retry=time hints.  With or without this specification, all SMTP
   servers SHOULD be prepared for DoS attacks of all kinds.

   Another arguable security concern is related to the idea a formal
   SMTP extension can possibly lower the effectiveness of Greylisting
   when abusive mail senders adapt to the server's suggested retry
   times.  This concern does not seem to have weight since adaptation
   can occur with or without the extension simply by complying to SMTP
   retry recommendations.  Greylisting remains effective because legacy
   abusive systems do not adapt.  In fact, a retry=time hint
   implementation provides a means to help avoid abusive redundancy and
   reduced random overloading of connections at unmanaged random times



Santos & Harris          Expires April 26, 2012                [Page 14]

Internet-Draft                  SMTPGREY                    October 2011


   by MTA clients of all flavors.  A retry=time hint may actually be
   purposely calculated to provide a time window when there is less
   loading for legitimate and abusive senders.


7.  Acknowledgements

   The following individuals contributed input and guidance in the
   production of this specification:

      Tim Kehres, John Klensin, S. Moonesamy, Keith Moore, Paul Smith.

   Please note acknowledgement does not imply any specific endorsement
   of this specification other than they have provided important pros
   and cons input which helped mold the specification.


8.  References

8.1.  Normative References

   [RFC1651]  Klensin, J., Freed, N., Rose, M., Stefferud, E., and D.
              Crocker, "SMTP Service Extensions", RFC 1651, July 1994.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC3463]  Vaudreuil, G., "Enhanced Mail System Status Codes",
              RFC 3463, January 2003.

   [RFC4408]  Wong, M. and W. Schlitt, "Sender Policy Framework (SPF)
              for Authorizing Use of Domains in E-Mail, Version 1",
              RFC 4408, April 2006.

   [RFC4871]  Allman, E., Callas, J., Delany, M., Libbey, M., Fenton,
              J., and M. Thomas, "DomainKeys Identified Mail (DKIM)
              Signatures", RFC 4871, May 2007.

   [RFC5321]  Klensin, J., "Simple Mail Transfer Protocol", RFC 5321,
              October 2008.

   [RFC5322]  Resnick, P., Ed., "Internet Message Format", RFC 5322,
              October 2008.

8.2.  Informative References

   [HARRIS]   Harris, E., "The Next Step in the Spam Control War:
              Greylisting", 2003, <http://projects.puremagic.com/



Santos & Harris          Expires April 26, 2012                [Page 15]

Internet-Draft                  SMTPGREY                    October 2011


              greylisting/whitepaper.html>.


Appendix A.  Additional Greylist Parameters

   Greylisting Servers vary in ways which include what factors are used
   in tracking a sender and how accepted senders are temporarily or
   permanently white listed.

   Whitelist Record Expiration  Whitelist Record Expiration is used to
        allow a previous greylisted sender a time window where it can be
        temporarily or permanently whitelisted depending on the
        implementation.  This is a local policy consideration, however,
        it should be noted that redundant greylisting of a common MTA is
        not considered reasonable.  At some point, the MTA is a trusted
        source of mail and the MTA SHOULD be permanently whitelisted.
        The main idea with a temporary whitelisting is that its possible
        a future transaction can be a compromised user transaction.

   Class C IP Address Tracking  Class C IP Address Tracking allows a
        Greylisting server to control a greylisted MTA who retries using
        a different class C address.  This is typical in larger outbound
        farms where many machines are used to send mail.  If Class C is
        not considered, MTAs using a different IP will be unnecessarily
        rejected after delaying within a blocked time.


Appendix B.  Augmenting Other Standard Email Filters Methods

   It is possible for a GreyListing server to combine other mail
   filtering techniques, methods and session information to determine if
   a sender should be greylisted.  While the augmentation of these
   additional methods is out of the scope, the following are some
   suggestions that may help minimize a GreyListing Server impact. on
   MTAs.

   SPF  SPF (Sender Policy Framework) [RFC4408] can be used to help
        validate a sender's IP association with the return path domain.
        A SPF SOFTFAIL or FAIL (if not used for rejection) result could
        be used to help decide when Greylisting should be employed on
        the sender.  While a PASS result is not a trusted condition, a
        local policy may use a PASS to skip Greylisting mail checks.

   DKIM DKIM (Domain Key Identified Mail) [RFC4871] can be used to help
        authenticate the transactions from trusted DKIM mail signers.
        If the signer is considered is trusted source, this can help
        eliminate the need to greylist the sender.




Santos & Harris          Expires April 26, 2012                [Page 16]

Internet-Draft                  SMTPGREY                    October 2011


Appendix C.  TO DO LIST

   1.  Possible section showing real proof of concept examples.


   2.  Review the SMTP Service Keyword and determine how SHOULD|MAY|MUST
       is applied.


   3.  Address concerns the SMTP extension attempts to modifed RFC5321.

       There is no intent to do so - its an extension and its very
       nature, optional.  This extension could only alter a Greylisting
       Server implemenation for 4yz text responses which is out of scope
       in RFC5321 or the implementation for a MTA retry and queing
       method where the extact methods used are aleady out of scope in
       RFC5321.


Authors' Addresses

   Hector Santos (editor)
   Santronics Software, Inc.
   15600 SW 158 ST Suite #306
   Homestead, Florida, FL  33033
   United States of America

   Email: hsantos@santronics.com
   URI:   http://www.santronics.com


   Evan Harris
   puremagic.com


   Email: eharris@puremagic.com















Santos & Harris          Expires April 26, 2012                [Page 17]

