


IDR Working Group                                              R. Raszuk
Internet-Draft                                                   E. Chen
Intended status: Standards Track                           Cisco Systems
Expires: September 12, 2011                                  B. Decraene
                                                          France Telecom
                                                          March 11, 2011


                         BGP Diagnostic Message
                 draft-raszuk-bgp-diagnostic-message-02

Abstract

   BGP protocol lacks self diagnostic tools which would allow for
   monitoring and detection of any possible bgp state database
   differences between BGP_RIB_Out of the sender and BGP_RIB_In of the
   receiver over BGP peering session.  It also lacks of build in
   mechanism to inform peer about subset of prefixes received over
   session which experienced some errors and which per protocol
   specification either resulted in attribute drop or "treat-as-
   withdraw" action.

   The intention of this document is to start a new class of work which
   will make BGP protocol and therefor assuring services constructed
   with the help of BGP protocol to become much more reliable and
   robust.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 12, 2011.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.



Raszuk, et al.         Expires September 12, 2011               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft           bgp-diagnostic-message               March 2011


   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Applications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   3.  BGP diagnostic message . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     3.1.  BGP DIAGNOSTIC Message Encoding  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     3.2.  BGP DIAGNOSTIC Message TLVs  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
       3.2.1.  Operational TLVs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
       3.2.2.  BGP database counters exchange . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
       3.2.3.  Diagnostics for encoding errors in BGP messages  . . . 10
       3.2.4.  AFI/SAFI signaling when malformed update . . . . . . . 12
       3.2.5.  Prefix specific BGP debugging  . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
       3.2.6.  Intra-domain bgp decision monitoring . . . . . . . . . 14
       3.2.7.  Exchange of installed Route Target filters . . . . . . 15
   4.  Operation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   5.  Capability negotiation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   6.  Security considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
   7.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
   8.  Acknowledgments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
   9.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
     9.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
     9.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19

















Raszuk, et al.         Expires September 12, 2011               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft           bgp-diagnostic-message               March 2011


1.  Introduction

   In this document we will first define a new diagnostic communication
   channel in the form of new BGP message then construct the set of
   basic message encoding to be used for simple diagnostic self test
   routines periodically exchanged between BGP speakers.  We will also
   define set of other TLVs which can be very useful in precise
   description of prefixes affected by various cases of BGP session
   malfunctions.

   The goal of this document is to provide the background which will in
   turn allow for very easy extensibility once new needs and new BGP
   diagnostic ideas surface.


2.  Applications

   Authors would like to propose four main applications which BGP
   Diagnostic TLVs are designed to address.  New TLVs can be easily
   added to enhance further current applications or to propose new
   applications.

   The set of TLVs is organized in the following application groups:

      General TLVs used for operational purposes of the described
      mechanism.

      Set of TLVs designed to carry information about BGP state across
      BGP peers that include per neighbor counters and global counters.
      There are two modes this functionality can be used - on demand by
      explicit query as well as periodic in an automated mode.  The
      scope of messages is to be able to operate both on the iBGP as
      well as eBGP boundaries.  It is in the control of the operator to
      decide which set of information would be send to a given set of
      peers.

      Messages which operate in an automated push mode (as long as peer
      negotiated listen capability for them) and are designed to inform
      BGP peer on the list of impacted NLRIs which were received along
      with malformed attribute or within malformed update message.

      Following recommendation from MP-BGP4 RFC4760 next group of
      messages are used to indicate which AFI/SAFIs were disabled for
      any further processing by BGP peer due to detection of an
      incorrect attribute present in the BGP Update message.

      In number of troubleshooting efforts in real networks it is often
      very helpful to verify state of a given prefix in the neighboring



Raszuk, et al.         Expires September 12, 2011               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft           bgp-diagnostic-message               March 2011


      router's BGP database.  This is particularly useful on the EBGP
      boundaries where there is no CLI/SNMP access to the router.
      Authors define a new way of query peer's BGP for the state of
      particular prefix.

      Last set of messages is an attempt to allow for intra-domain
      better analysis of the BGP best path selection tie break
      decisions.


3.  BGP diagnostic message

   When defining any self test tool the critical element is to find a
   right separation balance between the test object and testing
   instruments.

   For the vast majority of real BGP issues found in the life production
   networks authors believe that the right balance is the definition of
   new BGP message which could be exchanged along with any negotiated
   AFI/SAFI between those BGP speakers which will during initial OPEN
   message exchange new BGP diagnostic message capability.

   The two extreme alternatives which were considered were the
   definition of new BGP attribute which may inherit and share potential
   issues of given BGP address family it is designed to diagnose and on
   the other extreme to build a separate and independent network
   diagnostic protocol.  The use of BGP message seems to provide
   sufficient isolation from any service address family and is much
   easier to deploy then enabling an entire new intra and inter-domain
   protocol.  Another very important issue with using any other protocol
   for detection of potential differences of BGP databases state is lack
   of synchronization with BGP UPDATE messages.  This alone in the
   continuously churning BGP environment would not allow for any
   benefit.

3.1.  BGP DIAGNOSTIC Message Encoding

   BGP message as defined in RFC 4271 consists of a fixed-size header
   followed by two octet length field and one octet of type value.  RFC
   4271 limits maximum message size to 4096 octets.  As one of the
   applications of BGP Diagnostic message is to be able to carry entire
   potentially malformed BGP message this specification extends the
   maximum size of BGP Diagnostic message to be always 128 octets bigger
   then any other BGP Message.  Considering the current RFC 4271 maximum
   BGP message size to be 4096 octets maximum size of BGP diagnostic
   message would be 4224 octets.

   For the purpose of diagnostic message information encoding we will



Raszuk, et al.         Expires September 12, 2011               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft           bgp-diagnostic-message               March 2011


   use one or more Type-Length-Value containers where each TLV will have
   the following format:



      0                   1                   2                   3
      0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
     +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
     |             Type              |             Length            |
     +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
     |                     Variable size TLV value                   |
     +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+


                  Figure 1: DIAGNOSTIC message TLV Format


   Type  -  2 octet value indicating the TLV type
   Length - 2 octet value indicating the TLV length in octets
   Value -  Variable length value field depending on the type of
            the TLVs carried.

   To work around continued BGP churn issue some types of TLVs will need
   to contain a sequence number to correlate request with associated to
   it replies.  The sequence number will consist of 8 octets and will be
   of form: 4 octet bgp_router_id + local 4 octet number.  When local 4
   octet number reaches 0xFFFF it should restart from 0x0000.

   Typical application scenario for use of sequence number is to include
   it in the diagnostic request message and during reply to copy it into
   reply messages triggered by such request message.

3.2.  BGP DIAGNOSTIC Message TLVs

   This document defines the following diagnostic TLV types:

   * Operational TLVs

   * BGP database counters exchange

   * Diagnostics for encoding errors in BGP messages

   * AFI/SAFI signaling when malformed update

   * Prefix specific BGP debugging

   * Intra-domain bgp decision monitoring




Raszuk, et al.         Expires September 12, 2011               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft           bgp-diagnostic-message               March 2011


   * Exchange of Route Target filters

   * Errors and warnings detected when validating BGP paths and prefixes

3.2.1.  Operational TLVs


   Type 1 - Diagnostic Message Periodic Request
   Length - 2 octets - variable value

     Value (N x 2 octets):
       TLV type - 2 octets

     Use: To indicate the request to periodically receive listed TLV
          information. TLV type of 0xFFFF indicates request to receive
          all available diagnostic TLVs from the peer.


   Type 2 - Max frequency permitted
   Length - 2 octets - variable value

     Value (N x 4 octets):
       TLV type - 2 octets
       Frequency value in seconds two octets 0..65535

       Special values:
         0 - never send given diagnostic TLV
         65535 - no TLV inter-gap minimum set

     Use: To indicate in seconds the maximum frequency given TLV
          may be periodically sent to the bgp speaker




















Raszuk, et al.         Expires September 12, 2011               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft           bgp-diagnostic-message               March 2011


   Type 3 - Diagnostic Message Query
   Length - 2 octets - variable value
   Sequence number - 8 octets

     Value (N x 2 octets):
       TLV type - 2 octets

     Use: To interactively (during debugging/troubleshooting) request
          to receive listed TLV information. TLV type of 0xFFFF
          indicates request to receive all available diagnostic TLVs
          from the peer. TLV of type 0x0000 indicates request to
          receive a list of all enabled and available diagnostic
          TLV types from the peer towards querying BGP speaker. The
          support of this TLV type is mandatory.



   Type 4 - Counter's reset request
   Length - 2 octets - variable value

     Value (N x 2 octets):
       TLV type - 2 octets - List of TLVs subject to counter's reset.

     Use: To request rest of per neighbor counters of a given TLV
          type. TLV type of 0xFFFF indicates request to zero all
              per neighbor counters.

























Raszuk, et al.         Expires September 12, 2011               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft           bgp-diagnostic-message               March 2011


   Type 5 - Not supported TLV reply
   Length - 2 octets - variable value

     Value (N x 3 octets):
       TLV type - 2 octets - TLV that is not supported by the peer
                  but where part of TLV Request or TLV Query message
       Error Code - 1 octet - Error code

           Error codes:

           0x01 - Wrong TLV value
           0x02 - TLV not supported for this peer
           0x03 - Max query frequency exceeded
           0x04 - Administratively disabled

     Use: To indicate to the peer that the TLV he has requeste
          either in TLV Request or in TLV Query message is not
          supported. The support of this TLV type is mandatory.


   Type 6 - Enabled and supported TLV types
   Length - 2 octets - variable value

     Value (N x 2 octets):
       TLV type - 2 octets - TLV that is enabled and supported
                             by the peer

     Use: To indicate to the peer that the enclosed list of TLVs
          can be requested either in TLV Request or in TLV Query
          messages. The support of this TLV type is mandatory.





















Raszuk, et al.         Expires September 12, 2011               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft           bgp-diagnostic-message               March 2011


3.2.2.  BGP database counters exchange


   Type 7 - Number of Reachable Prefixes Transmitted/Received
   Length - 2 octets - variable value
   Sequence number - 8 octets

     Value (N x 11 octets):
       AFI/SAFI - 3 octets
       Number of prefixes transmitted - 4 octets
       Number of prefixes received - 4 octets

     Use: To indicate number of reachable prefixes exchanged for
          a given AFI/SAFI between two bgp speakers. This message
          can be sent only based on the remote query Type 3 which
          contains the query sequence number to be placed in the
          reply.


   Type 8 - Number of prefixes in BGP_RIB_Out
   Length - 2 octets - variable value

     Value (N x 7 octets):
       AFI/SAFI - 3 octets
       Number of prefixes 4 octets

     Use: To indicate number of prefixes kept in BGP_RIB_Out between
          bgp speakers for a given AFI/SAFI between two bgp speakers.


   Type 9 - Number of paths in BGP_RIB_Out
   Length - 2 octets - variable value

     Value (N x 6 octets):
       AFI/SAFI - 3 octets
       Number of paths 4 octets

     Use: To indicate number of paths kept in BGP_RIB_Out between bgp
          speakers for a given AFI/SAFI between two bgp speakers.












Raszuk, et al.         Expires September 12, 2011               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft           bgp-diagnostic-message               March 2011


   Type 10 - Number of prefixes present in BGP_RIB
   Length - 2 octets - variable value

     Value (N x 6 octets):
       AFI/SAFI - 3 octets
       Number of prefixes 4 octets

     Use: To indicate number of prefixes kept in BGP RIB for a given
          AFI/SAFI.


   Type 11 - Number of paths present in BGP_RIB
   Length - 2 octets - variable value

     Value (N x 7 octets):
       AFI/SAFI - 3 octets
       Number of prefixes 4 octets

     Use: To indicate number of paths kept in BGP RIB for a given
          AFI/SAFI.

3.2.3.  Diagnostics for encoding errors in BGP messages


   Type 12 - Reachable prefixes present in dropped attribute UPDATE msg
   Length - 2 octets - variable value

     Value (N octets):
       AFI/SAFI - 3 octets
       1 .. M - List of prefixes

     Use: To list reachable prefixes present in the update message
          where optional transitive attribute with partial bit set
          was malformed and has been removed from the update message.
          Prefix encoding should follow given AFI/SAFI definition.
















Raszuk, et al.         Expires September 12, 2011              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft           bgp-diagnostic-message               March 2011


  Type 13 - Unreachable prefixes present in dropped attribute UPDATE msg
  Length - 2 octets - variable value

    Value (N octets):
      AFI/SAFI - 3 octets
      1 .. M - List of prefixes

    Use: To list unreachable prefixes present in the update message
         where optional transitive attribute with partial bit set
         was malformed and has been removed from the update message.
         Prefix encoding should follow given AFI/SAFI definition.


   Type 14 - Reachable prefixes present in malformed UPDATE msg
   Length - 2 octets - variable value

     Value (N octets):
       AFI/SAFI - 3 octets
       1 .. M - List of prefixes

     Use: To list reachable prefixes present in the malformed update
          message which were subject to "treat-as-withdraw" behaviour.
          Prefix encoding should follow given AFI/SAFI definition.



   Type 15 - Entire malformed update message enclosure
   Length - 2 octets - variable value
   Sequence number - 8 octets

     Value:
        Malformed message

     Use: Propagate the malformed message to the peer upon it's
          request or at the event of error detection. That includes
          propagation of messages which had malformed attribute,
          unparsable content or any other abnormal encoding. If more
          then a single message has been determined as malformed the
          subsequent replies will contain the same sequence number
          and should not be treated as an override.











Raszuk, et al.         Expires September 12, 2011              [Page 11]

Internet-Draft           bgp-diagnostic-message               March 2011


3.2.4.  AFI/SAFI signaling when malformed update


   Type 16 - List of ignored AFI/SAFIs by the peer over given session
   Length - 2 octets - variable value

     Value (N octets):
       1..M AFI/SAFI - 3 octets each

     Use: To list those AFI/SAFIs which were detected to be malformed
          by the peer and while session is up were transitioned to
          IGNORE state.

          Such case  is inline with Multiprotocol Extensions
          RFC 4760 as per it's section 7 Error Handling:

          "For the duration of the BGP session over which the UPDATE
           message was received, the speaker then SHOULD ignore all
           the subsequent routes with that AFI/SAFI received over
           that session".


3.2.5.  Prefix specific BGP debugging


   Type 17 - Prefix specific BGP query
   Length - 2 octets - variable value

     Value (N octets):
       AFI/SAFI - 3 octets
       Prefix under query
           Prefix mask (optional)

     Use: To query peer for the status of prefix under examination.
          When prefix mask is present the request is for exact match.
          When prefix mask is not present the request is for the
          longest match. Prefix encoding should follow given AFI/SAFI
          definition.













Raszuk, et al.         Expires September 12, 2011              [Page 12]

Internet-Draft           bgp-diagnostic-message               March 2011


   Type 18 - Prefix specific BGP response
   Length - 2 octets - variable value

     Value (N octets):
       AFI/SAFI - 3 octets
       Prefix under query
           Prefix mask (optional)
           Prefix status (1 octet)

         Status:
           0x01 - prefix not found in BGP table
           0x02 - prefix in BGP table and active (in FIB)
           0x03 - prefix in BGP table and not-active (not in FIB)
                   0x04 - administratively disabled

     Use: To inform peer querying about the status of particular
          prefix status. Prefix encoding should follow given AFI/SAFI
          definition.


   Type 19 - BGP attribute based prefix query
   Length - 2 octets - variable value

     Value (N octets):
       AFI/SAFI - 3 octets
           Query Parameters - 1 octet
       BGP Attribute TLV

       Defined Query Parameters:
         Bit 0 - value 0 - Exact match
         Bit 0 - value 1 - Partial match

     Use: To query peer for the list of prefixes which paths contain
          given BGP attribute. BGP attribute encoding should follow
              given attribute's specification.
















Raszuk, et al.         Expires September 12, 2011              [Page 13]

Internet-Draft           bgp-diagnostic-message               March 2011


   Type 20 - BGP attribute based prefix reply
   Length - 2 octets - variable value

     Value (N octets):
       AFI/SAFI - 3 octets
           Query Parameters - 1 octet
       1 .. M - List of prefixes

           Defined Query Parameters:
           Bit 0 - value 0  - Exact match
           Bit 0 - value 1  - Partial match

     Use: To inform bgp peer about presence of set of prefixes
          which contain with exact or partial match the BGP
          Attribute as specified in the query. Prefix encoding
          should follow given AFI/SAFI definition.

3.2.6.  Intra-domain bgp decision monitoring


   Type 21 - Number of IGP metric best path tie breaks executed
   Length - 2 octets - variable value

     Value (N x 7 octets):
       AFI/SAFI - 3 octets
       Number of tie breaks 4 octets

     Use: To indicate number of prefixes with their best path selected
          by tie break of IGP metric to their BGP next hop distance
          step of BGP best path selection algorithm.


   Type 22 - Number of BGP best path tie breaks in each selection step
   Length - 2 octets - variable value

     Value (N x 7 octets):
       AFI/SAFI - 3 octets
           Best path selection step N - Number of tie breaks 4 octets

     Use: To indicate number of cases where in BGP best path selection
          algorithm given step has been used as a tie break during
          overall best path selection process for a given prefix.









Raszuk, et al.         Expires September 12, 2011              [Page 14]

Internet-Draft           bgp-diagnostic-message               March 2011


3.2.7.  Exchange of installed Route Target filters


   Type 23 - Request for reception of route target filters
             installed towards given peer by RFC4684
   Length - 2 octets - variable value
   Sequence number - 8 octets

     Value (N x 7 octets):
       AFI/SAFI - 3 octets
       BGP Router ID of the peer - 4 octets

     Use: To request reception of full table of route target
          fiters installed towards listed BGP peer for a requested
          AFI/SAFI. Single request may contain multiple pairs of
          AFI/SAFIs and/or BGP Router IDs.


   Type 24 - Reply containing all route target filters installed
             towards given peer
   Length - 2 octets - variable value
   Sequence number - 8 octets

     Value (7 + N * 12 or 24 octets):
       AFI/SAFI - 3 octets
       BGP Router ID of the peer - 4 octets
           List of route targets - each 12 or 24 octets

     Use: Allows for troubleshooting purposes to share list of
          route targets installed for a given AFI/SAFI towards
          indicated BGP peer. In the event that RT filtering
          table size will not fit in single BGP Diagnostic
          Message reply the subsequent reply should include
          the same sequence number.


4.  Operation

   BGP implementation which supports DIAGNOSTIC message can support all
   or subset of defined diagnostic types.  The range of supported TLV
   types will be signaled in the new BGP capability message during BGP
   connection establishment phase.

   The operation of this extension can be realized on a pool/query based
   or push based principles.  An implementation may provide, a timer to
   periodically send selected Diagnostic types TLVs to the peer or to
   the management station.




Raszuk, et al.         Expires September 12, 2011              [Page 15]

Internet-Draft           bgp-diagnostic-message               March 2011


   Similarly BGP peer may periodically or by manual cli request the
   reception of selected or all of the defined diagnostic TLV types.

   The received values are then compared against local counters.  When
   discrepancy is found operator is alarmed and further analysis should
   follow.  The repair actions is out of scope of this document.

   Example:

   Under some situations when determined that the discrepancy is
   detected an automated or manual Route Refresh message can be
   triggered with it's extension for Start_of_Refresh and End_of_Refresh
   markers .  That would allow for purge of any stalled data across two
   BGP databases.

   An important point which needs to be discussed is the exchange of
   counter's values in light of continued BGP churn presence.  As BGP is
   never stable it is expected that any sort of described counters will
   also be subject to continues value change making any comparison of
   their values questionable.

   There are three classes of counters defined in this document: sent
   counters, received counters and current table state counters.

   Only "sent" counters can be used for not correlated comparison and
   problem detection between any two BGP speakers.  They are not subject
   to BGP churn issue due to the fact that DIAGNOSTIC messages would be
   exchanged inline with BGP UPDATE messages on a given session.  An
   implementation must be able to freeze the received counters when
   comparing or displaying the received "sent" counters from BGP peer.

   Received counters send in the Diagnostic messages are only meaningful
   in the context of explicit request trigger situation generated by the
   BGP speaker.  BGP speaker should stop transmitting any BGP message of
   a given AFI/SAFI or freeze corresponding counter after sending
   diagnostic message request to the peer and before reception of actual
   diagnostic message reply.  In order to correlate diagnostic message
   requests with associated replies use of build in sequence numbers is
   provided.

   Table state counters (for example number of BGP RIB entries) are
   exchanged only for informational reasons and they should not be
   subject to comparison with any local counter values.


5.  Capability negotiation

   A BGP speaker that is willing to send or receive the BGP DIAGNOSTIC



Raszuk, et al.         Expires September 12, 2011              [Page 16]

Internet-Draft           bgp-diagnostic-message               March 2011


   Messages from its peer should advertise the new DIAGNOSTIC Messages
   Capability to the peer using BGP Capabilities advertisement [BGP-
   CAP].  A BGP speaker may send a DIAGNOSTIC message to its peer only
   if it has received the DIAGNOSTIC message capability from its peer.

   The Capability Code for this capability is specified in the IANA
   Considerations section of this document.

   The Capability Length field of this capability is 2 octets.  The
   Capability Value field consists of reserved flags field.



                      +------------------------------+
                      | Capability Code (1 octet)    |
                      +------------------------------+
                      | Capability Length (1 octet)  |
                      +------------------------------+
                      |       Flags (2 octets)       |
                      +------------------------------+


            Figure 2: DIAGNOSTIC message BGP Capability Format


6.  Security considerations

   No new security issues are introduced to the BGP protocol by this
   specification.


7.  IANA Considerations

   IANA is requested to allocate a type code for the DIAGNOSTIC message
   from the BGP Message Types registry, as well as requesting a type
   code for the new Diagnostic Message Capability negotiation from BGP
   Capability Codes registry.

   This document requests IANA to define and maintain a new registry
   named: "DIAGNOSTIC Message Type Values".  The reserved types are:
   0x0000 0xFFFF.  The allocation policy is on a first come first served
   basis.

   This document makes the following assignments for the DIAGNOSTIC
   Message Type Values:






Raszuk, et al.         Expires September 12, 2011              [Page 17]

Internet-Draft           bgp-diagnostic-message               March 2011


    Type 1  - Diagnostic Message TLV(s) Request
    Type 2  - Max frequency permitted
    Type 3  - Diagnostic Message TLV(s) Query
    Type 4  - Counter's reset request
    Type 5  - Not supported TLV
    Type 6  - Enabled and supported TLV types

    Type 7  - Number of Reachable Prefixes Transmitted/Received
    Type 8  - Number of prefixes in BGP_RIB_Out
    Type 9  - Number of paths in BGP_RIB_Out
    Type 10 - Number of prefixes present in BGP_RIB
    Type 11 - Number of paths present in BGP_RIB

    Type 12 - Reachable prefixes present in dropped attribute message
    Type 13 - Unreachable prefixes present in dropped attribute message
    Type 14 - Reachable prefixes present in malformed UPDATE message
    Type 15 - Entire malformed update message enclosure

    Type 16 - List of ignored AFI/SAFIs by the peer over given session

    Type 17 - Prefix specific BGP query
    Type 18 - Prefix specific BGP response
    Type 19 - BGP attribute based prefix query
    Type 20 - BGP attribute based prefix reply

    Type 21 - Number of IGP metric best path tie breaks executed
    Type 22 - Number of BGP best path tie breaks in each selection step

    Type 23 - Request for reception of route target filters
    Type 24 - Reply containing all route target filters installed

    Type 25 - 65534 Free for future allocation.
    Type 65535 - Reserved



8.  Acknowledgments

   Authors would like to thank Alton Lo for his valuable input.


9.  References

9.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.




Raszuk, et al.         Expires September 12, 2011              [Page 18]

Internet-Draft           bgp-diagnostic-message               March 2011


   [RFC4271]  Rekhter, Y., Li, T., and S. Hares, "A Border Gateway
              Protocol 4 (BGP-4)", RFC 4271, January 2006.

   [RFC5492]  Scudder, J. and R. Chandra, "Capabilities Advertisement
              with BGP-4", RFC 5492, February 2009.

9.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.retana-bgp-security-state-diagnostic]
              Retana, A. and R. Raszuk, "BGP Security State Diagnostic
              Message", draft-retana-bgp-security-state-diagnostic-00
              (work in progress), March 2011.

   [I-D.shakir-idr-ops-reqs-for-bgp-error-handling]
              Shakir, R., "Operational Requirements for Enhanced Error
              Handling Behaviour in BGP-4",
              draft-shakir-idr-ops-reqs-for-bgp-error-handling-01 (work
              in progress), February 2011.


Authors' Addresses

   Robert Raszuk
   Cisco Systems
   170 West Tasman Drive
   San Jose, CA  95134
   US

   Email: raszuk@cisco.com


   Enke Chen
   Cisco Systems
   170 West Tasman Drive
   San Jose, CA  95134
   US

   Email: enkechen@cisco.com


   Bruno Decraene
   France Telecom
   38-40 rue du General Leclerc
   Issi Moulineaux cedex 9  92794
   France

   Email: bruno.decraene@orange-ftgroup.com




Raszuk, et al.         Expires September 12, 2011              [Page 19]

