



OSPF                                                          A. Smirnov
Internet-Draft                                                 A. Retana
Updates: 5786 (if approved)                                    M. Barnes
Intended status: Standards Track                     Cisco Systems, Inc.
Expires: April 19, 2014                                 October 16, 2013


OSPF Routing with Cross-Address Family MPLS Traffic Engineering Tunnels
                      draft-smirnov-ospf-xaf-te-00

Abstract

   When using Traffic Engineering (TE) in a dual-stack IPv4/IPv6 network
   the Multiprotocol Label Switching (MPLS) TE Label Switched Paths
   (LSP) infrastructure may be duplicated, even if the destination IPv4
   and IPv6 addresses belong to the same remote router.  In order to
   achieve an integrated MPLS TE LSP infrastructure, OSPF routes must be
   computed over MPLS TE tunnels created using information propagated in
   another OSPF instance.  This is solved by advertising cross-address
   family (X-AF) OSPF TE information.

   This document describes an update to RFC5786 that allows for the easy
   identification of a router's local X-AF IP addresses.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 19, 2014.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents



Smirnov, et al.          Expires April 19, 2014                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft     OSPF Routing with Cross-AF MPLS TE       October 2013


   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Requirements Language . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   3.  Operation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   4.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   5.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   6.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   7.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     7.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     7.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6

1.  Introduction

   TE Extensions to OSPFv2 [RFC3630] and to OSPFv3 [RFC5329] have been
   described to support intra-area TE in IPv4 and IPv6 networks,
   respectively.  In both cases the TE database provides a tight
   coupling between the routed protocol and TE signaling information in
   it.  In other words, any use of the TE link state database is limited
   to IPv4 for OSPFv2 [RFC2328] and IPv6 for OSPFv3 [RFC5340].

   In a dual stack network it may be desirable to set up common MPLS TE
   LSPs to carry traffic destined to addresses from different address
   families on a router.  The use of common LSPs eases potential
   scalability and management concerns by halving the number of LSPs in
   the network.  Besides, it allows operators to group traffic based on
   business characteristics and/or applications or class of service, not
   constrained by the network protocol which carries it.

   For example, an LSP created based on MPLS TE information propagated
   by OSPFv2 instance can be defined to carry both IPv4 and IPv6
   traffic, instead of having multiple LSPs one for each address family.
   Even if in some cases the address family-specific traffic is to be
   separated, the calculation from a common database may prove
   operationally beneficial.

   A requirement when creating a common MPLS TE infrastructure is the
   ability to reliably map the X-AF family addresses to the
   corresponding advertising tail-end router.  This mapping is a



Smirnov, et al.          Expires April 19, 2014                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft     OSPF Routing with Cross-AF MPLS TE       October 2013


   challenge because the LSAs containing the routing information are
   carried in one OSPF instance while the TE calculation may be done
   using a TE database from a different instance.

   A simple solution to this problem is to rely on the Router ID to
   identify a node in the corresponding OSPFv2 and OSPFv3 databases.
   This solution would mandate both instances on the same router to be
   configured with the same Router ID.  However, relying on the
   correctness of the configuration puts additional burden on network
   management and adds cost to the operation of the network.  The
   network becomes even more difficult to manage if OSPFv2 and OSPFv3
   topologies do not match exactly, for example if area borders are
   drawn differently in the two protocols.  Also, if the routing
   processes do fall out of sync (having different Router IDs, even if
   for local administrative reasons), there is no defined way for other
   routers to discover such misalignment and to take any corrective
   measures (such as to avoid routing through affected TE tunnels or
   issuing warning to network management).  The use of misaligned router
   IDs may result in delivering the traffic to the wrong tail-end
   router, which could lead to suboptimal routing or even traffic loops.

   This document describes an update to [RFC5786] that allows for the
   easy identification of a router's local X-AF IP addresses.  Routers
   using the Node Attribute TLV [RFC5786] can include non-TE enabled
   interface addresses in their OSPF TE advertisements, and also use the
   same sub-TLVs to carry X-AF information, facilitating the mapping
   mentioned above.

2.  Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].

3.  Operation

   [RFC5786] defined the Node IPv4 Local Address and Node IPv6 Local
   Address sub-TLVs of the Node Attribute TLV for a router to advertise
   additional local IPv4 and IPv6 addresses.  To solve the problem
   outlined in [RFC5786] OSPFv2 would advertise and use only IPv4
   addresses and OSPFv3 would advertise and use only IPv6 addresses.










Smirnov, et al.          Expires April 19, 2014                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft     OSPF Routing with Cross-AF MPLS TE       October 2013


   This document updates [RFC5786] so that a router can also announce
   one or more local X-AF addresses using the corresponding Local
   Address sub-TLV.  In other words, to implement the X-AF routing
   technique proposed in this document, OSPFv2 will advertise the Node
   IPv6 Local Address sub-TLV and OSPFv3 will advertise the Node IPv4
   Local Address sub-TLV, possibly in addition to advertising other IP
   addresses as documented by [RFC5786].

   A node that implements X-AF routing SHOULD advertise in the
   corresponding Node Local Address sub-TLV all X-AF IP addresses local
   to the router that can be used by Constrained SPF (CSPF) to calculate
   MPLS TE LSPs.  In general, OSPF SHOULD advertise the IP address
   listed in the Router Address TLV of the X-AF instance maintaining
   MPLS TE database plus any additional local addresses advertised by
   the X-AF OSPF instance in its Node Local Address sub-TLV.
   Implementation MAY advertise other local X-AF addresses.

   If the Node Attribute TLV carries both the Node IPv4 Local Address
   sub-TLV and the Node IPv6 Local Address sub-TLV, then the X-AF
   component must be considered for the consolidated calculation of MPLS
   TE LSPs.  Both instances may carry the required information, it is
   left to local configuration to determine which database is used.

   On Area Border Routers (ABR), each advertised X-AF IP address MUST be
   advertised into at most one area.  If OSPFv2 and OSPFv3 area borders
   match (i.e. for each interface area number for OSPFv2 and OSPFv3
   instances is numerically equal), then the X-AF addresses MUST be
   advertised into the same area in both instances.  This allows other
   ABRs connected to the same set of areas to know with which area to
   associate MPLS TE tunnels.

   For example, suppose the OSPFv2 instance on a router is used for MPLS
   TE calculation and the OSPFv3 instance will use those LSPs for X-AF
   routing.  Further suppose that OSPFv2 advertises IPv4 address 1.1.1.1
   in Router Address TLV (plus other Traffic Engineering TLVs as
   required by [RFC3630]), and additional local IPv4 addresses 1.1.1.2
   and 1.1.1.3 in the Node IPv4 Local Address sub-TLV as described in
   [RFC5786].  For X-AF routing, the OSPFv3 instance will advertise the
   Node IPv4 Local Address sub-TLV listing the local IPv4 addresses
   1.1.1.1, 1.1.1.2 and 1.1.1.3.

   During the X-AF routing calculation, X-AF IP addresses are used to
   map locally created LSPs to tail-end routers in the LSDB.  The
   mapping algorithm can be described as:

      Walk the list of all MPLS TE tunnels for which the computing
      router is a head-end.  For each MPLS TE tunnel T:




Smirnov, et al.          Expires April 19, 2014                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft     OSPF Routing with Cross-AF MPLS TE       October 2013


   1.  If T's destination IP address is from the same address family as
       the computing OSPF instance, then the tunnel must have been
       signaled based on MPLS TE information propagated in the same OSPF
       instance.  Process the tunnel as per [RFC3630] or [RFC5329].

   2.  Otherwise it is a X-AF MPLS TE tunnel.  Note tunnel's destination
       IP address.

   3.  Walk the X-AF IP addresses in the LSDBs of all connected areas.
       If a matching IP address is found, advertised by router R in area
       A, then mark the tunnel T as belonging to area A and terminating
       on tail-end router R. Assign an intra-area SPF cost to reach
       router R within area A as the IGP cost of tunnel T.

   After completing this calculation, each TE tunnel is associated with
   an area and tail-end router in terms of the routing LSDB of the
   computing OSPF instance and has a metric.

   Note that for clarity of description the mapping algorithm is
   specified as a single calculation.  Actual implementations for the
   efficiency may choose to support equivalent mapping functionality
   without implementing the algorithm exactly as it is described.

4.  Security Considerations

   This document introduces no new security concerns to OSPF or other
   specifications referenced in this document as the use of the
   extensions is the only update specified.

5.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no IANA actions.

6.  Acknowledgements

   The authors would like to thank Peter Psenak and Eric Osborne for
   early discussions.

   We would also like to thank the authors of RFC5786 for laying down
   the foundation for this work.

7.  References









Smirnov, et al.          Expires April 19, 2014                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft     OSPF Routing with Cross-AF MPLS TE       October 2013


7.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC5786]  Aggarwal, R. and K. Kompella, "Advertising a Router's
              Local Addresses in OSPF Traffic Engineering (TE)
              Extensions", RFC 5786, March 2010.

7.2.  Informative References

   [RFC2328]  Moy, J., "OSPF Version 2", STD 54, RFC 2328, April 1998.

   [RFC3630]  Katz, D., Kompella, K., and D. Yeung, "Traffic Engineering
              (TE) Extensions to OSPF Version 2", RFC 3630, September
              2003.

   [RFC5329]  Ishiguro, K., Manral, V., Davey, A., and A. Lindem,
              "Traffic Engineering Extensions to OSPF Version 3", RFC
              5329, September 2008.

   [RFC5340]  Coltun, R., Ferguson, D., Moy, J., and A. Lindem, "OSPF
              for IPv6", RFC 5340, July 2008.

Authors' Addresses

   Anton Smirnov
   Cisco Systems, Inc.
   De kleetlaan 6a
   Diegem  1831
   Belgium

   Email: as@cisco.com


   Alvaro Retana
   Cisco Systems, Inc.
   7025 Kit Creek Rd.
   Research Triangle Park, NC  27709
   USA

   Email: aretana@cisco.com









Smirnov, et al.          Expires April 19, 2014                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft     OSPF Routing with Cross-AF MPLS TE       October 2013


   Michael Barnes
   Cisco Systems, Inc.
   510 McCarthy Blvd.
   Milpitas, CA  95035
   USA

   Email: mjbarnes@cisco.com












































Smirnov, et al.          Expires April 19, 2014                 [Page 7]
