


Network Working Group                                     E. Davies, Ed.
Internet-Draft                                          Folly Consulting
Expires: April 19, 2006                                 October 16, 2005


            Goals and Principles for IETF Process Evolution
              draft-davies-pesci-initial-considerations-00

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 19, 2006.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).

Abstract

   This document identifies a set of goals and principles for the next
   stages in revising and updating the Internet Engineering Task Force
   (IETF) process for developing standards and other specifications.  It
   does not propose specific changes to the process, which should be the
   subject of future documents.  It suggests a strawman for the way in
   which process changes could be specified and identifies some initial
   target areas for process change.





Davies                   Expires April 19, 2006                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft              PESCI Principles                October 2005


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.1.  Principles, Policy, Process and Procedure  . . . . . . . .  3
     1.2.  About This Document  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.  Background reading . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Short problem analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   4.  High Level Goals and Principles of IETF Process Change . . . .  7
     4.1.  Goals  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
       4.1.1.  Desired Outcomes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
       4.1.2.  Change Management Guidelines . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     4.2.  Principles to be Considered  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
       4.2.1.  Development and Authorisation of the Changed
               Processes  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
       4.2.2.  The Content of the Changed Processes . . . . . . . . . 10
       4.2.3.  Management and Leadership in the Changed Processes . . 10
       4.2.4.  Individual Participants  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
       4.2.5.  Protocol Parameter Assignments . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
       4.2.6.  Areas  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
       4.2.7.  Working Groups . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
       4.2.8.  Extended Review  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   5.  The Arena for Change . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     5.1.  Components Not Considered for Major Change in this
           Document . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     5.2.  Components Considered for Major Change in the Document . . 15
   6.  Next Steps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
     6.1.  Change Process Proposal  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
     6.2.  Immediate Tasks for the Change Process . . . . . . . . . . 19
   7.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
   8.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
   9.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
   10. Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
   Appendix A.  Raw principles  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
     A.1.  General  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
     A.2.  Management and Leadership  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
     A.3.  Documents (may change after techspec BOF)  . . . . . . . . 23
     A.4.  Intellectual Property  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
     A.5.  Protocol Parameter Assignments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
     A.6.  Working Groups . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
     A.7.  Other  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
   Appendix B.  PESCI Announcement  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
   Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 28








Davies                   Expires April 19, 2006                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft              PESCI Principles                October 2005


1.  Introduction

   This document identifies a set of goals and principles for the next
   stages in revising and updating the Internet Engineering Task Force
   (IETF) process for developing standards and other specifications.  It
   does not propose specific changes to the process, which should be the
   subject of future documents.  It does, however, suggest a strawman
   for the way in which the process changes could be specified and
   identifies some areas of current IETF process that appear to be the
   most urgently in need of improvement in the light of problems
   previously identified.  It has been produced by a design team
   selected by the IETF Chair and is submitted to the IETF community for
   discussion, modification, and hopefully approval.

   The IETF almost continually debates its own process and this is in
   many ways a healthy sign of its openness.  However, the debate is
   often inconclusive.  This document attempts to set the scene for
   focused work to change only those specific aspects of the IETF
   process that need change, by identifying goals and principles that
   can be expressed simply and can potentially reach consensus in the
   community.

1.1.  Principles, Policy, Process and Procedure

   Before going on to discuss process change we should be clear about
   what we mean by "process", and some of the other "P" words which will
   be used in the document.

   Principles  A set of statements that sets out how the IETF will
               approach its work and carry out its mission.
               Collectively they set the organization's ethos.  These
               include such things as requiring that development of
               documents and organizational matters are as far as
               possible open and "rough consensus and running code" as
               an operating principle.  This document attempts to
               capture a large subset of these principles relevant to
               the issue of process changes (see Section 4.2).

   Policy      An agreement on what the IETF sets out to accomplish.  At
               the highest level this is incorporated in the IETF
               Mission Statement[RFC3935].  This is refined in the
               "constitutions" (usually known as "charters" in the IETF)
               for the various component bodies which provide the
               organisation of the IETF (listed in Section 2), but these
               documents are not confined to policy matters.  Overall
               IETF policy and the constitutions of the bodies are
               adopted by establishing strong IETF consensus.




Davies                   Expires April 19, 2006                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft              PESCI Principles                October 2005


   Process     Descriptions of the methods and mechanisms by which the
               IETF works.  These must be visible to all the IETF
               participants; core pieces of the existing process are
               contained in the IESG charter and the IAB charter
               together with the definition of the IETF Standards Track
               in [RFC2026].  Additions or modifications to IETF
               processes are verified by establishing an IETF (rough)
               consensus, but normally, the specification of the process
               should be developed under the aegis of the body or bodies
               that will oversee the operation of the process.

               The process category covers area descriptions, large
               proportions of the material in RFC2026 and the mechanisms
               used to handle Intellectual Property Rights (IPR)
               disclosures [RFC3979], as well as (for instance) the IAB
               document on liaisons [RFC4053].

   Procedures  The "nuts and bolts" of the execution of the process.
               The I-D tracker, the tools team work, the liaison
               statements document - even the IPR trust agreement -
               belong in this category.

               Procedures are normally developed by the people doing the
               work, and documented and published as these bodies feel
               it appropriate.

1.2.  About This Document

   This document was produced by the PESCI design team selected by the
   IETF Chair and is submitted to the IETF community for discussion,
   modification, and hopefully expeditious approval.  PESCI stands for
   Process Evolution Committee of the IETF and is in the IETF's naming
   tradition as a successor of the earlier POISSON working group.  The
   membership of the design team is listed in the Acknowledgements and
   the original announcement of PESCI is given as an Appendix.  PESCI
   has no special status in the IETF process; it is simply the group of
   people who produced this document under the leadership of the IETF
   Chair.

   Discussion of this draft is welcomed on the pesci-discuss@ietf.org
   list (join via https://www1.ietf.org/mailman/listinfo/pesci-discuss).


2.  Background reading

   The primary objective of the IETF process is to support the IETF
   Mission Statement, [RFC3935].  Readers should be familiar with that
   document.



Davies                   Expires April 19, 2006                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft              PESCI Principles                October 2005


   The early phase of the current round of process discussions led to a
   problem statement [RFC3774].  A general overview of current and draft
   process documents can be found in [I-D.carpenter-procdoc-roadmap].
   At the time of writing, two process related working groups exist:
   newtrk (New IETF Standards Track Discussion) and ipr (Intellectual
   Property Rights).  Their charters, mailing lists, etc., may be found
   via http://www.ietf.org/html.charters/wg-dir.html#General%20Area.

   The organisations involved in the IETF standards process are
   discussed in [RFC2028].  Information about the constitutions,
   purposes, and policy of the main IETF bodies involved in these
   processes can be found in:
   o  The Internet Architecture Board(IAB) Charter[RFC2850]
   o  The Internet Engineering Steering Group (IESG) Charter[RFC3710]
   o  The Nominating and Recall Committee (NOMCOM)[RFC3777]
   o  Request For Comments (RFC) Editor: See the RFC Editor web pages
      including RFC Editor Purpose description
      (http://www.rfc-editor.org/DOCUMENTS/purpose.html) and some
      procedures in [RFC3932]
   o  The memorandum of understanding under which the Internet Assigned
      Numbers Authority (IANA)) operates is in [RFC2860]; the processes
      and procedures as they affect IETF relationships to IANA are
      currently under discussion and will be the subject of the
      "techspec" BOF in November 2005 (see Section 3).
   o  The mission of the Internet Research Task Force (IRTF) is
      described on its web page (http://www.irtf.org/), and the policies
      and procedures for the IRTF are in [RFC2014]
   o  Liaisons with external bodies are conducted through the IAB (see
      [RFC4052] and [RFC4053])

   In the last two years or so, a major effort has been made to update
   the IETF's administrative structure, creating the IAOC, the IETF
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA), and appointing the IETF
   Administrative Director (IAD) (see [RFC4071] for details of these
   bodies).  This should not be confused with process change, although
   its goal is to improve support for the process.  Additionally, the
   former and present IETF Chairs, and the IESG have taken steps to
   improve procedures and their transparency.  The Tools team and the
   Education team are busy, many improvements have been made in details
   of IESG document processing and shepherding, and the IESG has made a
   number of efforts to improve the transparency of its discussions.
   Such efforts are valuable, but orthogonal to process change as such.
   However, they are part of the response to the problem statement
   [RFC3774].


3.  Short problem analysis




Davies                   Expires April 19, 2006                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft              PESCI Principles                October 2005


   The PESCI team reviewed earlier [RFC3774] and recent discussion of
   IETF process problems.  This generated the following list of problems
   that seem to affect the development of standards and other
   specifications (following the remit of the design team described in
   Section 1) and that appear to be potentially soluble.

   1.  Timeliness of IETF output
   2.  Lack of clarity about authority and delegation
   3.  Variable quality of output from WGs
       *  At least 30% of drafts attract IESG "DISCUSS" comments even
          after IETF Last Call.
       *  Unsolved issue of adequate cross-area review earlier in the
          process.
   4.  IESG overload, which leads to subsidiary problems
       *  bottleneck effect
       *  too little steering
       *  perception issues and them/us mentality
       *  burnout
       *  potential lack of candidates
   5.  Lack of a "career path" for IESG members - "dropped in,
       overworked and chopped off"
       *  there is no form of apprenticeship for Area Directors (ADs)
       *  ADs are trained "on the job" leading to lower effectiveness
          early in their terms
       *  lack of any sort of formal recognition or role for "emeritus"
          ADs
       *  potential to loose both experience and capability of ex-ADs
   6.  Binary nature of appeal/recall process
       *  there is a disincentive to "go nuclear" leading to festering
          problems
       *  appeals are very time consuming for IESG (and maybe also for
          IAB)
       *  the IESG judge and jury problem for process issues
   7.  Difficulties which the IETF has in dealing with complex problems
       (architectural issues are hard to handle in the current IESG/
       area/working group structure)
   8.  Failures to follow through on the standards advancement process,
       generally poor maintenance of standards and slow progress of
       standards
       Newtrk issues are in scope for the process change but we should
       allow Newtrk to work - there maybe some opportunities to provide
       input to newtrk through the principles we propose here.
   9.  Authority and decision mechanisms for parameter assignments (IANA
       considerations)

   Issues that are to be considered under the "techspec" banner are out
   of scope for PESCI.  The scope of techspec includes resolving
   concerns regarding lack of visibility into RFC Editor state, copy-



Davies                   Expires April 19, 2006                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft              PESCI Principles                October 2005


   editing, and excessive author changes in AUTH48.  There is to be a
   techspec BOF at IETF 64 in Vancouver. (see discussion list archive at
   http://www1.ietf.org/mail-archive/web/techspec/current/).

   IPR issues have their own WG (ipr) and have been thoroughly reviewed.


4.  High Level Goals and Principles of IETF Process Change

   This section lists specific goals and principles of changing the IETF
   process for developing standards and other specifications.  An effort
   has been made to write these very briefly and in self-explanatory
   words.  Many existing documents, including [RFC3774] and those cited
   in [I-D.carpenter-procdoc-roadmap], have been consulted, as well as
   recent mailing list discussions and private communications.

   In this section the team has concentrated on goals and principles
   that specifically concern change to the process.  However, in some
   cases this is hard to do (for example, when it seems that a basic
   principle is only partly implemented by today's process).  The team
   expects more refinement and tighter focus in this section as a result
   of community discussion.

4.1.  Goals

   Goals for changing the IETF processes can be separated into
   o  targets for the end point of the change ( Section 4.1.1), and
   o  guidelines that should be followed during the creation of the new
      processes and the transition needed to put the approved processes
      into use (Section 4.1.2).

4.1.1.  Desired Outcomes

   G1. Identify and document improvements and additions to the existing
       processes for developing standards and other specifications to
       enable the IETF to be more effective and efficient in the
       performance of its mission.

       To this end, define and document processes which will:
       1.  Provide an environment in which the mission of the IETF can
           be carried out efficiently and effectively including, but not
           limited to, provision of tools, communication mechanisms and
           meetings that will take the mission forwards.
       2.  Deliver, in a timely manner, a set of accurate, consistent,
           usable, maintainable, coordinated, and relevant documents
           that describe





Davies                   Expires April 19, 2006                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft              PESCI Principles                October 2005


           +  the architectural principles of the Internet
           +  the protocols over which the IETF asserts ownership
           +  additions and extensions developed within the IETF for
              protocols not owned by the IETF
           +  any necessary supporting information and practices.
       3.  React in a timely fashion to events from internal and
           external sources that affect the Internet as a whole and the
           document development process.
       4.  Maintain the quality of IETF output both initially and over
           the entire lifetime of a protocol.
       5.  Deliver visibility of the process to all participants,
           together with adequate protections against abuse of the
           process by any participant.
       6.  Maintain metrics which will allow the efficiency and
           effectiveness of the processes to be monitored.
       7.  Provide effective coordination between the various component
           structures defined by the process (such as the current IAB
           and the IESG) and the individual participants in the IETF.
       8.  Provide a transition path and continuity in the process of
           change, both as regards the processes themselves and the
           protocols owned.

4.1.2.  Change Management Guidelines

   When designing new processes, it should be borne in mind that process
   changes that require major structural changes within the IETF may
   have wide-scale impact on the operation of the IETF: evolutionary
   change may be more effective than revolutionary change.
   G2.  Preserve those parts of the process that work reasonably well
        today, unless they block other necessary changes.
   G3.  Make changes that seem certain to improve those parts of the
        process that work less well.
   G4.  Changes to processes should err towards the maintenance of
        stability.
   G5.  Avoid changes that would require unrealistic resources or
        behaviours.
   G6.  Protect the continuity of ongoing IETF work.
   G7.  As far as possible, minimize simultaneous changes that may
        interfere with each other.
   G8.  Avoid "thrashing" by repeated changes in the same area.
   G9.  Try to explicitly estimate the impact of changes before making
        them, and try to measure whether the expectations were met after
        making the change.
   G10. Acknowledge that some refinement of the initial proposals may be
        needed after trials.  To this end try to work expeditiously to
        provide a nearly right solution that delivers most of the gains
        rather than refining the solutions endlessly before any
        implementation (in line with the IETF's usual way of developing



Davies                   Expires April 19, 2006                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft              PESCI Principles                October 2005


        standards).

4.2.  Principles to be Considered

   When developing, approving and implementing the changes to IETF
   standards development processes there are a number of principles that
   should be borne in mind.  In developing the set of principles listed
   in this section the design team took into account a much longer list
   of "raw principles" (currently in Appendix A) .  This work tries to
   abstract from this data the true principles that should be taken into
   account.  However we would urge both the community and the developers
   of the changed processes to look critically at these "principles",
   but accept that perfection is impossible (_rough_ consensus is the
   aim):
   o  If good and sufficient reason to reject or modify any of them can
      be found, such change should not be a taboo subject.
   o  The principles, except for those in Section 4.2.1, provide
      guidance not constraints or requirements: it is up to the
      developers of the changed processes and the community to decide
      _how_ these principles should affect the change process or be
      enshrined in the resulting changed processes.
   o  Each principle will be applicable to only a part of the process
      changes: if a principle is applicable to some part of the process
      changes, the aim should be improvement along the dimension given
      by the principle.  Aiming for completeness or perfection in one
      cut, even on a single principle, is likely to seriously delay
      design of the changed processes.
   We have endeavoured to keep any element of "solutionism" out of these
   principles.

4.2.1.  Development and Authorisation of the Changed Processes

   This group of principles deals with how any proposed changes to the
   IETF processes for developing standards and other specifications
   should be developed and authorized by the IETF community.  These
   principles appear to be required by our current process, and similar
   principles should be true of any future process.

   P1. Changes to the IETF process must themselves be agreed by an open
       process approved by the IETF community.
   P2. The process for developing and agreeing these changed processes
       must itself be the subject of IETF rough consensus.
   P3. The development process must incorporate taking advice from
       *  the IESG, the IAB, the IAOC, and the Working Group chairs
       *  legal advisors






Davies                   Expires April 19, 2006                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft              PESCI Principles                October 2005


   P4. When the proposed changes have been fully documented, "buy-in" or
       more formal assent to the changed processes needs to be obtained
       as follows:
       *  Any negative comments from the Working Group chairs must be
          seriously considered.
       *  Formal consent must be obtained from the IESG, the IAB, and
          the IAOC.
       *  Acceptance must be obtained from the ISOC board.
   P5. The development and authorisation of the changed processes must
       ensure that the IESG is not required itself to develop the new
       processes.
   P6. The revised process should be documented in a new set of coherent
       and comprehensive documents, rather than updates to the existing
       ad hoc set.

4.2.2.  The Content of the Changed Processes

   This section contains principles relating to what should and should
   not be in the revised processes.  A minimalist approach is taken to
   give the authors of change maximum freedom to do the right thing.

   P7.  New process rules should be flexible enough to allow unusual
        cases to be handled according to common sense.
   P8.  Parts of the existing process that have proved impractical
        should be improved or removed.
   P9.  The number of steps in the document approval process must be
        kept to a minimum subject to adequate review and approval being
        carried out.
   P10. Document quality criteria, decision criteria, and procedures
        that support the process should be publicly documented.
   P11. A complete complaints, conciliation, and appeals process for
        each decision process should be documented.

4.2.3.  Management and Leadership in the Changed Processes

   The IETF prides itself on being a technically led organization (i.e.,
   our leaders are primarily technologists, rather than managers) with
   open processes which can, whenever possible, be challenged by
   participants if they feel there has been a miscarriage.  This is a
   major part of the IETF ethos and altering it would change the IETF
   fundamentally.  However, if the standards development process is to
   be effective, people, process, and technical management skills are
   also required.  Finding enough technically skilled participants, who
   also have these management skills, to populate the leadership
   positions is challenging.  At present the management of the standards
   development process is mostly carried out by WG chairs under the
   supervision of ADs with the members of the IAB primarily in the role
   of technical consultants and policy setters.  The cadre of ADs is



Davies                   Expires April 19, 2006                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft              PESCI Principles                October 2005


   relatively small and the work that they do is so different in
   character from that of WG chairs that it is difficult for
   participants to acquire the skills needed for the AD task other than
   by doing it: this can make new ADs relatively inefficient.

   P12. All decisions are subject to appeal using the procedures
        documented in the processes.
   P13. Management and leadership of the standards process should be
        predominantly carried out by people who are technically
        competent in the area in which they are leading, and the
        processes should ensure that people in leadership positions
        remain knowledgeable about the state of the art (and beyond) in
        their areas of responsibility.  At the highest levels, overall
        architectural awareness of the Internet become at least as
        important as technical expertise in a particular speciality.
   P14. The processes should ensure that it is possible for IETF
        participants to acquire or hone the particular skills needed for
        management and leadership positions in the IETF before taking on
        these positions, for example by forms of apprenticeship.  "On
        the job" training is valuable but we should try to give it in
        such a way that leaders are as productive as possible as soon as
        they are appointed.
   P15. The processes should seek to give opportunities to as many
        people as possible to participate in management of the process
        outside the narrow technical confines of a single working group,
        in order to increase the pool of people available for choosing
        leaders.
   P16. The processes should ensure that, so far as is possible, the
        pool of skills and experience developed by those in leadership
        and management positions remains available to the IETF and
        continues to be seen to be valued whilst giving these leaders a
        period to refresh their skill in the technical arena.
   P17. Selection of IETF leaders and managers should be by a competence
        based process which is, subject to the needs of individual
        confidentiality, open and independently verifiable.
   P18. Leadership positions should be defined such that the workload is
        compatible with other employment and personal life.  Very few
        leadership positions should require effective full time work.
   P19. The amount of work needed to select the IETF leaders and
        managers should not be disproportionate.  To this end the number
        of posts involved should not be allowed to grow without limit
        and the size of the selection panel should be constrained.

4.2.4.  Individual Participants

   The IETF is extremely unusual in that it has no formal membership.
   Participants are self-selecting and involvement is by the
   individual's choice.  There is no formal mechanism for outside



Davies                   Expires April 19, 2006                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft              PESCI Principles                October 2005


   corporate entities to affect IETF decisions, although there are
   arrangements for exchange of "liaisons" with other recognised
   standardisation organisations.

   P20. IETF processes should make it as easy as possible for
        individuals to participate fully in standards development work
        with no discrimination on the basis of race, religion,
        nationality, country of residence, gender, sexual orientation or
        disability.
   P21. Official IETF work is carried out exclusively in the English
        language.
   P22. Individual participants need not physically attend any meetings
        to participate in standards development work.

4.2.5.  Protocol Parameter Assignments

   This section contains principles which relate to the way in which
   IANA registries are established and the processes by which additional
   values can be registered.

   P23. The IETF functions of the IANA must be under IETF control.

4.2.6.  Areas

   Areas have become a fundamental structuring mechanism for IETF work
   since the Kobe reorganization.  Area Directors (ADs) are at the
   moment the central focus of management and technical expertise in the
   IETF.

   P24. The IETF needs a wide breadth of expertise in its participants
        and those who supervise its processes.  Providing a number of
        more concentrated foci for that expertise (which might be called
        "specialities") allows participants to discuss their interests
        with like minded people.
   P25. Besides experts in particular areas, it is important that the
        IETF also takes an architectural view and encourages
        participants who are able to work at the overall architectural
        level both to direct the standards development work in the IESG
        ambit; and to set technical guidelines internally, monitor
        technical developments in the research and commercial world out
        side the IETF and interact with external groups.
   P26. Areas must not become isolated "silos" in which work is carried
        out in isolation from other specialities.

4.2.7.  Working Groups

   The chartered Working Group (WG) normally led by two WG co-chairs is
   the way in which the IETF organizes units work.  It has proved a



Davies                   Expires April 19, 2006                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft              PESCI Principles                October 2005


   durable structure and when working well appears to be an effective
   way of doing standards development.

   P27. WG Chairs are responsible for ensuring that WGs execute their
        charters, meet their milestones, and produce deliverables that
        are ready for publication.
   P28. WGs should be primarily responsible for the quality of their
        output, and for obtaining and responding to cross-area and other
        external review.

4.2.8.  Extended Review

   The SIRS experiment and the General Area review team have shown the
   value of extended, cross-area review of documents.  Currently most
   such review is carried out too late in the document life cycle for
   best effectiveness.

   P29. It is essential that standards documents are not developed in
        isolation and that the effects of a particular proposal on other
        areas needs to be taken into account through consultancy and
        review by people outside the particular speciality developing
        the standards.
   P30. Extended review, and review in general, should be carried out
        starting as early as possible in the life cycle of the document.
   P31. Documents should not be presented for approval outside a working
        group until after successful cross-area review.
   P32. The new processes should provide means to ensure that cross-area
        review can be carried out effectively.


5.  The Arena for Change

   The IETF operates through a number of organizational components, some
   of which have been relatively stable (such as the IAB and the IESG)
   as regards their functions and processes since the Kobe
   reorganization in 1992 while others (such as IAOC and IASA) have a
   more recent genesis.  The design team looked at the various bodies to
   see how standards development process change should or ought to
   affect the components.  In some cases major structural change as a
   result of these changes is either inappropriate or out of scope.  The
   rest of this section considers the various components divided into
   those areas that it appears should be maintained with only peripheral
   changes and those areas that might be more heavily affected by any
   proposed process changes.

5.1.  Components Not Considered for Major Change in this Document

   In drawing up the high level goals and principles presented in



Davies                   Expires April 19, 2006                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft              PESCI Principles                October 2005


   Section 4 we consider that there are a number of fixed points in the
   overall organisation and operation of the IETF that are either
   outside our control, have served it well or have been recently put in
   place and are unlikely to need wholesale change.  This group has not
   considered changes that would involve changing the responsibilities
   of these bodies but some of their responsibilities and interactions
   with other bodies may need modification as part of the process
   changes.
   ISOC      ISOC acts as IETF's legal parent and guarantor.  This
             process is not at liberty to change the relationship
             between ISOC and IETF.  The ISOC board acts as court of
             final approval for some processes (such as appointments to
             IAB) and backstop for appeals in all processes.  This
             should not change although it might be appropriate to
             consider the route by which appeals and approvals reach the
             ISOC board.  Their seal of approval will be needed on any
             major process changes that may result from this effort.

   IAB       The main function of the IAB is architectural oversight of
             developments in the Internet.  This includes monitoring
             standards development work to ensure that it does not
             adversely impact the existing Internet, setting guidelines
             for architectural aspects of development, helping to
             determine what new working groups should be chartered,
             keeping a watching brief on technical developments outside
             the IETF, and providing statements on such developments as
             appropriate.

             The IAB currently acts as the second line of appeal for
             decisions of the IESG on standards development and other
             matters.  This function is not an ideal fit with the
             general architectural remit of the IAB: the competencies of
             the IAB members do not necessarily equip them to deal with
             the process appeals that come to them from the IESG.  Some
             of the members of the IAB may consider them a distraction
             from their architectural role.

   IAOC/IAD/IASA
             The administrative functions of the IETF are now handled by
             these structures.  They are recently in place and until
             they have been given chance to "bed in" it would be
             inappropriate (and costly) to alter these structures and
             their internal relationships.  However this does not say
             that what the administrative function does cannot be
             altered.  The changed processes will almost certainly
             require some additional or changed functions from the
             administrative functions.




Davies                   Expires April 19, 2006                [Page 14]

Internet-Draft              PESCI Principles                October 2005


   IRTF      The Internet Research Task Force (IRTF) will continue to
             exist in parallel with the IETF and sharing many of the
             administrative functions.  The documents that it produces
             add a small amount to the document approval and processing
             load.

   RFC Editor
             The RFC Editor provides the back end processing for all
             documents from approval to publication.  The techspec BOF
             is considering how this process can be improved and it will
             not be considered further here.

   IANA      The Internet Assigned Numbers Authority provides all the
             registry facilities for IETF protocols according to
             criteria and guidelines laid down by the IETF.  IANA is
             likely to continue in existence.  The processes which need
             to be carried out to establish and maintain these
             registries can be considered as part of the process
             changes.

5.2.  Components Considered for Major Change in the Document

   The following components are structures that have served the IETF
   well, and are likely to be part of whatever structure is suggested by
   the effort which follows on from the publication of this document.
   However, the ways in which they are put together and how
   responsibility is divided amongst them may need to change as part of
   this process.  Likewise, this should not be seen as constraining the
   changes that may be suggested: alternative or additional structures
   could take on part of the functions that are needed.
   IESG      The IESG is central to the processes of standards
             development in the IETF.  The steering role of the IESG in
             acceptance of new work, formation, and chartering of WGs,
             monitoring of WGs, and final stages of document processing
             seems to be appropriate, as it is essential to coordinate
             these functions.  This does not imply that the IESG must be
             solely responsible for final cross-area review.

             The problems which the IESG is seen to encounter in these
             jobs appear to be related to the amount of work involved
             especially in reviewing documents.  This is at least
             partially due to a lack of technical assistance for most
             ADs giving them no easy way to delegate parts of this work
             and making it difficult for them to operate "management by
             exception".

             Another area where process changes might lead to greater
             confidence in the standards development process is the



Davies                   Expires April 19, 2006                [Page 15]

Internet-Draft              PESCI Principles                October 2005


             degree of self-regulation which the IESG exercises: in many
             process related disputes the IESG is expected to act as
             judge and jury on actions in which it is itself involved.

   Areas     The partition of expertise in standards development into a
             number of areas appears to be a useful way of providing
             foci for participants and structure for an extremely wide
             technical field.

             Currently there is only informal recognition that not all
             areas are born equal.  The cross-area role of the security
             ADs and the interaction of the transport standards with
             most higher and lower layer standards means that the "out-
             of-area" loads on the security and transport area ADs are
             highly significant and there is little formal support for
             them in carrying out this extra work.  Operations work is
             also a key cross-area function.

             The effect of the current rigid structuring of work into
             areas is something which has not been much considered.  It
             is possible that the way in which the IESG is made up of
             ADs, basically two per area, with the ADs managing the
             working groups exacerbates some of the IETF's problems:
             *  Management "fan-out" constraint: The management capacity
                of the area ADs artificially limits the amount of work
                that can be carried out in an area - an active area
                might really need more working groups than can be
                realistically handled by the fixed set of ADs.  However,
                any increase of management capacity that might result
                from process changes should not inhibit critical
                assessment of any proposed new work both as to value and
                its likely effect on the overall architectural
                cohesiveness of the IETF work.
             *  Management "fan-in" overload: The number of working
                groups is expanded to and often beyond the point at
                which two ADs can successfully manage and review the
                output of those working groups on their own, but there
                is little formal delegation of such work which could
                possibly reduce this overload.
             *  ADs are primarily specialists: The concentration on area
                specialisms may lead NOMCOM to appoint people who are
                primarily specialists to AD positions rather than those
                with an over-arching architectural view.  This may lead
                to the overall attitude of the IESG de-emphasising
                architectural effectiveness.
             *  Area Workload Imbalance: Areas are not born equal.  The
                appointment of the same number of ADs in all areas leads
                to even greater overload in some areas.



Davies                   Expires April 19, 2006                [Page 16]

Internet-Draft              PESCI Principles                October 2005


             *  Areas can be a straitjacket: If some work naturally
                falls across speciality boundaries it may be difficult
                to fit it into the area model so that it either gets
                distorted to fit the model or does not get carried out
                at all (in the IETF).  It is conceivable that this at
                least part of the reason why the IETF does not seem to
                be good at solving complex problems.
             *  Area silos raise the stakes on cross-area review:
                Working groups and their participants effectively live
                in a single speciality environment.  Cross speciality
                working does not come naturally so that cross-area
                review becomes more of a big deal paradoxically making
                it more difficult to ensure it is done just when the
                need for it is greatest.

             The current area directorates are fairly informal
             organisations and are, in most cases, not formally involved
             in the management process (MIB doctors and the general area
             reviewing team are exceptions).  They could be a much
             bigger resource for ADs and specialities.

   IETF Chair
             The IETF Chair also currently wears the hats of chair of
             the IESG and AD of the General Area.  This multiplicity of
             jobs can lead to an overlap of roles and conflicting skills
             requirements in the single holder of the posts.  Serious
             consideration should be given to splitting the posts
             between two (or more) people.

   Working Groups
             Working Groups appear at base to be a successful way of
             carrying out an agreed charter of standards or other
             development work.
             The main areas for concern here are ensuring high quality
             output and maintaining momentum over the period of
             development, particularly in the later stages when the
             creative work is essentially finished and the work is
             mainly polishing.  Active management by supervisors
             together with more rigorous and earlier review of documents
             seems to be required.  Taking work through from initial
             standardisation to full standard appears to be difficult to
             achieve, The newtrk group may have some input here.

   NOMCOM    The NOMCOM provides the means of selecting leaders and the
             volunteer managers for the IETF.  The process by which this
             is performed is time consuming and could be considered
             onerous for participants, but it is vital that the process
             remains as open as possible and endeavours to keep the IETF



Davies                   Expires April 19, 2006                [Page 17]

Internet-Draft              PESCI Principles                October 2005


             as free of undue external influences as possible.

             Changes to these processes should ensure that overlaps of
             role (as regards those performing the selection and the
             leaders being selected) do not arise and that the workload
             of the NOMCOM does not get out of hand.



6.  Next Steps

   What the PESCI design team propose should be done next:

   We believe that an early proposal is needed for a new process for
   developing changes to the IETF processes especially in the area of
   developing standards documentation and other specifications.

   This proposed new process
   o  would be used by all individuals, design teams, and working groups
      who wish to propose changes or additions to IETF processes,
   o  should involve consultation with the IESG, the IAB, the IAOC, the
      Working Group chairs, and IETF participants generally, but
   o  must avoid requiring the IESG to develop the new processes or
      micromanage this process of development and approval.
   The new proposals, both for the change process and any resulting
   changed processes, should be implemented as a matter of urgency and
   should be handled expeditiously by the existing approvals and
   publishing process.

6.1.  Change Process Proposal

   We propose that the design team model is the most effective way of
   engineering process changes.  Within the context of the existing IETF
   process, this could be arranged by constituting a set of design teams
   with appropriate oversight and the charter of carrying out process
   change.  The design teams would operate within these charters: the
   overseers would invite design team members to participate, but
   alternative teams could offer solutions if they feel they have better
   solutions.

   The teams should function with an open discussion list, in the same
   way that the PESCI committee has done.  The result of the committee
   should be tested against the IETF consensus in the normal fashion; we
   believe that if there is clear IETF consensus that the proposal makes
   sense, the IESG (and the ISOC Board of Trustees) will respect that
   consensus and approve of it.





Davies                   Expires April 19, 2006                [Page 18]

Internet-Draft              PESCI Principles                October 2005


6.2.  Immediate Tasks for the Change Process

   Assuming that the model suggested in Section 6.1 is adopted, the
   following process change task appears to be the most urgent one, and
   a team should start on this as soon as possible.

   The most important single management role in the IETF at the moment
   is that of the IESG, including the role of IETF Chair.  This should
   therefore also receive the most scrutiny.  It's unreasonable to ask
   people to grade their own performance, or to attempt to perform a
   role at full speed while having to review how it could be done
   otherwise.  Therefore, a review of the roles the IESG has should be
   rooted outside the IESG - while asking current and former IESG
   members for information and advice at every opportunity.

   This should include:
   o  Creating a list of the tasks that currently gate on the IESG
   o  Identifying any additional related tasks that might be appropriate
      to improve efficiency and effectiveness
   o  Making proposals for discarding or restructuring the existing
      tasks in combination with the new tasks
   o  Making a proposal for grouping those tasks into separate task
      groups that can be assigned to different bodies at need.
   o  Developing a proposal for how the standards development work of
      the IETF should be partitioned to provide optimum efficiency while
      allowing the IETF to take on all appropriate work.
   o  Developing a suggestion for an initial set of bodies for handling
      those tasks in the new work partitioning scheme, including, if
      appropriate, a restructuring of the IESG.
   o  Describing the process by which the set of bodies gets modified.
   o  Describing how members of the proposed bodies get selected,
      replaced, and (if needed) removed.


7.  Security Considerations

   This document has no direct impact on the security of the Internet.
   However, a smooth and efficient IETF process is necessary to deal
   rapidly with emerging security threats.  Also, a badly designed
   process may be subject to social denial of service attacks that could
   damage both the IETF and indirectly the Internet itself.  We should
   also note that the change process (and the evaluation of potential
   change) is itself vulnerable to social DoS.


8.  IANA Considerations

   This document does not require action by the IANA.  However, IANA



Davies                   Expires April 19, 2006                [Page 19]

Internet-Draft              PESCI Principles                October 2005


   activities do form part of the IETF process and process changes may
   affect IANA.


9.  Acknowledgements

   The members of the PESCI team at the time this document was written
   were:

      Harald Alvestrand
      Scott Brim
      Brian Carpenter
      Elwyn Davies
      Adrian Farrel
      Michael Richardson

   This document was produced using the xml2rfc tool[RFC2629] and edited
   with the xxe editor plug-in.

10.  Informative References

   [I-D.carpenter-procdoc-roadmap]
              Carpenter, B., "The IETF Process: a Roadmap",
              draft-carpenter-procdoc-roadmap-02 (work in progress),
              October 2005.

   [RFC2014]  Weinrib, A. and J. Postel, "IRTF Research Group Guidelines
              and Procedures", BCP 8, RFC 2014, October 1996.

   [RFC2026]  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision
              3", BCP 9, RFC 2026, October 1996.

   [RFC2028]  Hovey, R. and S. Bradner, "The Organizations Involved in
              the IETF Standards Process", BCP 11, RFC 2028,
              October 1996.

   [RFC2629]  Rose, M., "Writing I-Ds and RFCs using XML", RFC 2629,
              June 1999.

   [RFC2850]  Internet Architecture Board and B. Carpenter, "Charter of
              the Internet Architecture Board (IAB)", BCP 39, RFC 2850,
              May 2000.

   [RFC2860]  Carpenter, B., Baker, F., and M. Roberts, "Memorandum of
              Understanding Concerning the Technical Work of the
              Internet Assigned Numbers Authority", RFC 2860, June 2000.

   [RFC3710]  Alvestrand, H., "An IESG charter", RFC 3710,



Davies                   Expires April 19, 2006                [Page 20]

Internet-Draft              PESCI Principles                October 2005


              February 2004.

   [RFC3774]  Davies, E., "IETF Problem Statement", RFC 3774, May 2004.

   [RFC3777]  Galvin, J., "IAB and IESG Selection, Confirmation, and
              Recall Process: Operation of the Nominating and Recall
              Committees", BCP 10, RFC 3777, June 2004.

   [RFC3932]  Alvestrand, H., "The IESG and RFC Editor Documents:
              Procedures", BCP 92, RFC 3932, October 2004.

   [RFC3935]  Alvestrand, H., "A Mission Statement for the IETF",
              BCP 95, RFC 3935, October 2004.

   [RFC3979]  Bradner, S., "Intellectual Property Rights in IETF
              Technology", BCP 79, RFC 3979, March 2005.

   [RFC4052]  Daigle, L. and Internet Architecture Board, "IAB Processes
              for Management of IETF Liaison Relationships", BCP 102,
              RFC 4052, April 2005.

   [RFC4053]  Trowbridge, S., Bradner, S., and F. Baker, "Procedures for
              Handling Liaison Statements to and from the IETF",
              BCP 103, RFC 4053, April 2005.

   [RFC4071]  Austein, R. and B. Wijnen, "Structure of the IETF
              Administrative Support Activity (IASA)", BCP 101,
              RFC 4071, April 2005.


Appendix A.  Raw principles

   This Appendix is a laundry list of items, not all of which can
   properly be called principles.  Some of them are indeed basic
   principles, others simply reflect current practice, and yet others
   summarize recent proposals for change.  The purpose of the list was
   to act as raw material for PESCI in searching for general principles
   for changing the IETF process, and it is presented here as a matter
   of record.

A.1.  General

   R1. The IETF works by an open process and by rough consensus, and
       this also applies to process changes.  But the IETF also observes
       experiments and running code with interest, and this should also
       apply to process changes.





Davies                   Expires April 19, 2006                [Page 21]

Internet-Draft              PESCI Principles                October 2005


   R2. The IETF works in areas where it has, or can find, technical
       competence.
   R3. The IETF depends on a volunteer core of active participants.
   R4. Membership of the IETF or of its WGs is not fee based, nor
       organizationally defined, but is based upon self-identification
       and active participation by individuals.
   R5. There is a question of principle of how the IETF, which only
       recognizes individuals, deals with technical input that comes
       from another standards organization, i.e. does it get extra
       weight because it represents collective thinking from a peer
       group?
   R6. While the IETF needs clear process rules for the normal cases,
       there should be enough flexibility to allow unusual cases to be
       handled according to common sense.  We apply personal judgment
       and only codify when we're certain.  (But we do codify who can
       make personal judgements.)
   R7. Parts of the process that have proved impractical should be
       removed or made optional.

A.2.  Management and Leadership

   R8.  The IETF recognizes leadership positions and grants power of
        decision to the leaders, but decisions are subject to appeal.
   R9.  The leaders may and should delegate power and responsibility, so
        long as this is made public and remains subject to appeal.
   R10. Appeals stop at the IAB and exceptionally the ISOC Board.  As a
        fact of life, there are decisions that can't be *effectively*
        appealed.  But dissent, complaint, and appeal are a consequence
        of the IETF's nature and should be regarded as normal events.
   R11. Decision criteria and processes should be publicly documented.
   R12. Leadership positions are for fixed terms (although we have no
        formal term limits).
   R13. People should cycle through leadership positions rather than
        making them a career. [klensin proposal] Stints of more than
        four years should be considered exceptional.
   R14. Leadership positions should be defined such that the workload is
        compatible with other employment and personal life.  Very few
        leadership positions should require effective full time work.
   R15. It is important to develop future leaders within the active
        community.
   R16. A community process is used to select the leadership.
        Question: can we devise something better than the random
        selection of NOMCOM members?
   R17. The primary consideration in selecting the leadership is
        personal ability to do the job.  (Employer consent to execute
        the workload is close behind.)





Davies                   Expires April 19, 2006                [Page 22]

Internet-Draft              PESCI Principles                October 2005


   R18. Leaders are empowered to make the judgement that rough consensus
        has been demonstrated.  Absent formal membership, there are no
        formal rules for consensus.
   R19. The technical leadership is subdivided into
        *  The ADs, assembled as the IESG
        *  [klensin proposal] The Review Panel
        *  The IAB
        *  The IETF Chair
        *  The WG Chairs (appointed by the ADs)
   R20. The IAB is responsible for architectural oversight, which should
        include supporting ADs in their guidance and direction roles.
   R21. [carpenter proposal] It is desirable to separate the role of the
        IETF Chair from that of chairing the IESG.  (Note to ADs: not
        because I don't like you; indeed it isn't obvious which of the
        two jobs I'd pick in free space - BC)

A.3.  Documents (may change after techspec BOF)

   R22. IETF documents often start as personal drafts, may become WG
        drafts, and are approved for permanent publication by a
        leadership body independent of the WG or individuals that
        produced them.
   R23. IETF documents belong to the community, not to their authors.
        But authorship is recognized and valued, as are lesser
        contributions than full authorship.
   R24. Technical quality and correctness is the primary criterion for
        reaching consensus about documents.
   R25. IETF specifications are not considered to be satisfactory
        standards until interoperable independent implementations have
        been demonstrated.  (This is the embodiment of the "running
        code" slogan.)  But (on legal advice) the IETF doesn't take
        responsibility for interop tests and doesn't certify
        interoperability.
   R26. IETF specifications may be published as Informational,
        Experimental, Standards Track, or Best Current Practice.
   R27. IETF processes are currently published as Best Current Practice.
   R28. Useful information that is neither a specification nor a process
        may be published as Informational.
   R29. Obsolete or deprecated specifications and processes may be
        downgraded to Historic.
   R30. The standards track should distinguish specifications that have
        been demonstrated to interoperate.
   R31. Standards Track and Best Current Practice documents must be
        subject to IETF wide rough consensus (Last Call process).  WG
        rough consensus is normally sufficient for other documents.






Davies                   Expires April 19, 2006                [Page 23]

Internet-Draft              PESCI Principles                October 2005


   R32. Substantive changes made after a document leaves a WG must be
        referred back to the WG.
   R33. The IETF determines requirements for publication and archival of
        its documents.

A.4.  Intellectual Property

   R34. TBD

A.5.  Protocol Parameter Assignments

   P35. TBD

A.6.  Working Groups

   R36. WGs should be primarily responsible for the quality of their
        output, and therefore for obtaining early review; the leadership
        should act as a quality backstop.
   R37. WGs should be primarily responsible for assessing negative
        impact of their work on the Internet as a whole, and therefore
        for obtaining cross-area review; the leadership should act as a
        cross-area backstop.
   R38. Early review of documents is more effective in dealing with
        major problems than late review.
   R39. ADs are responsible for guiding the formation and chartering of
        WGs, for giving them direction as necessary, and for terminating
        them.
   R40. WG Chairs are responsible for ensuring that WGs execute their
        charters, meet their milestones, and produce deliverables that
        are ready for publication.
   R41. ADs are responsible for arranging backstop review and final
        document approval.

A.7.  Other

   R42. [klensin proposal] It is desirable to separate the work of WG
        and process management, including "steering" of the IETF, from
        the work of final review of documents.


Appendix B.  PESCI Announcement

   To: IETF Announcement list <ietf-announce@ietf.org>
   From: IETF Chair <chair@ietf.org>
   Date: Fri, 16 Sep 2005 11:21:18 -0400
   Subject: IETF Process Evolution

   There has been quite a bit of community discussion of IETF process



Davies                   Expires April 19, 2006                [Page 24]

Internet-Draft              PESCI Principles                October 2005


   change in recent months.  Obviously, process changes must obtain
   rough consensus in the IETF and follow the procedures in place
   (principally RFC 2026 today).  However, past experience has shown
   that general discussion of IETF process change on the main IETF list,
   or in a normal working group, rapidly tends towards divergent
   opinions with consensus being extremely hard and slow to establish.
   On the other hand, we have experience that discussion of simply
   formulated principles and of consistent process proposals can be
   constructive and convergent.

   This note describes a method of starting the next phase of IETF
   process change, possibly including updating the change process
   itself.

   As IETF Chair, I intend to lead a short term design team, to be known
   as PESCI (Process Evolution Study Committee of the IETF).

   I will request PESCI to
   - review recent discussions on IETF process changes
   - identify a concise set of goals and principles for process change
   - publish these for comment and seek IETF debate and rough consensus

   The target is to have a draft of goals and principles by IETF64.

   The next steps will depend on the agreed goals and principles after
   this debate.  It is very likely that we will need a process that will
   generate a consistent set of proposals and a sequence for
   implementing them, with target dates.  It is also likely that the
   first proposal will be a new process for process change.  And it's a
   given that open discussion and rough consensus, in accordance with
   IETF principles, will be required.

   A non-binding proposal for the next steps is appended to this
   message.

   Given the short time until the next IETF, the team will have to start
   very soon and work quite intensively.  If you would like to volunteer
   for the PESCI team or nominate someone to serve on it, please send me
   email immediately.  I want to create the team within a week.

      Brian Carpenter
      IETF Chair

   N.B. The open discussion list will be pesci-discuss@ietf.org, but it
   hasn't yet been created at the time of sending this message.

   -----




Davies                   Expires April 19, 2006                [Page 25]

Internet-Draft              PESCI Principles                October 2005


   Possible next steps after the PESCI goals and principles are agreed:

   - decide whether to renew the PESCI design team (assumed below) or
   use an alternative discussion forum
   - consider various process change proposals from any source
   - reach a team consensus on a consistent set of proposals and a
   sequence for implementing them, with target dates.  All proposals
   must embed the principle of rough IETF consensus and must provide an
   appeal mechanism.
   - one of the proposals, likely the first, may be a proposal for a new
   process for process change
   - post the proposals as Internet-Drafts intended for publication as
   BCPs
   - seek IETF-wide rough consensus on these drafts
   - legal considerations, IASA financial considerations, and
   considerations of practicality raised by current or past Area
   Directors, WG Chairs and the like will be given special
   consideration.  If IETF consensus appears to be for a proposal which
   is legally, financially or practically unacceptable, PESCI will need
   to convince the community to change its mind.

   To enable this, as relevant, the ADs, IAB members, and IAOC members
   including the IAD will be asked to provide personal input
   specifically on the feasibility of implementing the proposed process
   changes as they affect their specific roles.

   - forward proposals for approval as BCPs* and acceptance by the ISOC
   Board.  Until such time as the new process for process change has
   been approved, the proposals will be submitted directly to the
   General Area Director and the approval body will be the IESG.
   However, the IESG members' principal chance to comment on and
   influence the proposals is prior to their forwarding for approval.

   *An alternative would be to use the mechanism described in RFC 3933,
   if consensus was weak.  In particular, this can be used to experiment
   with the practicality of ideas.

   Additional conditions for PESCI's work

   - a subsidiary goal is to end up with a clearly defined and
   interlocked set of process documents, rather than a patchwork of
   updates to existing documents

   - PESCI will provide an open mailing list where discussion with the
   community will be encouraged.  It will issue regular (monthly?)
   progress reports and generally operate as transparently as possible.
   Discussion in IETF plenary sessions is also expected.




Davies                   Expires April 19, 2006                [Page 26]

Internet-Draft              PESCI Principles                October 2005


   - nothing in this proposal prevents ongoing operational improvements
   within the current process.

















































Davies                   Expires April 19, 2006                [Page 27]

Internet-Draft              PESCI Principles                October 2005


Author's Address

   Elwyn Davies (editor)
   Folly Consulting
   Soham,
   UK

   Phone: +44 7889 488 335
   Fax:
   Email: elwynd@dial.pipex.com
   URI:








































Davies                   Expires April 19, 2006                [Page 28]

Internet-Draft              PESCI Principles                October 2005


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Disclaimer of Validity

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2005).  This document is subject
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights.


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




Davies                   Expires April 19, 2006                [Page 29]

