


Network Working Group                                             Y. Nir
Internet-Draft                                               Check Point
Intended status: Informational                         February 25, 2010
Expires: August 29, 2010


       IPsec High Availability and Load Sharing Problem Statement
                     draft-ietf-ipsecme-ipsec-ha-00

Abstract

   This document describes a requirement from IKE and IPsec to allow for
   more scalable and available deployments for VPNs.  It defines
   terminology for high availability and load sharing clusters
   implementing IKE and IPsec, and describes gaps in the existing
   standards.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 29, 2010.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of



Nir                      Expires August 29, 2010                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft       IPsec HA & LS Problem Statement       February 2010


   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the BSD License.

   This document may contain material from IETF Documents or IETF
   Contributions published or made publicly available before November
   10, 2008.  The person(s) controlling the copyright in some of this
   material may not have granted the IETF Trust the right to allow
   modifications of such material outside the IETF Standards Process.
   Without obtaining an adequate license from the person(s) controlling
   the copyright in such materials, this document may not be modified
   outside the IETF Standards Process, and derivative works of it may
   not be created outside the IETF Standards Process, except to format
   it for publication as an RFC or to translate it into languages other
   than English.

































Nir                      Expires August 29, 2010                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft       IPsec HA & LS Problem Statement       February 2010


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
     1.1.  Conventions Used in This Document . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   2.  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   3.  The Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
     3.1.  Lots of Long Lived State  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
     3.2.  IKE and IPsec Counters  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
     3.3.  Missing Synch Messages  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
     3.4.  Simultaneous use of IKE and IPsec SAs by Different
           Members . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   4.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   5.  Change Log  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   6.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9




































Nir                      Expires August 29, 2010                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft       IPsec HA & LS Problem Statement       February 2010


1.  Introduction

   IKEv2, as described in [RFC4306] and [RFC4718], and IPsec, as
   described in [RFC4301] and others, allows deployment of VPNs between
   different sites as well as from VPN clients to protected networks.

   As VPNs become increasingly important to the organizations deploying
   them, there is a demand to make IPsec solutions more scalable and
   less prone to down time, by using more than one physical gateway to
   either share the load or back each other up.  Similar demands have
   been made in the past for other critical pieces of an organizations's
   infrastructure, such as DHCP and DNS servers, web servers, databases
   and others.

   IKE and IPsec are in particular less friendly to clustering than
   these other protocols, because they store more state, and that state
   is more volatile.  Section 2 defines terminology for use in this
   document, and in the envisioned solution documents.

   In general, deploying IKE and IPsec in a cluster requires such a
   large amount of information to be synchronized among the members of
   the cluster, that it becomes impractical.  Alternatively, if less
   information is synchronized, failover would mean a prolonged and
   intensive recovery phase, which negates the scalability and
   availability promises of using clusters.  In Section 3 we will
   describe this in more detail.

1.1.  Conventions Used in This Document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].


2.  Terminology

   "Single Gateway" is an implementation of IKE and IPsec enforcing a
   certain policy, as described in [RFC4301].

   "Cluster" is a set of two or more gateways, implementing the same
   security policy, and protecting the same domain.

   "Member" is one gateway in a cluster.

   "High Availability Cluster", or "HA Cluster" is a cluster where only
   one of the members is active at any one time.  This member is also
   referred to as the the "active", whereas the others are referred to
   as "stand-bys".



Nir                      Expires August 29, 2010                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft       IPsec HA & LS Problem Statement       February 2010


   "Load Sharing Cluster", or "LS Cluster" is a cluster where more than
   one of the members may be active at the same time.

   "Failover" is the event where a stand-by member becomes active, and
   the formerly active member becomes a stand-by.

   "Tight Cluster" is a cluster where all the members share an IP
   address.  This could be accomplished using configured interfaces with
   specialized protocols or hardware, such as [VRRP], or through the use
   of multicast addresses, but in any case, peers need only be
   configured with one IP address in the PAD.

   "Loose Cluster" is a cluster where each member has a different IP
   address.  Peers find the correct member using some method such as DNS
   queries or [REDIRECT].

   "Synch Channel" is a communications channel among the cluster
   members, used to transfer state information.  The synch channel may
   or may not be IP based, may or may not be encrypted, and may work
   over short or long distances.  The security and physical
   characteristics of this channel are out of scope for this document,
   but it is a requirement that its use be minimized for scalability.


3.  The Problem Statement

   This document will make no attempt to describe the problems in
   setting up a cluster.  The following subsections describe the
   problems related to the protocol itself.

   We also ignore the problem of synchronizing the policy between
   cluster members, as this is an administrative issue that is not
   particular to either clusters or to IPsec.

   Note that the interesting scenario here is VPN, whether tunneled
   site-to-site or remote access. host-to-host transport mode is not
   expected to benefit from this work.

3.1.  Lots of Long Lived State

   IKE and IPsec have a lot of long lived state:
   o  IKE SAs last for minutes, hours, or days, and carry keys and other
      information.  Some gateways may carry thousands to hundreds of
      thousands of IKE SAs.
   o  IPsec SAs last for minutes or hours, and carry keys, selectors and
      other information.  Some gateways may carry hundreds of thousands
      such IPsec SAs.




Nir                      Expires August 29, 2010                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft       IPsec HA & LS Problem Statement       February 2010


   o  SPD Cache entries.  While the SPD is unchanging, the SPD cache
      changes on the fly due to narrowing.  Entries last at least as
      long as the SAD entries, but tend to last even longer than that

   A naive implementation of a high availability cluster would have no
   synchronized state, and a failover would produce an effect similar to
   that of a rebooted gateway. [resumption] describes how new IKE and
   IPsec SAs can be recreated in such a case.

3.2.  IKE and IPsec Counters

   We can overcome the first problem described in Section 3.1, by
   synchronizing states - whenever an SA is created, we can share this
   new state with all other members.  There is, however, another
   problem.  Those states are not only long-lived, but they are ever
   changing.

   IKE has message counters.  A peer may not process message n until
   after it has processed message n-1.  Skipping message IDs is not
   allowed.  So a newly-active member needs to know the last message IDs
   both received and transmitted.

   ESP and AH have an anti-replay feature, where every encrypted packet
   carries a counter number.  Repeating counter numbers is considered an
   attack, so the newly-active member SHOULD NOT use a replay counter
   number that has already been used.

   In some cases, it is feasible to synchronize the IKE message counters
   for every IKE exchange, but it is almost never feasible to
   synchronize the IPsec message counters for every IPsec packet
   transmitted or received.  So we have to assume that at least for
   IPsec, the replay counter will not be up-to-date on the newly-active
   member.

   A possible solution to the IPsec problem is to send replay counter
   information not for each packet processed, but only at regular
   intervals, say, every 10,000 packets.  After a failover, the newly-
   active member advances the counters for outbound SAs by 10,000.  To
   the peer this looks like up to 10,000 packets were lost, but this
   should be acceptable, as neither ESP nor AH are reliable protocols.
   This still has the problem of what to do with inbound IPsec packets,
   for which the newly-active member is unable to determine if they are
   replayed or not.

   Another possible solution to the IPsec problem is to rekey all child
   SAs following a failover.  This may or may not be feasible depending
   on the implementation and the configuration.




Nir                      Expires August 29, 2010                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft       IPsec HA & LS Problem Statement       February 2010


3.3.  Missing Synch Messages

   The synch channel is very likely not to be infallible.  Before
   failover is detected, some synchronization messages may have been
   missed.  For example, the active member may have created a new Child
   SA using message n.  The new information (entry in the SAD and update
   to counters of the IKE SA) is sent on the synch channel.  Still, with
   every possible technology, the update may be missed before the
   failover.

   This is a bad situation, because the IKE SA is doomed. the newly-
   active member has two problems:
   o  It does not have the new IPsec SA pair.  It will drop all incoming
      packets protected with such an SA.  This could be fixed by sending
      some DELETEs and INVALID_SPI notifications, if it wasn't for the
      other problem...
   o  The counters for the IKE SA show that only request n-1 has been
      sent.  The next request will get the message ID n, but that will
      be rejected by the peer.  After a sufficient number of
      retransmissions and rejections, the whole IKE SA with all
      associated IPsec SAs will get dropped.

   The above scenario may be rare enough that it is acceptable that on a
   configuration with thousands of IKE SAs, a few will need to be
   recreated from scratch or using session resumption techniques.
   However, detecting this may take a long time (several minutes) and
   this negates the goal of creating a high availability cluster in the
   first place.

3.4.  Simultaneous use of IKE and IPsec SAs by Different Members

   For load sharing clusters, all active members may need to use the
   same SAs, both IKE and IPsec.  This is an even greater problem than
   in the case of HA, because consecutive packets may need to be sent by
   different members to the same peer gateway.

   The solution to the IKE SA issue is up to the application.  It's
   possible to create some locking mechanism over the synch channel, or
   else have one member "own" the IKE SA and manage the child SAs for
   all other members.  For IPsec, solutions fall into two broad
   categories.

   The first is the "sticky" category, where all communications with a
   single peer, or all communications involving a certain SPD cache
   entry go through a single peer.  In this case, all packets that match
   any particular SA go through the same member, so no synchronization
   of the replay counter needs to be done.  Inbound processing is a
   "sticky" issue, because the packets have to be processed by the



Nir                      Expires August 29, 2010                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft       IPsec HA & LS Problem Statement       February 2010


   correct member based on peer and SPI.  Another issue is that
   commodity load balancers will not be able to match the SPIs of the
   encrypted side to the clear traffic, and so the wrong member may get
   the the other half of the flow.

   The other way, is to duplicate the child SAs, and have a pair of
   IPsec SAs for each active member.  Different packets for the same
   peer go through different members, and get protected using different
   SAs with the same selectors and matching the same entries in the SPD
   cache.  This has some shortcomings:
   o  It requires multiple parallel SAs, which the peer has no use for.
      Section 2.8 or [RFC4306] specifically allows this, but some
      implementation might have a policy against long term maintenance
      of redundant SAs.
   o  Different packets that belong to the same flow may be protected by
      different SAs, which may seem "weird" to the peer gateway,
      especially if it is integrated with some deep inspection
      middleware such as a firewall.  It is not known whether this will
      cause problems with current gateways.  It is also impossible to
      mandate against this, because the definition of "flow" varies from
      one implementation to another.
   o  Reply packets may arrive with an IPsec SA that is not "matched" to
      the one used for the outgoing packets.  Also, they might arrive at
      a different member.  This problem is beyond the scope of this
      document and should be solved by the application, perhaps by
      forwarding misdirected packets to the correct gateway for deep
      inspection.


4.  Security Considerations

   Implementations running on clusters MUST be as secure as
   implementations running on single gateways.  In other words, no
   extension or interpretation used to allow operation in a cluster may
   facilitate attacks that are not possible for single gateways.

   Moreover, thought must be given to the synching requirements of any
   protocol extension, to make sure that it does not create an
   opportunity for denial of service attacks on the cluster.


5.  Change Log

   This is the first version, re-spun as an WG document







Nir                      Expires August 29, 2010                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft       IPsec HA & LS Problem Statement       February 2010


6.  Informative References

   [REDIRECT]
              Devarapalli, V. and K. Weniger, "Redirect Mechanism for
              IKEv2", draft-ietf-ipsecme-ikev2-redirect (work in
              progress), August 2009.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC4301]  Kent, S. and K. Seo, "Security Architecture for the
              Internet Protocol", RFC 4301, December 2005.

   [RFC4306]  Kaufman, C., "Internet Key Exchange (IKEv2) Protocol",
              RFC 4306, December 2005.

   [RFC4718]  Eronen, P. and P. Hoffman, "IKEv2 Clarifications and
              Implementation Guidelines", RFC 4718, October 2006.

   [VRRP]     Hinden, R., "Virtual Router Redundancy Protocol (VRRP)",
              RFC 3768, April 2004.

   [resumption]
              Sheffer, Y. and H. Tschofenig, "IKEv2 Session Resumption",
              draft-ietf-ipsecme-ikev2-resumption (work in progress),
              June 2009.


Author's Address

   Yoav Nir
   Check Point Software Technologies Ltd.
   5 Hasolelim st.
   Tel Aviv  67897
   Israel

   Email: ynir@checkpoint.com














Nir                      Expires August 29, 2010                [Page 9]

