


Network Working Group                                       B. Hoehrmann
Internet-Draft                                        September 15, 2010
Intended status: Informational
Expires: March 19, 2011


          Language variant subtags for North Frisian dialects
                     draft-hoehrmann-nordfriisk-00

Abstract

   This memo describes language variant subtags for dialects of the
   North Frisian language including the relevant registration forms for
   registration in the Language Subtag Registry and rationale for the
   choice of identifiers.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on March 19, 2011.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.




Hoehrmann                Expires March 19, 2011                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft  Language tags for North Frisian dialects  September 2010


1.  Introduction

   North Frisian is a language spoken primarily by the North Frisians,
   an autochthonic minority in the north-west of Germany in the district
   of Nordfriesland, with approximately 10,000 speakers.  The language
   is typically divided into two groups of dialects, the mainland
   dialects, also spoken on some of the Halligen, and the insular
   dialects, spoken on some of the islands in the northern part of the
   German Bight.  The two groups are further divided in ten main
   dialects.

   This document proposes twelve language variant subtags to identify
   them for use with the ISO 639-2 three-letter code "frr" that
   identifies them all as a group, as per [BCP0047].  Twelve instead of
   ten because one of the main dialects, Fering-Oeoemrang, consists of
   two closely related dialects, Fering and Oeoemrang, and having to
   identify Oeoemrang with "fering", which would be the obvious choice
   for the combined dialect due to length and character restrictions for
   subtags, would be unintuitive.

   Further, the Mooring dialect is considered part of the Boekingharder
   dialect which is one of the ten main dialects; Mooring however is one
   of the dominant dialects and sometimes proposed as the standard
   variant of the language, identifying it with the truncated and
   transliterated subtag "boeking" would be similarily unintuitive.

   Note: Throughout this document, latin characters with a diaeresis
   have been transliterated by the typical german convention to replace
   them by the latin character followed by the letter "e", so o-umlaut
   becomes "oe".

2.  Dialects and variant subtags

2.1.  Soel'ring

   Soel'ring is the dialect associated with the island Sylt on the
   german north sea coast.  Syltring is an alternative name for the
   dialect that is becoming obsolete.  It has been chosen as subtag as
   the proper name contains characters that are not allowed in subtags
   and "syltring" is more commonly used than the transliteration
   "soelring".

     Type:        variant
     Prefix:      frr
     Subtag:      syltring
     Description: The Soel'ring dialect of North Frisian





Hoehrmann                Expires March 19, 2011                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft  Language tags for North Frisian dialects  September 2010


2.2.  Fering

   Fering is the dialect associated with the island Foehr on the german
   north sea coast.  It belongs to the group of insular dialects and
   together with Oeoemrang (the dialect of the neighbouring island
   Amrum) it is considered one of the ten main dialects.  The subtag
   "fering" has been chosen as it is identical to the proper name of the
   dialect.

     Type:        variant
     Prefix:      frr
     Subtag:      fering
     Description: The Fering dialect of North Frisian

2.3.  Oeoemrang

   Oeoemrang is the dialect associated with the island Amrum on the
   german north sea coast.  Together with Fering it is considered one of
   the ten main dialects and belongs to the insular group of dialects.
   "Amring" is an alternate name for the dialect that is becoming
   obsolete; it has been chosen as subtag as the proper name contains
   characters not permitted in subtags, the transliteration is too long,
   and "Amrumer" would make the naming inconsistent with the closely
   related Fering dialect.

     Type:        variant
     Prefix:      frr
     Subtag:      amring
     Description: The Oeoemrang dialect of North Frisian

2.4.  Halunder

   Halunder is the insular dialect of the North Frisian language
   associated with the island Heligoland in the German Bight.  The
   subtag "halunder" has been chosen to identify it as it matches the
   proper name.

     Type:        variant
     Prefix:      frr
     Subtag:      halunder
     Description: The Halunder dialect of North Frisian

2.5.  Hallig Frisian

   Hallig Frisian is the dialect associated with the Halligen, a number
   of islands in the Wadden Sea on the german north sea coast.  Even
   though the Halligen are islands, it is considered a mainland dialect.
   The subtag "hallig" has been chosen as frisian "Halifreesk" and



Hoehrmann                Expires March 19, 2011                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft  Language tags for North Frisian dialects  September 2010


   standard german "Halligfriesisch" are too long and plain "freesk" is
   ambiguous.

     Type:        variant
     Prefix:      frr
     Subtag:      hallig
     Description: The Hallig Frisian dialect of North Frisian

2.6.  Wiedingharder

   Wiedingharder is the mainland dialect associated with the former
   administrative division Wiedingharde in the north of Nordfriesland.
   All subtags for dialects typically identified by through their
   associated Harde are formed by taking the standard german name,
   possibly truncated to meet length restrictions, and omitting the
   "harder".  The names rendered in the dialect cannot be used as they
   are either ambiguous or contain characters not allowed in subtags.

     Type:        variant
     Prefix:      frr
     Subtag:      wieding
     Description: The Wiedinharder dialect of North Frisian

2.7.  Boekingharder

   Boekingharder is the mainland dialect associated with the former
   administrative division Boekingharde south of the Wiedingharde.

     Type:        variant
     Prefix:      frr
     Subtag:      boeking
     Description: The Boekingharder dialect of North Frisian

2.8.  Mooring

   Mooring is the mainland dialect associated with the Risummoor, a mire
   in the east of the Boekingharde.  It is usually considered part of
   the Boekingharder dialect and further divided into the Westermooring
   and the Ostermooring.  Alongside Fering, "Frasch" (Mooring) is
   considered one of the most important dialects, and it is common to
   refer to the Boekingarder dialect as Mooring.  The subtag name is the
   proper name of the dialect.

     Type:        variant
     Prefix:      frr
     Subtag:      mooring
     Description: The Mooring dialect of North Frisian




Hoehrmann                Expires March 19, 2011                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft  Language tags for North Frisian dialects  September 2010


2.9.  Karrharder

   Karrharder is the mainland dialect associated with the former
   administrative division Karrharde neighbouring the Nordergoesharde
   and the Boekingharde.

     Type:        variant
     Prefix:      frr
     Subtag:      karr
     Description: The Karrharder dialect of North Frisian

2.10.  Nordergoesharder

   Nordergoesharder is the mainland dialect associated with the former
   administrative division Nordergoesharde south of the Boekingharde.

     Type:        variant
     Prefix:      frr
     Subtag:      nordgoes
     Description: The Nordergoesharder dialect of North Frisian

2.11.  Mittelgoesharder

   Mittelgoesharder is the mainland dialect associated with the region
   between Nordergoesharde and Suedgoesharde.

     Type:        variant
     Prefix:      frr
     Subtag:      mittgoes
     Description: The Mittelgoesharder dialect of North Frisian

2.12.  Suedergoesharder

   Suedgoesharder is the mainland dialect associated with the former
   administrative division Suedergoesharde south of the Boekingharde.

     Type:        variant
     Prefix:      frr
     Subtag:      suedgoes
     Description: The Suedergoesharder dialect of North Frisian

3.  Security Considerations

   None beyond those discussed in [BCP0047].







Hoehrmann                Expires March 19, 2011                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft  Language tags for North Frisian dialects  September 2010


4.  IANA Considerations

   This document defines language variant subtags as per [BCP0047].

5.  References

   [BCP0047]  Phillips, A. and M. Davis, "Tags for Identifying
              Languages", BCP 47, RFC 5646, September 2009.

Author's Address

   Bjoern Hoehrmann
   Mittelstrasse 50
   39114 Magdeburg
   Germany

   EMail: mailto:bjoern@hoehrmann.de
   URI:   http://bjoern.hoehrmann.de

   Note: Please write "Bjoern Hoehrmann" with o-umlaut (U+00F6) wherever
   possible, e.g., as "Bj&#246;rn H&#246;hrmann" in HTML and XML.






























Hoehrmann                Expires March 19, 2011                 [Page 6]


