


Individual                                                       D. Otis
Internet-Draft                                                   D. Rand
Intended status: Informational                               Trend Micro
Expires: November 17, 2013                                  May 16, 2013


                    Macros Nixed by Major Providers
                   draft-otis-spfbis-macros-nixed-00

Abstract

   SPF is a popular tool for managing email blocking issues.  It has
   also helped reduce backscatter related with Non-Delivery
   Notifications as was intended.  A practically unused feature is SPF
   macro capability that SPFbis still in part retains.  This feature
   greatly diminishes SPF's utility and actually threatens email
   interchange, especially when used in conjunction with secondary
   policy layers while also being ignored by major providers.  The macro
   mechanism is also unable to cope with internationalization, and is
   found in virtually none of the published resource records.  It is
   counter productive to retain the largely unused and often unsupported
   macro feature, despite efforts expended to develop the macro
   language.

Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on November 17, 2013.

Copyright Notice



Otis & Rand             Expires November 17, 2013               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                Macros Nixed                      May 2013


   Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  SMTP Internationalization  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   3.  Mail From Parameter and SPF  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   4.  IPv6 and SPF with PTR or local-part Macros . . . . . . . . . .  5
     4.1.  Problems with Macros . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     4.2.  'do not use' Advice Assumes Senders Cooperate  . . . . . .  7
     4.3.  Retain SPF Type (99) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   5.  Domains as a Basis for Managing Traffic  . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   6.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   7.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   8.  References - Informative . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10























Otis & Rand             Expires November 17, 2013               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                Macros Nixed                      May 2013


1.  Introduction

   Checking reverse DNS [RFC1034] entries per SMTP [RFC5321] connection
   requires queries against the entire IP address.  SPF
   [I-D.ietf-spfbis-4408bis] macros may go a step further of searching
   for address matches with the SMTP client resolved from reverse DNS
   PTR record sets in a manner similar to address matches with the 'MX'
   mechanism hostname list.  For IPv6, reverse DNS checks by SMTP
   servers may inadvertently induce DDoS effects against the DNS managed
   by the sender's network provider while at the same time consuming the
   receiving SMTP server's connection resources waiting for the
   subsequent DNS responses.  Prior IPv4 mapping of reverse DNS is often
   used to avoid wasting of resources resulting from reverse DNS, but
   this strategy is not possible with IPv6.  Use of reverse DNS is
   seldom practical simply due to network resource considerations.
   While use of SPF 'PTR' mechanism and the {%p} macro now offers 'do
   not use' advice, it is unfortunate similar considerations for
   uninvolved DNS servers that can be similarly burdened by local-part
   macros or various macro expansions of SMTP client addresses were not
   offered the same advice.

   At least reasonable limits were placed on the number of NX domain
   responses.  Unfortunately even that strategy is undermined by a
   technique growing in popularity of using synthetic domains to act as
   an alternative for web cookies where the resulting responses actually
   increases the level of amplification.  There is no justification to
   use macros that are able to impose queries constructed of odd
   elements of the email-address local-part or that of the SMTP client
   IP address.

   Windows, OS X, iOS, Linux employ IPv6 privacy extensions [RFC4941]
   where any problematic IP address is likely to be reassigned different
   addresses regularly and remain valid beyond the reassignment
   interval.  Since a major portion of spam originates from compromised
   residential systems, any attempts to handle or cache this highly
   diverse information should not be considered practical.


2.  SMTP Internationalization

   It should also be pointed out use of macros may not function when
   [RFC6531] permits international email addresses that includes both
   local-part and domain portions of the email address.  Tests and
   comments by large email providers show an understandable reluctance
   to process SPF macros where often they simply do not implement the
   macro portion of SPF.

   The SPF review documented in [RFC6686] failed to provide a breakdown



Otis & Rand             Expires November 17, 2013               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                Macros Nixed                      May 2013


   on macro use.  SPF's macros can prove hazardous, especially with
   IPv6.  Rather than permitting receivers to decide their acceptance
   methods, an SPF resource record based on the Mail From parameter can
   induce 100 DNS transactions using labels constructed from random
   strings found in the message local-part.  While recent changes made
   in the current version of SPF recommends against its use, to process
   the reverse namespace may place an extreme burden on DNS, its cache,
   and the SMTP server's connection resources.  Too bad unrelated DNS
   providers where not afforded similar consideration.

   SPF macros have not anticipated the use of internationalized email
   addresses and lacks any negotiation with respect to this type of
   email.  A fair amount of problematic repair regarding construction of
   DNS queries based on internationalized email-addresses can be avoided
   by simply acknowledging currently SPF macros are seldom used and
   often not implemented.


3.  Mail From Parameter and SPF

   Access to an outbound SMTP servers may or may not restrict use of the
   Mail From Parameter.  An alternative mitigation strategy may rely
   upon rate limits and denial of access subsequent to abuse reports.
   Reasons for publishing SPF records might be to mitigate backscatter
   based on records that offer Non-Delivery-Notifications (NDNs)
   authorization by the Mail From parameter where the loss of some of
   these notifications is considered acceptable.  When used to authorize
   bulk senders, or provide results that are independent of the SMTP
   client, the process will not offer a status safely associated with
   any particular message.

   SPF failure rates of even a few percent are too high for it to offer
   a solid basis for either acceptance or rejection.  There are some
   policy strategies for specific domains [I-D.kucherawy-dmarc-base]
   that attempt to combine SPF [I-D.ietf-spfbis-4408bis] and DKIM
   [RFC6376] where when either of their related domains manage to pass,
   only then is the message to be placed in the in-box.

   Domains that reference SPF resource records should not be considered
   authenticated because the SPF process authorized the SMTP client.
   Often an SMTP client is shared by many domains.  As such, it would be
   incorrect to assume SPFv1 records that authorize a provider by way of
   the Mail From Parameters is only permitted by authenticated accounts
   from that domain.

   As a result, no domain information in SPF or DKIM, under current
   circumstances, can be used as a domain reference for either
   acceptance or reputation.



Otis & Rand             Expires November 17, 2013               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                Macros Nixed                      May 2013


4.  IPv6 and SPF with PTR or local-part Macros

   When IPv6 becomes more commonly used, some will attempt white-listing
   IP addresses as a practical albeit non-scalable method to deal with
   the highly increased address range confronted when dealing with IPv6.
   There are currently no practical solutions able to scale to the
   challenging range of IP addresses that might be controlled by
   malefactors.

   Unlike most DNS resources that segregate IPv4 and IPv6 datasets, SPF
   consolidates both IPv4 and IPv6 addresses into a common list
   comprised of a chain of DNS transactions.  In addition to explicit
   chaining, SPF expects receivers to process the first SPF resource
   record which may contain 10 SPF mechanisms.  Each mechanism may then
   require an additional 10 DNS transactions to resolve the mechanism's
   status.  According to [spf-all.com] out of 112,311,175 domains,
   24,073,182 (21.4 %) publish SPF records where only 12,768 (0.053%)
   employ macros.  Even the 0.053% figure overstates use since many
   represent questionable server farm deployments.  These are
   questionable since many major providers do not process SPF records
   that contain macros.  Non-implementation of macros is very good from
   a security and reliability perspective, but problematic for email's
   integrity when used.

4.1.  Problems with Macros

4.1.1.  Use of SPF Macros Ignored

   When SPF was first introduced, AOL claimed they used SPF to create IP
   address white-lists based upon domains with whom they collaborate.
   White-listing would be less effective if macros were used in SPF
   records to modify results based upon variables such as the IP address
   of the client or the local-part of the email address.  Ask a group of
   email providers about SPF, and you'll likely hear SPF is used to
   identify IP addresses used by a domain to send email.  With this
   information, they can then check these addresses against popular
   reputation services to determine where problems are apparent.  Silent
   discard or placement into spam folders reduces delivery status
   integrity and makes supporting unreliable delivery difficult.

   The information returned in the Authentication-Results header does
   not always clarify whether the SPF records were actually processed.
   In speaking with some of these providers about potential network
   amplification concerns along with resource consumption, they made
   assurances they do not process SPF macros and they have not had any
   complaints.  It seems these providers are also aware of path
   registration failure rates associated with SPF, and do not reject
   email on the basis of SPF failure.



Otis & Rand             Expires November 17, 2013               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                Macros Nixed                      May 2013


   [I-D.kucherawy-dmarc-base] Changes the importance of SPF records
   being processed, as they will come into play during message
   acceptance and not be limited to just deciding whether a NDN is safe
   to send.  As such, both 'do not use' and 'do not process' macros
   offers improved interchange and security.  SPF's intent is to
   constrain the number of invalid NDNs being returned when someone
   spoofs their domain.  Evidence of this intent might be denoted by SPF
   record's ending or providers overriding them with "?all".  This
   approach better supports DMARC's efforts at improving delivery rates
   with improved policy enforcement.  Because DMARC may actually
   convince a provider to refuse messages based upon SPF failures, it is
   important that it is not used for messages that are sent to mailing-
   lists for example.

   [I-D.ietf-spfbis-4408bis] purports to be documenting current use.  It
   dropped the SPF resource record (99) due to sparse use and recommends
   against reverse PTR use.  If a similar threshold were applied, all
   the SPF macro expansion aspects of this protocol would be removed as
   well.  Several large providers have offered their assurance that
   their SPF libraries had these macros removed.  Any effort hoping to
   define current use MUST carefully reconsider the inclusion of this
   ill-considered macro feature.  Otherwise, it can not be suggested
   SPF-bis simply documents current use.

   Danger imposed by the use of the local-part macro is inherent in the
   query required to support both an IPv6 expansion, in conjunction with
   the expansion of local-part macros induced by possibly cached SPF
   records.  The local-part, along with a range of IP addresses made
   readily possible by IPv6, can be manipulated to induce a flurry of
   large DNS transactions directed toward any otherwise uninvolved
   domain, all directed by cached DNS records that contain active
   content.

   It is never a good idea to allow free attacks enabled through foreign
   scripts.  The SPF local-part macro would allow a cached DNS record to
   be repeatedly exploited by a spam campaign with an attacker consuming
   little of their resources beyond what they already use in the
   campaign.  In this case, their recipients change the domains queried
   on behalf of the attackers based upon the same SPF resource record.
   High levels of amplification still apply if SPF specifications are
   not changed and resulting implementation are then assumed part of
   some greater security requirement and are no longer deemed
   experimental.  The SPF macro DOS overview demonstrated in 2006
   [otis-spf-dos-exploit] did not consider IPv6 use which offers higher
   gain, where the gain achieved sending a single 1KB message to a
   single recipient offered a 1:156 reflected gain over IPv4 that can
   never be filtered or blocked by using BCP38 [RFC2827].  When made
   against a wildcard record, even higher gains can be achieved.



Otis & Rand             Expires November 17, 2013               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                Macros Nixed                      May 2013


   Logically, local-part macros would not safely provide positive
   results without the query being combined with an IP address list of
   SMTP clients in some form.  A list structure would need to be
   repeated for each user.  Rcpt To using schemes like BATV provides an
   expedient way where the purported sender determines whether a NDN can
   be returned without the risk associated with active content placed
   within DNS resource records.  Several parsers ignore local-part macro
   expansion since they rarely play any role in providing positive
   results.

   The [I-D.ietf-spfbis-4408bis] Addendum E indicates a possible use of
   SPF macros such as exists:{%l}._spf.{%d} or exists:{%i}_spf.{%d} can
   be used in "specialized" DNS servers able to understand encrypted
   local-parts or react to inordinate query rates which suggests use of
   resource records having extremely short TTLs.  Such an approach can
   add a sizeable burden on recipients and targeted DNS servers.  Such a
   scheme represents a poor alternative to providing authenticated
   domain identifiers.  The general intent and purpose of SPF is to
   offer Non-Delivery Notification authorization where no macros are
   required and by most practical measure are not being used.

4.2.  'do not use' Advice Assumes Senders Cooperate

   Problems related to various types of network abuse made possible by
   SPF macro extensions are not prevented by assuming corrective
   behavior is obtained through advice given to senders.  In general, it
   is the sender not to be trusted.  Only by giving the advice 'do not
   use and do not implement' is both security and interchange ensured.

4.3.  Retain SPF Type (99)

   Upon greater reflection regarding deprecation of the SPF type (99)
   record, this was a mistake.  When overlaying the TXT resource record
   was originally proposed, many strongly objected.  Studies then showed
   scant use of TXT records which convinced those in the then MARID WG
   they could adopt the TXT record at the domain apex as belonging to
   SPF as their means to support wildcard use.  Although support of
   unknown RR types has improved, the vendor that made adoption of a
   different RR type problematic still persists with their related name
   service extensions imposing barriers.  SPF Type (99) should be
   retained to better ensure extensions to DNS retain an ability to cope
   with unknown RR types.


5.  Domains as a Basis for Managing Traffic

   A manageable basis for assessments can leverage a smaller number of
   related domains, compared to IPv6 or even IPv4 addresses.  Although



Otis & Rand             Expires November 17, 2013               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                Macros Nixed                      May 2013


   technically the domain name space can be larger than the massively
   large IPv6 address space, in practice it is not.  One hundred
   thousand domains control 90% of Internet traffic out of approximately
   100 million domains active each month.  The top 150 domains control
   50% of the traffic, and the top 2,500 domains control 75%.  This
   level of domain consolidation permits effective fast-path white-
   listing.  Improvements achieved using domains to consolidate the
   threat landscape can easily justify added cryptographic
   authentication burdens.  Even APL resource records [RFC3123] can
   authenticate EHLO using a single DNS transaction, but this would not
   allow IPv6 email to be more easily managed, which cryptographic
   technology can offer.


6.  IANA Considerations

   This document requires no IANA consideration.


7.  Security Considerations

   This draft intends to describe serious security and interchange
   concerns with use of SPF macros.  The contained recommendations are
   expected to reduce these concerns.  Greater caution is warranted
   before making assumptions about DNS activity.  Due to high volumes of
   traffic, rarely is this traffic logged directly by the server.  Some
   items might be triggered while passing through firewalls, but without
   being given the item to watch, discovering a well orchestrated attack
   is analogous to discovering a needle in the proverbial haystack.

   Many administrators overlook a serious problem made much worse by
   chatty protocols that impose processing delays.  Examining server
   logs will not reveal any problem either, because the limited resource
   being consumed is the number of outstanding connections TCP is able
   to support.  Reaching this limit will prevent new connections from
   being instantiated but this is not logged as an event.  Over time
   administrators may hear complaints email is not being delivered or
   just see an ever growing percentage of spam.

   Add language clearly indicating BOTH the implementation or use of SPF
   macro features is hereby deprecated.  Any such use provides a neutral
   result.  In addition, restore SPF type 99 to better insure the future
   health of DNS.


8.  References - Informative

   [I-D.ietf-spfbis-4408bis]



Otis & Rand             Expires November 17, 2013               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                Macros Nixed                      May 2013


              Kitterman, D., "Sender Policy Framework (SPF) for
              Authorizing Use of Domains in Email, Version 1",
              draft-ietf-spfbis-4408bis-14 (work in progress),
              April 2013.

   [I-D.kucherawy-dmarc-base]
              Kucherawy, M., "Domain-based Message Authentication,
              Reporting and Conformance (DMARC)",
              draft-kucherawy-dmarc-base-00 (work in progress),
              March 2013.

   [RFC1034]  Mockapetris, P., "Domain names - concepts and facilities",
              STD 13, RFC 1034, November 1987.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC2460]  Deering, S. and R. Hinden, "Internet Protocol, Version 6
              (IPv6) Specification", RFC 2460, December 1998.

   [RFC2782]  Gulbrandsen, A., Vixie, P., and L. Esibov, "A DNS RR for
              specifying the location of services (DNS SRV)", RFC 2782,
              February 2000.

   [RFC2822]  Resnick, P., "Internet Message Format", RFC 2822,
              April 2001.

   [RFC2827]  Ferguson, P. and D. Senie, "Network Ingress Filtering:
              Defeating Denial of Service Attacks which employ IP Source
              Address Spoofing", BCP 38, RFC 2827, May 2000.

   [RFC3123]  Koch, P., "A DNS RR Type for Lists of Address Prefixes
              (APL RR)", RFC 3123, June 2001.

   [RFC4033]  Arends, R., Austein, R., Larson, M., Massey, D., and S.
              Rose, "DNS Security Introduction and Requirements",
              RFC 4033, March 2005.

   [RFC4034]  Arends, R., Austein, R., Larson, M., Massey, D., and S.
              Rose, "Resource Records for the DNS Security Extensions",
              RFC 4034, March 2005.

   [RFC4291]  Hinden, R. and S. Deering, "IP Version 6 Addressing
              Architecture", RFC 4291, February 2006.

   [RFC4408]  Wong, M. and W. Schlitt, "Sender Policy Framework (SPF)
              for Authorizing Use of Domains in E-Mail, Version 1",
              RFC 4408, April 2006.



Otis & Rand             Expires November 17, 2013               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft                Macros Nixed                      May 2013


   [RFC4941]  Narten, T., Draves, R., and S. Krishnan, "Privacy
              Extensions for Stateless Address Autoconfiguration in
              IPv6", RFC 4941, September 2007.

   [RFC4954]  Siemborski, R. and A. Melnikov, "SMTP Service Extension
              for Authentication", RFC 4954, July 2007.

   [RFC5321]  Klensin, J., "Simple Mail Transfer Protocol", RFC 5321,
              October 2008.

   [RFC5322]  Resnick, P., Ed., "Internet Message Format", RFC 5322,
              October 2008.

   [RFC5451]  Kucherawy, M., "Message Header Field for Indicating
              Message Authentication Status", RFC 5451, April 2009.

   [RFC6376]  Crocker, D., Hansen, T., and M. Kucherawy, "DomainKeys
              Identified Mail (DKIM) Signatures", RFC 6376,
              September 2011.

   [RFC6530]  Klensin, J. and Y. Ko, "Overview and Framework for
              Internationalized Email", RFC 6530, February 2012.

   [RFC6531]  Yao, J. and W. Mao, "SMTP Extension for Internationalized
              Email", RFC 6531, February 2012.

   [RFC6532]  Yang, A., Steele, S., and N. Freed, "Internationalized
              Email Headers", RFC 6532, February 2012.

   [RFC6577]  Kucherawy, M., "Authentication-Results Registration Update
              for Sender Policy Framework (SPF) Results", RFC 6577,
              March 2012.

   [RFC6686]  Kucherawy, M., "Resolution of the Sender Policy Framework
              (SPF) and Sender ID Experiments", RFC 6686, July 2012.

   [otis-spf-dos-exploit]
              http://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-otis-spf-dos-exploit-01,
              "Otis SPF DoS Exploitation", June 2006.

   [spf-all.com]
              http://spf-all.com/stats.html, "SPF-all.com Stats",
              May 2013.








Otis & Rand             Expires November 17, 2013              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft                Macros Nixed                      May 2013


Authors' Addresses

   Douglas Otis
   Trend Micro
   10101 N. De Anza Blvd
   Cupertino, CA  95014
   USA

   Phone: +1.408.257-1500
   Email: doug_otis@trendmicro.com


   Dave Rand
   Trend Micro
   10101 N. De Anza Blvd
   Cupertino, CA  95014
   USA

   Phone: +1.408.257-1500
   Email: dave_rand@trendmicro.com































Otis & Rand             Expires November 17, 2013              [Page 11]

