A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3357

        Title:      One-way Loss Pattern Sample Metrics
        Author(s):  R. Koodli, R. Ravikanth
        Status:     Informational
        Date:       August 2002
        Mailbox:    rajeev.koodli@nokia.com, rravikanth@axiowave.com 
        Pages:      15
        Characters: 30570
        Updates/Obsoletes/SeeAlso:  None

        I-D Tag:    draft-ietf-ippm-loss-pattern-07.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3357.txt


Using the base loss metric defined in RFC 2680, this document defines
two derived metrics "loss distance" and "loss period", and the
associated statistics that together capture loss patterns experienced
by packet streams on the Internet.  The Internet exhibits certain
specific types of behavior (e.g., bursty packet loss) that can affect
the performance seen by the users as well as the operators.  The loss
pattern or loss distribution is a key parameter that determines the
performance observed by the users for certain real-time applications
such as packet voice and video.  For the same loss rate, two different
loss distributions could potentially produce widely different
perceptions of performance.

This document is a product of the IP Performance Metrics Working Group
of the IETF.

This memo provides information for the Internet community.  It does
not specify an Internet standard of any kind.  Distribution of this
memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.

