A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3432
                            
        Title:      Network performance measurement with periodic
                    streams
        Author(s):  V. Raisanen, G. Grotefeld, A. Morton
        Status:     Standards Track
        Date:       November 2002
        Mailbox:    Vilho.Raisanen@nokia.com,
                    g.grotefeld@motorola.com, acmorton@att.com
        Pages:      23
        Characters: 52493
        Updates/Obsoletes/SeeAlso:    None
                            
        I-D Tag:    draft-ietf-ippm-npmps-08.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3432.txt


This memo describes a periodic sampling method and relevant metrics
for assessing the performance of IP networks.  First, the memo
motivates periodic sampling and addresses the question of its value
as an alternative to the Poisson sampling described in RFC 2330.  The
benefits include applicability to active and passive measurements,
simulation of constant bit rate (CBR) traffic (typical of multimedia
communication, or nearly CBR, as found with voice activity detection),
and several instances in which analysis can be simplified.  The
sampling method avoids predictability by mandating random start times
and finite length tests.  Following descriptions of the sampling
method and sample metric parameters, measurement methods and errors
are discussed.  Finally, we give additional information on periodic
measurements, including security considerations.

This document is a product of the IP Performance Metrics Working Group
of the IETF.

This is now a Proposed Standard Protocol.

This document specifies an Internet standards track protocol for
the Internet community, and requests discussion and suggestions
for improvements.  Please refer to the current edition of the
"Internet Official Protocol Standards" (STD 1) for the
standardization state and status of this protocol.  Distribution
of this memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.

