A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3303

        Title:      Middlebox communication architecture and framework
        Author(s):  P. Srisuresh, J. Kuthan, J. Rosenberg, A. Molitor,
                    A. Rayhan
        Status:     Informational
        Date:       August 2002
        Mailbox:    srisuresh@yahoo.com, kuthan@fokus.fhg.de,
                    jdrosen@dynamicsoft.com, amolitor@visi.com,
                    rayhan@ee.ryerson.ca 
        Pages:      34
        Characters: 91209
        Updates/Obsoletes/SeeAlso:    None

        I-D Tag:    draft-ietf-midcom-framework-07.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3303.txt


A principal objective of this document is to describe the underlying
framework of middlebox communications (MIDCOM) to enable complex
applications through the middleboxes, seamlessly using a trusted
third party.  This document and a companion document on MIDCOM
requirements ([REQMTS]) have been created as a precursor to
rechartering the MIDCOM working group.

There are a variety of intermediate devices in the Internet today
that require application intelligence for their
operation.  Datagrams pertaining to real-time streaming applications,
such as SIP and H.323, and peer-to-peer applications, such as Napster
and NetMeeting, cannot be identified by merely examining packet
headers.  Middleboxes implementing Firewall and Network Address
Translator services typically embed application intelligence
within the device for their operation.  The document specifies an
architecture and framework in which trusted third parties can
be delegated to assist the middleboxes to perform their operation,
without resorting to embedding application intelligence.  Doing
this will allow a middlebox to continue to provide the services,
while keeping the middlebox application agnostic.

This document is a product of the Middlebox Communication Working
Group of the IETF.

This memo provides information for the Internet community.  It does
not specify an Internet standard of any kind.  Distribution of this
memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.

