A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3489

        Title:      STUN - Simple Traversal of User Datagram Protocol
                    (UDP) Through Network Address Translators (NATs)
        Author(s):  J. Rosenberg, J. Weinberger, C. Huitema, R. Mahy
        Status:     Standards Track
        Date:       March 2003
        Mailbox:    jdrosen@dynamicsoft.com,
                    jweinberger@dynamicsoft.com,
                    huitema@microsoft.com, rohan@cisco.com
        Pages:      47
        Characters: 117562
        Updates/Obsoletes/SeeAlso:    None

        I-D Tag:    draft-ietf-midcom-stun-05.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3489.txt


Simple Traversal of User Datagram Protocol (UDP) Through Network
Address Translators (NATs) (STUN) is a lightweight protocol that
allows applications to discover the presence and types of NATs and
firewalls between them and the public Internet.  It also provides the
ability for applications to determine the public Internet Protocol
(IP) addresses allocated to them by the NAT.  STUN works with many
existing NATs, and does not require any special behavior from them.
As a result, it allows a wide variety of applications to work through
existing NAT infrastructure.

This document is a product of the Middlebox Communication Working
Group of the IETF.

This is now a Proposed Standard Protocol.

This document specifies an Internet standards track protocol for
the Internet community, and requests discussion and suggestions
for improvements.  Please refer to the current edition of the
"Internet Official Protocol Standards" (STD 1) for the
standardization state and status of this protocol.  Distribution
of this memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.
