Internet Engineering Task Force                              S. Manning
Internet Draft                                                   Huawei
Intended status: Informational                               R. Streijl
Expires: April 2012                                           V. Prasad
                                                            P. Tarapore
                                                                   AT&T
                                                              M. Geller
                                                                  Cisco
                                                            R. Krishnan
                                                                Brocade
                                                       October 21, 2011


      Additional Content Distribution Network Interconnection (CDNI)
                      Requirements Based on ATIS CSF
                 draft-manning-cdni-additional-csf-reqs-00


Abstract

   The purpose of Content Delivery Networks (CDNs) is to deliver
   content to end users in an efficient manner from the perspective of
   the network providers and with consistently good performance from
   the perspective of the end user. Due to footprint limitations of a
   single network provider, it may be necessary to interconnect CDNs
   between different providers. The Content Distribution Network
   Interconnection (CDNI) working group has been chartered to develop
   an interoperable and scalable solution for such CDN interconnection.

   The requirements for CDN interconnection are being discussed and
   developed in various industry forums. One example is the Alliance
   for Telecommunications Industry Solutions (ATIS) Cloud Services
   Forum (CSF) which is looking at CDN interconnection requirements
   from the perspective of telecom providers. This document introduces
   some additional requirements to be included in the CDNI working
   group based on conclusions reached by ATIS CSF. The goal is for
   specifications developed by CDNI to successfully support some of the
   needs expressed by ATIS CSF as interpreted by the authors of this
   document.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that




Manning, et al.         Expires April 21, 2012                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft           Additional CDNI Reqs              October 2011


   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents
   at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as
   reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 21, 2012.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors. All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document. Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with
   respect to this document. Code Components extracted from this
   document must include Simplified BSD License text as described in
   Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without
   warranty as described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents


   1. Introduction...................................................3
   2. Requirements Language..........................................3
   3. Logging Interface Requirements.................................4
      3.1. Logging Failures..........................................4
      3.2. Storage Resources.........................................4
      3.3. Performance Information...................................5
      3.4. Delete Requests...........................................5
      3.5. Extensible Information Fields.............................6
   4. Control Interface Requirements.................................6
      4.1. Deletion of Objects.......................................6
      4.2. Reservation of Resources..................................7
   5. Security Considerations........................................8
   6. IANA Considerations............................................8


Manning, et al.         Expires April 21, 2012                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft           Additional CDNI Reqs              October 2011


   7. References.....................................................8
      7.1. Normative References......................................8
      7.2. Informative References....................................8
   8. Acknowledgments................................................8

1. Introduction

   [I-D.ietf-cdni-use-cases] and [I-D.ietf-cdni-requirements] describe
   the majority of use cases and requirements needed for the
   development of CDN interconnection specifications. This document
   introduces some additional requirements based on the conclusions
   reached by the Alliance for Telecommunications Industry Solutions
   (ATIS) Cloud Services Forum (CSF) which is looking at CDN
   interconnection requirements from the perspective of telecom
   providers. Based on the ATIS specification [CSF] as well as analysis
   and discussions within CSF, the authors have captured requirements
   suitable for the CDNI working group in this document.

   Although working on largely the same problem area, ATIS CSF has a
   wider scope than the CDNI working group and considers interactions
   between Content Service Providers (CSPs) and CDNs as well as
   examining interface "domains" that include Operations & Customer
   Care (establishment of SLAs), Back Office (provisioning and
   charging), and aspects of the "data plane" [2]. Therefore, some of
   the ATIS CSF use cases and requirements fall outside the solution
   scope of the CDNI working group. However, some ATIS CSF
   requirements, especially in the CDNI logging and control interfaces,
   are well matched to the CDNI solution scope. The hope is that the
   inclusion of the appropriate requirements in this document will
   allow the CDNI working group specifications to support the ATIS
   community and help foster aligned solutions to the common CDNI
   problem. This will benefit the CDN community and encourage wider
   adoption of IETF CDNI standards.

2. Requirements Language

   The key words "High Priority", "Medium Priority" and "Low Priority"
   in this document are to be interpreted in the following way:

     o "High Priority" indicates requirements that are to be supported
        by the CDNI interfaces.  A requirement is stated as "High
        Priority" when it is established by the working group that it
        can be met without compromising the targeted schedule for WG
        deliverables, or when it is established that specifying a
        solution without meeting this requirement would not make sense
        and would justify re-adjusting the WG schedule, or both.  This
        is tagged as "[HIGH]".


Manning, et al.         Expires April 21, 2012                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft           Additional CDNI Reqs              October 2011



     o "Medium Priority" indicates requirements that are to be
        supported by the CDNI interfaces unless the WG realizes at a
        later stage that attempting to meet this requirement would
        compromise the overall WG schedule (for example it would
        involve complexities that would result in significantly
        delaying the deliverables). This is tagged as "[MED]".

     o "Low Priority" indicates requirements that are to be supported
        by the CDNI interfaces provided that dedicating WG resources to
        this work does not prevent addressing "High Priority" and
        "Medium Priority" requirements and that attempting to meet this
        requirement would not compromise the overall WG schedule.  This
        is tagged as "[LOW]".



3. Logging Interface Requirements

3.1. Logging Failures

   One of ATIS CSF explicit requirements is for the logging interface
   to record individual actions on content items which includes
   unsuccessful deliveries. See [CSF] section 7.1.2, requirement R1.
   This leads to the following additional CDNI requirements:

     LOG-A1  [HIGH] The CDNI Logging interface shall support logging of
             incomplete deliveries to User Agents performed by the
             Downstream CDN as a result of request redirection by the
             Upstream CDN.

     LOG-A2  [MED] In the case of cascaded CDNs, the CDNI Logging
             interface shall support the Downstream CDN for reporting
             to the Upstream CDN logging for incomplete deliveries
             performed by the Downstream CDN itself as well as logging
             for incomplete deliveries performed by cascaded CDNs on
             behalf of the Downstream CDN.

3.2. Storage Resources

   ATIS CSF requirements for the logging interface include the use of
   storage resources in the dCDN when such resources are requested by
   the uCDN. This is primarily useful for pre-positioning content. See
   [CSF] section 7.1.4, requirement R4 and R11. This leads to the
   following additional CDNI requirements:




Manning, et al.         Expires April 21, 2012                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft           Additional CDNI Reqs              October 2011


     LOG-A3  [MED] The CDNI Logging interface shall support logging of
             storage resources to the upstream CDN for deliveries where
             content is stored by the downstream CDN for delivery to
             User Agents. The information logged may include the type
             of storage (e.g., Origin, Intermediate, Edge, Cache) as
             well as the amount of storage (e.g., total GB, GB used,
             per time period, per content domain) all of which may
             impact the cost of the services.

     LOG-A4  [MED] In the case of cascaded CDNs, the CDNI Logging
             interface shall support the Downstream CDN to report
             storage resources to the Upstream CDN where content is
             stored by the Downstream CDN itself as well as logging for
             storage resources when content storage is performed by
             cascaded CDNs on behalf of the Downstream CDN.

     LOG-A5  [MED] The CDNI Logging interface shall support the
             upstream CDN to request the downstream CDN to return
             information on storage resources to the upstream CDN for
             deliveries where content is currently being stored by the
             downstream CDN for delivery to User Agents.

3.3. Performance Information

   ATIS CSF requirements for the logging interface includes the
   reporting of performance statistics between the CDNs. This is
   especially important for monitoring common data traffic such as HTTP
   streaming sessions. See [CSF] section 7.1.2, requirement R6. This
   leads to the following additional CDNI requirement:

     LOG-A6  [MED] The CDNI Logging interface shall support logging of
             performance data for deliveries to User Agents performed
             by the Downstream CDN as a result of request redirection
             by the Upstream CDN. Performance data may include various
             traffic statistics (the specific parameters are to be
             determined). The Logging interface shall support the
             upstream CDN to indicate the nature and contents of the
             performance data to be reported by the downstream CDN.

3.4. Delete Requests

   ATIS CSF requirements for the logging interface includes recording
   explicit deletions of content (e.g., over the control interface).
   This leads to the following additional CDNI requirement:

     LOG-A7  [HIGH] The CDNI Logging interface shall support logging of
             deleted objects from the downstream CDN to the upstream


Manning, et al.         Expires April 21, 2012                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft           Additional CDNI Reqs              October 2011


             CDN as a result of explicit delete requests on via the
             Control interface from the upstream CDN.

3.5. Extensible Information Fields

   ATIS CSF requirements for the logging interface involves
   extensibility in the protocol to support implementation dependent
   information. See [CSF] section 7.1.2, requirement R2. This leads to
   the following additional CDNI requirements:

     LOG-A8  [HIGH] The CDNI Logging interface shall support
             extensibility to allow proprietary information fields to
             be carried. These information fields must be agreed upon
             ahead of time between the corresponding CDNs.

     LOG-A9  [HIGH] The CDNI Logging interface shall support the
             exchange of extensible log file formats to support
             proprietary information fields. These information fields
             must be agreed upon ahead of time between the
             corresponding CDNs.

4. Control Interface Requirements

4.1. Deletion of Objects

   The uCDN may explicitly command the dCDN to delete certain content
   objects. ATIS CSF views that the deletion of objects is particular
   sensitive to CDN providers and the interface operation needs some
   clarifications. For example, it might take some finite amount of
   time to process deletions in the dCDN. During this time, the uCDN
   may assume that the dCDN will continue to deliver the content marked
   for deletion. But once the delete acknowledgement is received, the
   uCDN should be certain that no more deliveries will take place out
   of the dCDN and all copies of the content have been completely
   removed. The following CDNI requirement makes these assumptions
   clear:

     CNTL-A1 [HIGH] The CDNI Control interface shall support the
             process by which the uCDN receives confirmation that the
             deletion of all copies of content have been done by the
             dCDN upon request by the uCDN. The confirmation receipt
             should be supported through a synchronous and/or
             asynchronous mechanism and should include a success or
             failure indication. The failure indication is used if the
             dCDN cannot delete the content.




Manning, et al.         Expires April 21, 2012                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft           Additional CDNI Reqs              October 2011


   Another situation is where an object is made up of a collection of
   sub-objects. The dCDN may fail to delete the entire object. In this
   case, a partial delete indication should be sent to the uCDN
   specifying which sub-objects were successfully deleted. The
   following CDNI requirement makes this clear:


     CNTL-A2 [MED] The CDNI Control interface should support the
             Downstream CDN to indicate to the Upstream CDN a list of
             sub-objects that were successfully deleted and a list of
             sub-objects that were unsuccessfully deleted in the case
             of an object made up of a collection of sub-objects was
             not fully deleted by the Downstream CDN.

   Finally, there is the case where an uCDN wishes to purge all content
   associated with a particular dCDN without issuing multiple delete
   requests for each and every content object. The CDN pair, however,
   continues to have a business relationship and therefore may elect to
   maintain the established CDNI session. The following CDNI
   requirement supports this:


     CNTL-A3 [MED] The CDNI Control interface should support the
             Upstream CDN to efficiently request that the Downstream
             CDN that all content stored in the Downstream CDN on
             behalf of the Upstream CDN be deleted without enumeration
             of each individual object. Further, a single delete
             request may operate across many objects based on
             parameters such as content type, content provider name,
             content domain, etc.

4.2. Reservation of Resources

   ATIS CSF has requirements for the uCDN to ask the dCDN to reserve
   bandwidth/storage resources in anticipation of content deliveries.
   For example, this may be important for the delivery of live
   streaming content. This is seen in [CSF] section 7.2.3, requirement
   R12. The following CDNI requirement supports this:

     CNTL-A4 [MED] The CDNI Control interface shall support the
             Upstream CDN to request that the Downstream CDN to reserve
             capacity at some future time in terms of streaming
             bandwidth between the CDNs and/or storage resources in the
             downstream CDN prior to content delivery.





Manning, et al.         Expires April 21, 2012                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft           Additional CDNI Reqs              October 2011


5. Security Considerations

   This document adds no additional security considerations beyond
   those found in [I-D.ietf-cdni-use-cases] and [I-D.ietf-cdni-
   requirements].

6. IANA Considerations

   This document makes no request of IANA.

7. References

7.1. Normative References

   [I-D.ietf-cdni-requirements]
             K. Leung, K. and Lee Y. (Editors), "Content Distribution
             Network Interconnection (CDNI) Requirements", draft-ietf-
             cdni-requirements-00 (work in progress), September 2011.

   [I-D.ietf-cdni-use-cases]
             Bertrand, G. (Editor), Stephan, E., Watson, G.,
             Burbridge, T., Eardley, P., and Ma, K., "Use Cases for
             Content Delivery Network Interconnection", draft-ietf-
             cdni-use-cases-00 (work in progress), September 2011.

7.2. Informative References

    [CSF]    Tarapore, P. and Munson G. (Editors), "CDN Interconnection
             Use Case Specification and High Level Requirements",
             Alliance for Telecommunications Industry Solutions: ATIS-
             0200003, June 2011.

8. Acknowledgments

   The authors wish to thank Gary Munson, Andrew White, Spencer
   Dawkins, and Jincheng Li, as well as the members of the ATIS Cloud
   Services Forum for their discussions and input.

Authors' Addresses

   Serge Manning
   Huawei US Research Center
   Plano, TX

   Email: sergem913@gmail.com




Manning, et al.         Expires April 21, 2012                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft           Additional CDNI Reqs              October 2011


   Robert Streijl
   AT&T
   Chicago, IL

   Email: rs0608@att.com

   Vishwa Prasad
   AT&T
   Middletown, NJ

   Email: vp2613@att.com

   Percy Tarapore
   AT&T
   Middletown, NJ

   Email: pt5947@att.com


   Mike Geller
   Cisco Systems

   Email: mgeller@cisco.com

   Ramki Krishnan
   Brocade Communications
   San Jose, CA

   Email: ramk@brocade.com




















Manning, et al.         Expires April 21, 2012                 [Page 9]

