A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3106

        Title:      ECML v1.1: Field Specifications for E-Commerce
        Author(s):  D. Eastlake, T. Goldstein
        Status:     Informational
        Date:       April 2001
        Mailbox:    Donald.Eastlake@motorola.com,
                    tgoldstein@brodia.com 
        Pages:      20
        Characters: 40715
        Obsoletes:  2706

        I-D Tag:    draft-eastlake-ecom-fields2-05.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3106.txt


Customers are frequently required to enter substantial amounts of
information at an Internet merchant site in order to complete a
purchase or other transaction, especially the first time they go
there.  A standard set of information fields is defined as the first
version of an Electronic Commerce Modeling Language (ECML) so that
this task can be more easily automated, for example by wallet
software that could fill in fields.  Even for the manual data entry
case, customers will be less confused by varying merchant sites if a
substantial number adopt these standard fields.  In addition, some
fields are defined for merchant to consumer communication.

This memo provides information for the Internet community.  It does
not specify an Internet standard of any kind.  Distribution of this
memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.

