
TRILL Working Group                                      Donald Eastlake
INTERNET-DRAFT                                              Mingui Zhang
Intended status: Proposed Standard                                Huawei
                                                           Radia Perlman
                                                              Intel Labs
Expires: January 3, 2012                                    July 4, 2011


                  RBridges: Multi-Topology Data Plane
            <draft-eastlake-trill-rbridge-multi-topo-00.txt>


Abstract

   The IETF has standardized RBridges (Routing Bridges), devices that
   implement the TRILL (TRansparent Interconnection of Lots of Links)
   protocol, a solution for least cost transparent frame routing in
   multi-hop networks with arbitrary topologies, using IS-IS
   (Intermediate System to Intermediate System) link-state routing and
   encapsulation with a hop count.

   IS-IS supports multi-topology routing. This document specifies a
   TRILL data plane encoding to make use of such routing.


Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Distribution of this document is unlimited. Comments should be sent
   to the TRILL working group mailing list.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html







D. Eastlake, et al                                              [Page 1]

INTERNET-DRAFT                       RBridges: Multi-Topology Data Plane


Table of Contents

      1. Introduction............................................3
      1.1 Terminology............................................3

      2. TRILL Multi-Topology (MT)...............................4
      2.1 Nicknames and Topology Abbreviation....................4
      2.2 Nickname Allocation....................................5
      2.3 SPF and Distribution Tree Calculation..................5

      3. Processing Multi-Topology Frames........................7
      3.1 Ingress Processing.....................................7
      4.2 Transit Processing.....................................7
      4.3 Egress Processing......................................7
      4.4 Address Learning.......................................7

      5. IS-IS Extensions........................................8

      6. IANA Considerations.....................................9
      7. Security Considerations.................................9

      8. References.............................................10
      8.1 Normative References..................................10
      8.2 Informative References................................10




























D. Eastlake, et al                                              [Page 2]

INTERNET-DRAFT                       RBridges: Multi-Topology Data Plane


1. Introduction

   The IETF has standardized RBridges (Routing Bridges), devices that
   implement the TRILL (TRansparent Interconnection of Lots of Links)
   protocol [RFCtrill], a solution for least cost transparent frame
   routing in multi-hop networks with arbitrary topologies, using IS-IS
   (Intermediate System to Intermediate System) link-state routing [IS-
   IS] [RFC1195] [ISIStrill] and encapsulation with a hop count.

   TRILL supports VLANs (Virtual Local Area Networks) but the
   segregation provided by VLANs is logical, especially so with TRILL.
   While maintaining logical separation, the base TRILL standard shares
   inter-RBridge links across all VLANs and by default interconnects all
   end stations that are in the same VLAN and have connectivity to any
   RBridge in the campus.

   IS-IS multi-topology [RFC5120] can provide physical separation of
   classes of TRILL Data frames, assuming that the RBridges in a campus
   can be trusted. This can be used for a variety of purposes including
   such things as confining traffic to isolated islands within an
   RBridge campus, quality of service traffic engineering, excluding
   some frames from links that are particularly exposed to interception,
   and providing significant protection against some covert channels
   [RFC4949].

   Familiarity with the TRILL base protocol standard [RFCtrill], TRILL
   use of IS-IS [ISIStrill], and IS-IS multi-topology [RFC5120] is
   assumed in this document.



1.1 Terminology

   The terminology and acronyms of [RFCtrill] are used in this document
   with the additions listed below.

      MT - Multi-Topology

      TAS - Topology Abbreviation Size

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].









D. Eastlake, et al                                              [Page 3]

INTERNET-DRAFT                       RBridges: Multi-Topology Data Plane


2. TRILL Multi-Topology (MT)

   The essence of TRILL multi-topology (MT) is that (a) when TRILL Data
   frames are ingressed or created they are assigned to a topology, (b)
   links can be labeled with one or more topologies and different cost,
   etc., for different topologies, and (c) a TRILL Data frame is only
   allowed on a link labeled with the frame's topology.  In addition,
   there is a base topology: all links are considered to be labeled to
   allow frames in the base topology, and, by default, TRILL Data frames
   are considered to be base topology frames.

   With minor exceptions, it is important that all transit RBridges
   believe a TRILL Data frame is in the same topology to avoid
   persistent routing loops. This document specifies how to encode this
   information into the egress nickname in a TRILL Data frame. (It is
   believed that this technique is supportable by most if not all TRILL
   fast path silicon implementations as of the date of this document.)

   Implementation of MT has a significant impact on shortest path and
   distribution tree computation. In general, it multiplies the level of
   effort by the number of different topologies. Using the technique in
   this document, it also reduces the number of of available nicknames,
   generally dividing it by the number of topologies rounded up to the
   next power of two. For these reasons, the number of topologies in use
   should be minimized.



2.1 Nicknames and Topology Abbreviation

   The TRILL base protocol standard [RFCtrill] specifies 16-bit
   nicknames as abbreviations for RBridge IS-IS System IDs. In MT TRILL
   the nickname is subdivided into two fields. The least significant TAS
   (Topology Abbreviation Size) number of bits indicate the topology
   constraints of the nickname while the most significant ( 16 - TAS )
   bits continue to act as an abbreviation for an RBridge System ID.

   The TAS value for an MT RBridge campus is dictated by the RBridge
   that is the highest priority to be a distribution tree root.  The
   value of TAS can vary from zero to seven. Zero is permitted and
   indicates that only the base topology can be used.

   In IS-IS, topologies have a 12-bit ID which we refer to as an
   absolute topology number. Topology zero is the base topology. All
   links are considered to be part of the base topology. Absolute
   topology numbers are mapped into abbreviations by a table dictated by
   the RBridge that is the highest priority to be a distribution tree
   root. In the opening remarks to this Section 2, "topology" should be
   read as referring to topology abbreviation.



D. Eastlake, et al                                              [Page 4]

INTERNET-DRAFT                       RBridges: Multi-Topology Data Plane


   Multiple absoolute topology numbers MAY be mapped into the same
   abbreviation. This may or may not result in the merger of the mapped
   absolute topologies depending on whether their use is disjoint or
   overlapping. Absolute topology zero and topology abbreviation zero
   always refers to the base topology.

   For example, assume that absolute topologies T1 and T2 exist and are
   both mapped into the same abbreviation, say 3. If all RBridges
   reachable by links labeled T1 or T2 are connected through such links,
   then, since MT TRILL forwarding is based on the topology
   abbreviation, T1 and T2 are necessarily merged to the extent both
   topologies are in use. On the other hand, such RBridges could be
   divided into disjoint islands with no connection via T1 or T2 links.
   In that case, depending on how frames are topologically classified on
   ingress and egress, each such island could independently be
   exclusively T1, exclusively T2, merged T1 and T2, or unused.



2.2 Nickname Allocation

   RBridges indicate in their LSP whether they support MT by the
   presence of the MT TLV [RFC5120]. If all RBridges in a campus support
   MT, then RBridges can be configured for and contend for nicknames as
   provided in [RFCtrill], but only for nicknames that have TAS number
   of low order zero bits. If there are any RBridges in the campus that
   do not support MT, then MT RBridges must hold all nicknames from ( k
   * 2**TAS ) through ( (k+1) * 2**TAS - 1 ) in order to, in effect,
   hold nickname ( k * 2**TAS ).

   RBridges not supporting MT are unaware of the subdivision of the
   TRILL nickname into subfields. Thus, they may hold artbirary 16-bit
   allowed quanities as nicknames. MT aware RBridges know that the
   bottom TAS bits of any nicknames held by such MT unaware RBridges are
   not topologically significant.



2.3 SPF and Distribution Tree Calculation

   Since MT TRILL cannot impose any changes on MT unaware RBridges,
   those RBridges will perform their SPF and distribution tree
   calculations as specified in [RFCtrill]. For compatibility, MT aware
   RBridge MUST perform their base topology SPF and distribution tree
   calculations in the same way. MT aware RBridges do this even if one
   or more non-zero absolute topologies are being mapped into the base
   topology abbreviation zero.

   For MT aware RBridges, least cost (SPF) paths are calculated per
   topology abbreviation for the abbreviations labeling any link


D. Eastlake, et al                                              [Page 5]

INTERNET-DRAFT                       RBridges: Multi-Topology Data Plane


   connected to that RBridge. For topologies other than the base
   toplogy, link costs from the MT-ISN TLV (TLV #222 [RFC5120]) are
   used; however, such costs are reported per absolute topology, not per
   topology abbreviation.  This is resolved for non-zero abbreviations
   by using, in SPF calculations, the lowest cost reported for the link
   for any absolute topology corresponding the topology abbreviation for
   which the calculation is being performed. Non-base topologies do not
   necessarily span the campus and there may be RBridges that are
   unreachable in such topologies. Frames destined for unreachable
   RBridges are discarded.

   Distribution trees are also calculated per topology abbreviation by
   MT aware RBridges. Such trees are built as described in [RFCtrill]
   with the following differences for non-zero topology abbreviations:

   1. Link costs are as described in the preceding paragraph on TRILL MT
      SPF calculations.

   2. The tree root nicknames(s) for the distribution tree(s) for a
      particular topology abbreviation are determined using the Trees
      sub-TLVs and Tree Identifiers sub-TLVs for all of the absolute
      topologies that are mapped into the topology abbreviation for
      which distribution tree(s) are being calculated. All nicknames
      appearing in these sub-TLVs MUST have their lower TAS number of
      bits zero. more tbd

   3. Number of trees. What happens if you have 25 topologies but some
      of your RBridges only support 16 distribution trees?
























D. Eastlake, et al                                              [Page 6]

INTERNET-DRAFT                       RBridges: Multi-Topology Data Plane


3. Processing Multi-Topology Frames

   This section specifies ingress, transit, and egress processing of MT
   TRILL Data frames.



3.1 Ingress Processing

   On ingressing or creating a frame, an RBridge assigns it to an
   absolute topology ID. The method by which this 12-bit topology ID is
   assigned is beyond the scope of this document.

   The resulting absolute ID is mapped to a topology abbreviation. That
   abbreviation is used as the bottom TAS bits in the ingress nickname
   field of the resulting TRILL Data frame. For a unicast native frame,
   that abbreviation, the VLAN, and the destination MAC address are used
   to look up the egress nickname field. If the destination is unknown,
   or the native frame is multicast or broadcast, the ingress RBridge
   selects a distribution tree



4.2 Transit Processing

   No change is required in transit frame processing assuming that SPF
   and distribution tree calculations have been performed as specified
   in Section 2.3.



4.3 Egress Processing




4.4 Address Learning















D. Eastlake, et al                                              [Page 7]

INTERNET-DRAFT                       RBridges: Multi-Topology Data Plane


5. IS-IS Extensions

   For the general extension of TRILL use of IS-IS to make use of the
   multi-topology features of IS-IS, see [trill-mt-control].

   In addition, a topology mapping sub-TLV is required, as specified in
   [trill-mt-control]. This sub-TLV is across all topologies and occurs
   in the Router Capabilities TLV. It specifies the TAS for the campus
   and provides a mapping from absolute topology IDs to topology
   abbreviations. Absolute topology zero is always mapped to topology
   abbreviation zero. No entry is needed for this base topology mapping
   and any other mapping for topology zero is ignored. Multiple absolute
   topologies may be mapped to the same abbreviation. If there are
   mappings of the same absolute topology to multiple abbreviations, the
   largest abbreviation, considered as an unsigned integer dominates.





































D. Eastlake, et al                                              [Page 8]

INTERNET-DRAFT                       RBridges: Multi-Topology Data Plane


6. IANA Considerations

   TBD



7. Security Considerations

   See [RFCtrill] for general RBridge Security Considerations.

   As with any communications system, end-to-end encryption and
   authentication should be considered for particularly sensitive data.

   More TBD






































D. Eastlake, et al                                              [Page 9]

INTERNET-DRAFT                       RBridges: Multi-Topology Data Plane


8. References

   The following sections list normative and informative references for
   this document.



8.1 Normative References

   [IS-IS] - International Organization for Standardization,
         "Intermediate system to Intermediate system intra-domain
         routeing information exchange protocol for use in conjunction
         with the protocol for providing the connectionless-mode Network
         Service (ISO 8473)", ISO/IEC 10589:2002, Second Edition, Nov
         2002.

   [RFC1195] - Callon, R., "Use of OSI IS-IS for routing in TCP/IP and
         dual environments", RFC 1195, December 1990.

   [RFC2119] - Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
         Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997

[RFC5120] - Przygienda, T., Shen, N., and N. Sheth, "M-ISIS: Multi
         Topology (MT) Routing in Intermediate System to Intermediate
         Systems (IS-ISs)", RFC 5120, February 2008.

[RFC 5305] - Li, T. and H. Smit, "IS-IS Extensions for Traffic
         Engineering", RFC 5305, October 2008.

   [RFCtrill] - R. Perlman, D. Eastlake, D. Dutt, S. Gai, and A.
         Ghanwani, "RBridges: Base Protocol Specification", draft-ietf-
         trill-rbridge-protocol-16.txt, in RFC Editor's queue.

   [ISIStrill] - Eastlake, D., A. Banerjee, D. Dutt, R. Perlman, A.
         Ghanwani, "TRILL Use of IS-IS", draft-ietf-isis-trill-05.txt,
         in RFC Editor's queue.

   [trill-mt-control] - Manral, V., D. Eastlake, M. Zhang, A. Banerjee,
         "Multi Topology Routing Extensions for Transparent
         Interconnection of Lots of Links (TRILL)", draft-manral-isis-
         trill-multi-topo-01.txt, work in progress.



8.2 Informative References

   [RFC4949] - Shirey, R., "Internet Security Glossary, Version 2", FYI
         36, RFC 4949, August 2007.




D. Eastlake, et al                                             [Page 10]

INTERNET-DRAFT                       RBridges: Multi-Topology Data Plane


9. Acknowledgements

   The comments and contributions of the following are gratefully
   acknowledged:

      TBD.



Authors' Addresses

   Donald Eastlake 3rd
   Huawei Technologies
   155 Beaver Street
   Milford, MA 01757 USA

   Phone: +1-508-333-2270
   EMail: d3e3e3@gmail.com


   Mingui Zhang
   Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd
   HuaWei Building, No.3 Xinxi Rd., Shang-Di
   Information Industry Base, Hai-Dian District,
   Beijing, 100085 P.R. China

   Email: zhangmingui@huawei.com


   Radia Perlman
   Intel Labs
   2200 Mission College Blvd.
   Santa Clara, CA 95054 USA

   Phone: +1-408-765-8080
   Email: radia@alum.mit.edu
















D. Eastlake, et al                                             [Page 11]

INTERNET-DRAFT                       RBridges: Multi-Topology Data Plane


Copyright, Disclaimer, and Additional IPR Provisions

   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors. All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document. Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document. Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.  The definitive version of
   an IETF Document is that published by, or under the auspices of, the
   IETF. Versions of IETF Documents that are published by third parties,
   including those that are translated into other languages, should not
   be considered to be definitive versions of IETF Documents. The
   definitive version of these Legal Provisions is that published by, or
   under the auspices of, the IETF. Versions of these Legal Provisions
   that are published by third parties, including those that are
   translated into other languages, should not be considered to be
   definitive versions of these Legal Provisions.  For the avoidance of
   doubt, each Contributor to the IETF Standards Process licenses each
   Contribution that he or she makes as part of the IETF Standards
   Process to the IETF Trust pursuant to the provisions of RFC 5378. No
   language to the contrary, or terms, conditions or rights that differ
   from or are inconsistent with the rights and licenses granted under
   RFC 5378, shall have any effect and shall be null and void, whether
   published or posted by such Contributor, or included with or in such
   Contribution.





















D. Eastlake, et al                                             [Page 12]

