Network Working Group                                         R. Struik 
Internet Draft                                              independent 
Intended status: Informational                             July 5, 2010 
Expires: January 2011 
                                    
 
                                      
          Facilitating Speed-ups of Elliptic Curve Based Schemes 
                   draft-struik-ecc-efficiencies-00.txt 


Abstract 

   We discuss several methods that can be used to accelerate the 
   verification step of ECC-based signature schemes. These include a 
   40% efficiency improvement of ordinary ECDSA signature verification 
   and even a factor 2.4x efficiency improvement when ECDSA certificate 
   verification is combined with the key computation step in Diffie-
   Hellman-based  protocols,  such  as  static-ECDH  and  ECMQV.  This 
   challenges the conventional wisdom that with ECC-based signature 
   schemes, signature verification is always considerably slower than 
   signature generation and slower than RSA signature verification. 
   Results apply to all prime curves standardized by NIST, the NSA 
   'Suite B' curves, and the so-called Brainpool curves.  

   While the efficiency advantages of these methods are most apparent 
   for a slightly modified version of ECDSA, these can also be enjoyed 
   if the signer appends a small number of bits ("side information") to 
   standardized ECDSA signatures or generates these ECDSA signatures in 
   a particular "fast verification friendly" way. Since the latter can 
   be done as a post-processing operation by any third party, this does 
   not require changes to the standardized specifications of ECDSA (or, 
   e.g., recertification by a Certificate Authority).  

Status of this Memo 

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the 
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79. This document may not be modified, 
   and derivative works of it may not be created, except to publish it 
   as an RFC and to translate it into languages other than English. 

   This document may contain material from IETF Documents or IETF 
   Contributions published or made publicly available before November 
   10, 2008. The person(s) controlling the copyright in some of this 
   material may not have granted the IETF Trust the right to allow 
   modifications of such material outside the IETF Standards Process.  
   Without obtaining an adequate license from the person(s) controlling 
   the copyright in such materials, this document may not be modified 
 
 
 
Struik                 Expires January 5, 2011                 [Page 1] 

Internet-Draft        Facilitating ECC Speed-ups              July 2010 
    

   outside the IETF Standards Process, and derivative works of it may 
   not be created outside the IETF Standards Process, except to format 
   it for publication as an RFC or to translate it into languages other 
   than English. 

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents 
   at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as 
   reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html 

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 5, 2011. 

Copyright Notice 

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the 
   document authors. All rights reserved. 

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal 
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents 
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of 
   publication of this document. Please review these documents 
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with 
   respect to this document. Code Components extracted from this 
   document must include Simplified BSD License text as described in 
   Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without 
   warranty as described in the Simplified BSD License. 

Table of Contents 

    
   1. Introduction...................................................3 
   2. ECDSA and Modified ECDSA.......................................3 
   3. Security Considerations........................................5 
   4. IANA Considerations............................................6 
   5. Conclusions....................................................6 
   6. References.....................................................6 
 
 
Struik                 Expires January 5, 2011                 [Page 2] 

Internet-Draft        Facilitating ECC Speed-ups              July 2010 
    

      6.1. Normative References......................................6 
      6.2. Informative References....................................6 
   7. Acknowledgments................................................8 
    
1. Introduction 

   The elliptic curve digital signature algorithm (ECDSA) is a widely 
   standardized variant of the original ElGamal signature scheme. As is 
   the case with most ElGamal signature schemes, ECDSA has the property 
   that signature verification is about twice as slow as signature 
   generation (and many times slower if the signer is afforded the 
   luxury of precomputation). The opposite is true in the RSA signature 
   scheme  with  small  encryption  exponent  e,  where  signature 
   verification is many times faster than generation. Thus speeding up 
   ECDSA signature verification is a problem of considerable practical 
   importance.  

   Recently, some techniques that significantly enhance the efficiency 
   of ECDSA signature verification have been introduced [4], [5], [15]. 
   This  document  aims  to  facilitate  the  optional  use  of  these 
   techniques, so as to foster wide-scale adoption.  

2. ECDSA and Modified ECDSA 

   With ECDSA, signatures consist of two non-negative integers, called 
   "r" and "s" in [2]. Here, the signature component "r" is derived 
   from an ephemeral private key R:=(x1,y1):=kG (cf. [2]) using a 
   publicly known algorithm. We call the signature scheme that results 
   in signature components (R, s), rather than (r,s), the "modified 
   ECDSA scheme". 

   We provide a summary of technical properties of ECDSA and Modified 
   ECDSA below (for a more detailed discussion, cf. [4]): 

1. Equivalence of operation. ECDSA Ordinary Verify yields a verdict on 
  whether a particular ECDSA signature (r,s) over a message m signed by 
  an entity with authentic public key Q is valid. Fast ECDSA Verify, as 
  described in Section 4.2 [4], yields the same verdict and, thus, is 
  equivalent to Ordinary ECDSA Verify. 
   
2. Performance  comparison.  ECDSA  Fast  Verify  relies  on  correctly 
  recovering the ephemeral elliptic curve point R used during the ECDSA 
  signing operation and then checking a particular elliptic curve 
  equation. In general, reconstruction of this value from signature 
  component r yields two candidate solutions (R, -R), rather than one. 
 
 
Struik                 Expires January 5, 2011                 [Page 3] 

Internet-Draft        Facilitating ECC Speed-ups              July 2010 
    

  Thus, verification may necessitate trying either value to see if the 
  verification equation is satisfied. Performance is as follows: 
 
  If the verifier can always discard one of the two candidate solutions 
  (R, -R), the speed-up of ECDSA signature verification is roughly 40%. 
  This situation occurs if one knows ECDSA signatures have been 
  generated in a "Fast Verify friendly" way (e.g., by changing the sign 
  of signature component s if appropriate) or if there is some side 
  information  communicated  with  the  ECDSA  signature  that  allows 
  efficiently discarding one of these solutions. 
   
  If the verifier cannot discard one of the two candidate solutions 
  (R,-R), the speed-up of ECDSA signature verification is only roughly 
  8%, since one has to try either value of R and has no way of knowing 
  which of the two values is the correct one. This situation occurs if 
  ECDSA signatures have been generated in the "standard" way [1] and 
  there is no side information communicated with the ECDSA signature 
  that allows discarding one of these solutions. Note that while the 
  average speed-up is 8%, the per-signature speed-up is between +40% 
  (correct value of R picked first) and -12% (incorrect value of R 
  picked first). 
 
  The following compliance aspects seem to apply:  
   
  1. Standards Compliance of ECDSA Fast Verify. ECDSA Ordinary Verify 
     and ECDSA Fast Verify are equivalent operations. Thus, it seems 
     that any implementation of ECDSA Fast Verify will automatically be 
     compliant with standards that specify ECDSA Ordinary Verify (this 
     includes ANSI X9.62-2005). 
      
  2. Standards Compliance of ECDSA Sign. The elliptic curve point R 
     used for computing the ECDSA signature (r,s) can be recomputed by 
     any party from the signature and the public key of the signer 
     alone. In particular, the value of R does not leak any information 
     on the internal mechanics of the signing operation (including the 
     signer's private key). Thus, it seems that any implementation of 
     ECDSA that exposes this value R as an additional output of the 
     ECDSA signing operation would be compliant with standards that 
     specify ECDSA Signing (this includes [1]). This would essentially 
     mean that ECDSA* Signing would be compliant. Note, though, that 

 
 
Struik                 Expires January 5, 2011                 [Page 4] 

Internet-Draft        Facilitating ECC Speed-ups              July 2010 
    

     the standard does not stipulate anything on additional output 
     parameters of the ECDSA signing or verification operation. 
 
  3. Post-processing operations. Any party may be able to change the s 
     component of the ECDSA signature without impacting the validity 
     hereof: validity of ECDSA signatures does not depend on the sign 
     of  signature  component  s.  This  allows  implementation  of  an 
     efficient mechanism for putting an ECDSA signature into a 'Fast 
     Verify  friendly'  format  (by  changing  the  sign  of  signature 
     component s depending on inspection of R) as a post-processing 
     operation. Note that this can be done efficiently in a standards 
     compliant way if implementations of ECDSA signing that expose the 
     ephemeral public key used in the signing process are standards 
     compliant  (i.e.,  it  depends  on  the  answer  to  #2  above). 
     Furthermore, note that ECDSA has no way of preventing any party 
     from executing this post-processing operation (since it can be 
     done, e.g., while the signature is in transit). This suggests that 
     this *should* be allowed for compliant implementations. 
 
   Additional techniques that result in speed-up of ECDSA signature 
   generation and those of related signature schemes will be described 
   in a later version of this document. 

   The techniques described are most beneficial if reconstruction of 
   the ephemeral key R used during ECDSA signature generation from 
   signature component r is a 1-1 mapping. This could be facilitated by 
   generating these so as to allow discarding one of the pair (R,-R) of 
   ephemeral keys that normally would result from this reconstruction 
   operation, via a predetermined rule. As an example, one could change 
   the signature (r,s) into (r,-s) if the y-coordinate of R during 
   signature verification has an odd integer value. This could be 
   indicated via an OID number.  

3. Security Considerations 

   The techniques to accelerate elliptic curve schemes discussed in 
   this submission are most advantageous if the signature scheme ECDSA 
   (or ECGDSA) are generated in a particular way, so as to ensure that 
   conversions between the original scheme and the modified scheme are 
   1-1 mappings. One can show that for elliptic curves widely used in 
   practice (such as the so-called NIST curves, the NSA 'Suite B' 
   curves, and Brainpool curves) this transformation results in an 
   equally secure scheme. For details re ECDSA and modified ECDSA, cf., 
   e.g., [4]; for details re combined key agreement and signature 
 
 
Struik                 Expires January 5, 2011                 [Page 5] 

Internet-Draft        Facilitating ECC Speed-ups              July 2010 
    

   verification, cf., e.g., [15]. More details for other schemes, such 
   as ECGDSA, will be provided in a later version of this document. 

4. IANA Considerations 

   This document contains a request to IANA to assign new OIDs for 
   ECDSA  signatures  generated  so  as  to  most  efficiently  making 
   available the efficiency enhancements described in this document. 

   A detailed list will be provided in a later version of this 
   document. 

5. Conclusions 

   We described various techniques that can be used to accelerate ECDSA 
   signature verification, either separately, or combined with other 
   signature verifications, or with key computations. We also outlined 
   how to enable a world where one would be able to reap the benefits 
   of these techniques always, via the use of a new OID. As poor man's 
   version, one could simply phase out generation of ECDSA signatures 
   in a non-friendly format (which can be done since there are several 
   orders  of  magnitude  difference  between  actual  and  potential 
   deployment right now).  

6. References 

6.1. Normative References 

   [1]   ANSI X9.62-1998, Public Key Cryptography for the Financial 
         Services Industry: The Elliptic Curve Digital Signature 
         Algorithm (ECDSA), American National Standard for Financial 
         Services, American Bankers Association, January 7, 1999. 

   [2]   FIPS Pub 186-3, Digital Signature Standard (DSS), Federal 
         Information Processing Standards Publication 186-3, US 
         Department of Commerce/National Institute of Standards and 
         Technology, Gaithersburg, Maryland, USA, February 2009. 
         (Includes change notice, October 5, 2001.) 

6.2. Informative References 

   [3]   ANSI X9.63-2001, Public Key Cryptography for the Financial 
         Services Industry:  Key Agreement and Key Transport Using 
         Elliptic Curve Cryptography, American National Standard for 
         Financial Services, American Bankers Association, November 20, 
         2001. 

 
 
Struik                 Expires January 5, 2011                 [Page 6] 

Internet-Draft        Facilitating ECC Speed-ups              July 2010 
    

   [4]   A. Antipa, D.R. Brown, R. Gallant, R. Lambert, R. Struik, S.A. 
         Vanstone, 'Accelerated Verification of ECDSA Signatures,' in 
         Proceedings of Selected Areas in Cryptography - SAC2005, B. 
         Preneel, S. Tavares, Eds.,  Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 
         Vol. 3897, pp. 307-318, New York: Springer, 2006. 

   [5]   M. Bellare, J.A. Garay, T. Rabin, 'Fast Batch Verification for 
         Modular Exponentiation and Digital Signatures,' in Proceedings 
         of Advances in Cryptology - EUROCRYPT'98, K. Nyberg, Ed., 
         Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 1403, pp. 236-250, New 
         York: Springer-Verlag, 1998. 

   [6]   W. Diffie, M.E. Hellmann, 'New Directions in Cryptography,' 
         IEEE.Trans.Inform.Theory, Vol. IT-22, pp. 644-654, 1976. 

   [7]   D.R. Hankerson, A.J. Menezes, S.A. Vanstone, Guide to Elliptic 
         Curve Cryptography,  New York: Springer, 2003. 

   [8]   D.J. Johnson, A.J. Menezes, S.A. Vanstone, 'The Elliptic Curve 
         Digital Signature Algorithm (ECDSA),' International Journal of 
         Information Security}, Vol. 1, pp. 36-63, 2001. 

   [9]   L. Law, A. Menezes, M. Qu, J. Solinas, S. Vanstone, 'An 
         Efficient Protocol for Authenticated Key Agreement,' Centre 
         for Applied Cryptographic Research, Corr 1998-05, University 
         of Waterloo, Ontario, Canada, 1998. 

   [10]  D. McGrew, K. Igoe, M. Salter, 'Fundamental Elliptic Curve 
         Cryptography Algorithms,' draft-mcgrew-fundamental-ecc-03, 
         IETF draft, May 21, 2010. 

   [11]  P. Hoffman, 'Elliptic Curve DSA for DNSSec,' draft-hoffman-
         dnssec-ecdsa-01, IETF draft, January 25, 2010. 

   [12]  NIST Pub 800-56a, Recommendation for Pair-Wise Key 
         Establishment Schemes Using Discrete Logarithm Cryptography 
         (Revised), NIST Special Publication 800-56A, US Department of 
         Commerce/National Institute of Standards and Technology, 
         Springfield, Virginia, March 8, 2007.  

   [13]  J. Proos, 'Joint Sparse Forms and Generating Zero Columns when 
         Combing,' Centre for Applied Cryptographic Research, Corr 
         2003-23, University of Waterloo, Ontario, Canada, 2003. 

   [14]  J. Solinas, 'Low-Weight Binary Representations for Pairs of 
         Integers,' Centre for Applied Cryptographic Research, Corr 
         2001-41, University of Waterloo, Ontario, Canada, 2001. 
 
 
Struik                 Expires January 5, 2011                 [Page 7] 

Internet-Draft        Facilitating ECC Speed-ups              July 2010 
    

   [15]  R. Struik, 'Speed-ups of elliptic curve-based schemes,' 
         invited paper, presented at Fields Institute Workshop on New 
         Directions in Cryptography, Ottawa, ON, June 25-27, 2008. 

   [16]  R. Struik, 'Speed-ups of Elliptic Curve Based Schemes,' rump 
         session presentation to NIST Key Management Workshop, 
         Gaithersburg, MD, June 8-9, 2009.  

   [17]  RFC 4492, Elliptic Curve Cryptography (ECC) Cipher Suites for 
         Transport Layer Security (TLS), Internet Request for Comments 
         5912, S. Blake-Wilson, N. Boluard, V. Gupta, C. Hawk, B. 
         Moeller, June 2010. 

   [18]  RFC 5114, Additional Diffie-Hellman Groups for Use with IETF 
         Standards, Internet Request for Comments 5114, M. Lepinski, S. 
         Kent, January 2010. 

   [19]  RFC 5280, Internet X.509 Public Key Infrastructure Certificate 
         and Certificate Revocation List (CRL) Profile, Internet 
         Request for Comments 5280, D. Cooper, S. Santesson, S. 
         Farrell, S. Boeyen, R. Housley, W. Polk, May 2008. 

   [20]  RFC 5639, ECC Brainpool Standard Curves and Curve Generation, 
         M. Lochter, J. Merkle, Internet Request for Comments 5912, 
         March 2010. 

   [21]  RFC 5759, Suite B Certificate and Certificate Revocation List 
         (CRL) Profile, J. Solinas, L. Zieglar, Internet Request for 
         Comments 5759, January 2010. 

7. Acknowledgments 

   The techniques discussed in this submissions benefitted from 
   discussions with the Certicom Research team. 

   This document was prepared using 2-Word-v2.0.template.dot. 

Authors' Addresses 

   Rene Struik 
   Independent 
   723 Carlaw Avenue 
   Toronto, ON  
   Canada M4K 3K8 
       
   Email: rstruik.ext@gmail.com 

 
 
Struik                 Expires January 5, 2011                 [Page 8]