A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3568

        Title:      Known Content Network (CN) Request-Routing
                    Mechanisms
        Author(s):  A. Barbir, B. Cain, R. Nair, O. Spatscheck
        Status:     Informational
        Date:       July 2003
        Mailbox:    abbieb@nortelnetworks.com, bcain@storigen.com,
                    nair_raj@yahoo.com, spatsch@research.att.com
        Pages:      19
        Characters: 42443
        Updates/Obsoletes/SeeAlso:  None

        I-D Tag:    draft-ietf-cdi-known-request-routing-03.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3568.txt


This document presents a summary of Request-Routing techniques that
are used to direct client requests to surrogates based on various 
policies and a possible set of metrics.  The document covers
techniques that were commonly used in the industry on or before
December 2000.  In this memo, the term Request-Routing represents
techniques that is commonly called content routing or content
redirection.  In principle, Request-Routing techniques can be
classified under: DNS Request-Routing, Transport-layer
Request-Routing, and Application-layer Request-Routing.

This document is a product of the Content Distribution Internetworking
Working Group of the IETF.

This memo provides information for the Internet community.  It does
not specify an Internet standard of any kind.  Distribution of this
memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.


