


ABFAB                                                         J. Howlett
Internet-Draft                                                     Janet
Intended status: Informational                              M. Wasserman
Expires: September 26, 2012                            Painless Security
                                                          March 25, 2012


                     Trust Router Problem Statement
               draft-howlett-abfab-trust-router-ps-02.txt

Abstract

   This document is a problem statement for a Trust Router Protocol.  A
   Trust Router Protocol is needed to support large, multihop ABFAB
   federations, without the need for credentials to be configured for
   every pair of Identity Providers and Relying Parties.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 26, 2012.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2012 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.



Howlett & Wasserman    Expires September 26, 2012               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft       Trust Router Problem Statement           March 2012


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Terminology and Concepts  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   3.  High-Level Problems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
     3.1.  Connecting your Partners  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
     3.2.  Identifying your Partners . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
     3.3.  Knowing your Partners . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
     3.4.  Policing and Managing Policy  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   4.  Specific Problems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
     4.1.  Many IdPs, Many RPs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
     4.2.  Frequent Changes in Membership  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
     4.3.  Minimal Costs for Adding a New Partner  . . . . . . . . . . 6
     4.4.  Costs Incurred by the Party that Benefits . . . . . . . . . 6
     4.5.  Minimal Costs for Forming a New Community . . . . . . . . . 6
     4.6.  Supporting Community Growth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
     4.7.  Multi-Role Participation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
     4.8.  Multi-Purpose Communities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
     4.9.  Deployment Challenges with Public Key Infrastructure  . . . 7
   5.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   6.  Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   7.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8





























Howlett & Wasserman    Expires September 26, 2012               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft       Trust Router Problem Statement           March 2012


1.  Introduction

   The ABFAB architecture [I-D.lear-abfab-arch] describes an access
   management model that enables the application of federated identity
   within a broad range of use cases.  This is achieved by building on
   proven technologies and widely deployed infrastructures.  Some of
   these use cases are described in [I-D.ietf-abfab-usecases].

   In the canonical case, an ABFAB transaction only implies two
   organizations: an Identity Provider (IdP) and a Relying Party (RP).
   In this simplest case of a bilateral connection, the amount of
   configuration needed by both partners is very small; probably just an
   AAA credential and the peer system's host name for the other party.

   However, in practice an community may consist of more than two
   partners.  In the case where bilateral connections are used, the
   amount of configuration at each partner increases in proportion to
   the number of connections.  As the number of partners increases, the
   amount of configuration churn may become too onerous to manage.
   Also, the operational costs of managing that configuration
   information is borne, to an unreasonable degree, by the RPs.  When a
   new IdP is added to a partnership, it is necessary for all of the RPs
   to update their configuration information before the new IdP's users
   will have full access to the services accessible to the partnership.

   There is also an operational need to separate the authentication
   process from the creation of a partnership, so that existing
   credentials my be leveraged for new communities, and so that new
   communities can be formed with minimal operational and infrastructure
   costs.

   This document is a problem statement for a Trust Router Protocol.  A
   Trust Router Protocol is needed to eliminate the need the need for a
   bilateral exchange of credentials between each IdP and RP.

   A Trust Router Protocol allows a new partner to be added to an ABFAB
   community by peering with any member of the Trust Router network,
   instead of requiring configuration changes by every partner who may
   wish to connect with the new partner.  A Trust Router protocol
   addresses the problems described in this document by distributing
   information about existing trust relationships within the
   partnership, thus avoiding the operational costs and limitations of
   using a Public Key Infrastructure (PKI).

   This document is broken into two sections: High-Level Problems and
   Specific Problems.  The High-Level Problems section describes the
   problems that the Trust Router Protocol has been designed to address
   at a conceptual level, and the Specific Problems section discusses a



Howlett & Wasserman    Expires September 26, 2012               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft       Trust Router Problem Statement           March 2012


   more concrete set of problems that the Trust Router Protocol is
   intended to address.

2.  Terminology and Concepts

   This section defines terms and concepts that will be used through the
   rest of the document while exploring the problems that could be
   solved by a trust router protocol.  Although this section does not
   define any problems, per se, a trust router protocol would be
   expected to support all of the concepts discussed here.

   o  Partner: An organization that participates in an ABFAB federation
      as an IdP, an RP or both.

   o  Community: A group of IdPs and RPs that are associated with each
      other for a specific purpose.

   o  Community of Interest: A community that is formed to share a set
      of resources and services.

   o  Community of Registration: A community that provides registration
      and authentication services for its members.

3.  High-Level Problems

3.1.  Connecting your Partners

   Organizations want to be able to connect to an arbitrary number of
   partners without being overwhelmed by configuration management of
   many bilateral connections.

3.2.  Identifying your Partners

   It is not generally sufficient to simply configure a partner.  In
   most cases, it is also necessary for organizations to have confidence
   that the configuration that they have for their partner(s) actually
   corresponds to their partner(s) and is not, for example, an attacker
   claiming to be their partner.  Unfortunately identifying partners and
   binding them cryptographically to the corresponding configuration can
   be very expensive.

   Organizations want to minimise the cost of validating their partners'
   identities, and of proving their own identity to their partners.

3.3.  Knowing your Partners

   Organizations and their partners generally interact within the
   context of a particular context.  The context can be established in a



Howlett & Wasserman    Expires September 26, 2012               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft       Trust Router Problem Statement           March 2012


   number of ways; for example:

   o  A pair of organization may have a formal business relationship
      that unambiguously establishes the nature of the relationship
      between the partners (for example, in the case of a supplier's
      relationship with a customer).  In this case, the customer's
      ABFAB-based interactions with the supplier are governed by this
      business relationship.

   o  A group of organization may also share a formal business
      relationship (for example, a number of suppliers within a
      manufacturer's supply chain).  In this case, the business
      relationship might govern the ABFAB-based interactions between the
      suppliers, and the suppliers and the manufacturer.

   o  A group of organizations may not share a formal business
      relationship but instead share common best practices.  In this
      case, the best practices might govern the ABFAB-based interactions
      between these organizations.

   Given the potential diversity of contexts, organizations need to know
   which context is in force for a particular ABFAB-based transaction
   and apply policy that controls which entities within an organization
   are permitted to operate within particular business contexts.

3.4.  Policing and Managing Policy

   Organizations want to have effective tools for policing and managing
   policies controlling ABFAB-based transactions with their partners.

4.  Specific Problems

4.1.  Many IdPs, Many RPs

   It is fairly easy to see how ABFAB, without Trust Routers, could be
   deployed in a small federation with stable membership, or even in a
   large federation with a single RP that provides services to all of
   the other members, such as an industry consortium.

   However, there are operational problems that arise when ABFAB is used
   in a federation with a large number of RPs providing services to an
   even larger number of IdPs.  In these cases, it can be challenging to
   manage the credentials that need to be exchanged, and manually
   configured, between each RP/IdP pair.







Howlett & Wasserman    Expires September 26, 2012               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft       Trust Router Problem Statement           March 2012


4.2.  Frequent Changes in Membership

   It must be possible to support changes in membership (adding new
   partners, or removing former partners) with minimal operational
   effort, and without requiring manual configuration changes that could
   result in new partners having delayed or incomplete access to
   services, or former partners retaining some access to services beyond
   the end of their membership.

4.3.  Minimal Costs for Adding a New Partner

   There is a need to support large federations in a cost-effective
   manner.  This includes minimizing the operational costs of adding a
   new partner (either an IdP or RP) to an existing community.  Without
   Trust Router, the operational costs of adding a new partner to an
   existing community might be quite high -- requiring credential
   exchange between a large number of parties, and requiring manual
   configuration changes on a large number of different systems.

4.4.  Costs Incurred by the Party that Benefits

   Without Trust Routers, a high portion of the operational cost related
   to adding and removing partners is born by the RPs, who need to
   maintain bilateral credentials for each IdP whose users can access
   the services provided by the RP.  This is fine in a case where a
   single RP provides services to a group of IdPs that pay for
   membership in the community, or pay for access to specific services.
   However, in a less-centralized partnership the costs of exchanging
   credentials with each IdP could serve as a disincentive for
   organizations to provide services to the community and/or result in
   cases where an RP is unwilling or unable to incur the costs of
   providing access to new partners.  Therefore, it is important that we
   devise a mechanism where the operational costs are distributed to the
   organizations that are receiving benefit from incurring the costs.

4.5.  Minimal Costs for Forming a New Community

   It should be possible for a group of potential partners to form a new
   Community of Interest with minimal intrastructure and the lowest
   possible operational expense.

   In order to minimize start-up costs, it should be possible to
   leverage existing shared credentials and use those credentials for a
   new Community of Interest.

   Practically, this resolves to two problems:





Howlett & Wasserman    Expires September 26, 2012               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft       Trust Router Problem Statement           March 2012


   o  It must be possible to create a new Community of Interest that
      uses credentials from one or more existing Communities of
      Registration.

   o  It must be possible for a partner to join multiple Communities of
      Interest using a shared Community of Registration, and for
      different entitities (such as users or servers) within a partner
      to participate in different Communities of Interest.  Practically,
      this means that information about the Community of Interest in use
      needs to be transmitted to an IdP, so it can be used as part the
      authentication process.

4.6.  Supporting Community Growth

   It should also be possible for Communities of Interest to grow to
   encompass more partners, partners in different regions of the world,
   or partners who have different Communities of Registration available
   to them.

   It must, therefore, be possible for a single Community of Interest to
   be serviced by multiple Communites of Registration.  While it might
   be necessary for any given RP/IdP pair to share at least one
   Community of Registration, it should not be necessary for all of the
   partners within a given Community of Interest to share a single
   Community of Registration.

4.7.  Multi-Role Participation

   It must be possible for a single partner to participate as both an RP
   and an IdP within a single community (either a Community of Interest
   or a Community of Registration).

4.8.  Multi-Purpose Communities

   It also must be possible for a single community to serve both as a
   Community of Interest and as a Community of Registration.  An use
   case for this requirement woudl be a Community of Registration that
   provides services to its own customers, perhaps for maintenance of
   their own Community of Registration membership.

4.9.  Deployment Challenges with Public Key Infrastructure

   Deployment problems with Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) make it
   unsuitable for use by many ABFAB communities.  The costs are
   prohibitive for the use of ABFAB federations in many educational
   environments, and the policies of PKI Certificate Authorities are not
   well-aligned with the policies of many communities.  Also, the
   support costs associated with having every every IdP generate keys



Howlett & Wasserman    Expires September 26, 2012               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft       Trust Router Problem Statement           March 2012


   and provide a public key (but not their private key) to each RP in a
   partnership may be prohibitive.

5.  Security Considerations

   This is a problem statement document, not a protocol definition, and
   therefore it does not define anything with its own Security
   Considerations.  The Security Considerations for the protocols
   discussed in this document are (or will be) provided in the documents
   defining those protocols.

6.  Acknowledgments

   This document was written using the xml2rfc tool described in RFC
   2629 [RFC2629].

   The following people have provided useful feedback on the contents of
   this document: Sam Hartman.

7.  Informative References

   [I-D.lear-abfab-arch]         Howlett, J., Hartman, S., Tschofenig,
                                 H., and E. Lear, "Application Bridging
                                 for Federated Access Beyond Web (ABFAB)
                                 Architecture", draft-lear-abfab-arch-02
                                 (work in progress), March 2011.

   [I-D.ietf-abfab-usecases]     Smith, R., "Application Bridging for
                                 Federated Access Beyond web (ABFAB) Use
                                 Cases", draft-ietf-abfab-usecases-01
                                 (work in progress), July 2011.

   [I-D.mrw-abfab-multihop-fed]  Wasserman, M., Tschofenig, H., and S.
                                 Hartman, "Multihop Federations for
                                 Application Bridging for Federation
                                 Beyond the Web (ABFAB)",
                                 draft-mrw-abfab-multihop-fed-01 (work
                                 in progress), July 2011.

   [RFC2629]                     Rose, M., "Writing I-Ds and RFCs using
                                 XML", RFC 2629, June 1999.










Howlett & Wasserman    Expires September 26, 2012               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft       Trust Router Problem Statement           March 2012


Authors' Addresses

   Josh Howlett
   Janet

   EMail: josh.howlett@ja.net


   Margaret Wasserman
   Painless Security
   356 Abbott Street
   North Andover, MA  01845
   USA

   Phone: +1 781 405 7464
   EMail: mrw@painless-security.com
   URI:   http://www.painless-security.com


































Howlett & Wasserman    Expires September 26, 2012               [Page 9]

