


Network Working Group                                    S. Hartman, Ed.
Internet-Draft                                         Painless Security
Intended status: Standards Track                              J. Howlett
Expires: September 2, 2010                                     JANET(UK)
                                                           March 1, 2010


     A GSS-API Mechanism for the Extensible Authentication Protocol
                      draft-howlett-eap-gss-00.txt

Abstract

   This document defines protocols, procedures, and conventions to be
   employed by peers implementing the Generic Security Service
   Application Program Interface (GSS-API) when using the EAP mechanism.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 2, 2010.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents



Hartman & Howlett       Expires September 2, 2010               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                 EAP GSS-API                    March 2010


   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.1.  Discovery  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     1.2.  Authentication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     1.3.  Secure Association Protocol  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   2.  Requirements notation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   3.  EAP Channel Binding and Naming . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     3.1.  Mechanism Name Format  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     3.2.  Exported Mechanism Names . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     3.3.  Acceptor Name RADIUS AVP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     3.4.  Proxy Verification of Acceptor Name  . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   4.  Selection of EAP Method  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   5.  Context Tokens . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     5.1.  Mechanisms and Encryption Types  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     5.2.  Context Options  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   6.  Acceptor Services  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     6.1.  GSS-API Channel Binding  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     6.2.  Per-message security . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     6.3.  Pseudo Random Function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   7.  Authorization and Naming Extensions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   8.  Applicability Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   9.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   10. References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
     10.1. Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
     10.2. Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19

















Hartman & Howlett       Expires September 2, 2010               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                 EAP GSS-API                    March 2010


1.  Introduction

   The Extensible Authentication Protocol (EAP) [RFC3748] defines a
   framework for authenticating a network access client and server in
   order to gain access to a network.  A variety of different EAP
   methods are in wide use; one of EAP's strengths is that for most
   types of credentials in common use, there is an EAP method that
   permits the credential to be used.

   EAP is often used in conjunction with a backend authentication server
   via RADIUS [RFC3579] or Diameter [RFC4072].  In this mode, the NAS
   simply tunnels EAP packets over the backend authentication protocol
   to a home EAP/AAA server for the client.  After EAP succeeds, the
   backend authentication protocol is used to communicate key material
   to the NAS.  In this mode, the NAS need not be aware of or have any
   specific support for the EAP method used between the client and the
   home EAP server.  The client and EAP server share a credential that
   depends on the EAP method; the NAS and AAA server share a credential
   based on the backend authentication protocol in use.  The backend
   authentication server acts as a trusted third party enabling network
   access even though the client and NAS may not actually share any
   common authentication methods.  Using AAA proxies, this mode can be
   extended beyond one organization to provide federated authentication
   for network access.

   The Generic Security Services Application Programming Interface (GSS-
   API) [RFC2743] provides a generic framework for applications to use
   security services including authentication and per-message data
   security services.  Between protocols that support GSS-API directly
   or protocols that support SASL [RFC4422], many application protocols
   can use GSS-API for security services.  However, with the exception
   of Kerberos [RFC4121], few GSS-API mechanisms are in wide use on the
   Internet.  While GSS-API permits an application to be written
   independent of the specific GSS-API mechanism in use, there is no
   facility to separate the server from the implementation of the
   mechanism as there is with EAP and backend authentication servers.

   The goal of this specification is to combine GSS-API's support for
   application protocols with EAP/AAA's support for common credential
   types and for authenticating to a server without requiring that
   server to specifically support the authentication method in use.  In
   addition, this specification supports the use of the Security
   Assertion Markup Language to transport assertions about attributes of
   client subjects to servers.  Together this combination will provide
   federated authentication and authorisation for GSS-API applications.

   This mechanism is a GSS-API mechanism that encapsulates an EAP
   conversation.  From the perspective of RFC 3748, this specification



Hartman & Howlett       Expires September 2, 2010               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                 EAP GSS-API                    March 2010


   defines a new lower-layer protocol for EAP.

   Section 1.3 of [RFC5247] outlines the typical conversation between
   EAP peers where an EAP key is derived:

   o  Phase 0: Discovery

   o  Phase 1: Authentication

   o  1a: EAP authentication

   o  1b: AAA Key Transport (optional)

   o  Phase 2: Secure Association Protocol

   o  2a: Unicast Secure Association

   o  2b: Multicast Secure Association (optional)

1.1.  Discovery

   GSS-API peers discover each other and discover support for GSS-API in
   an application-dependent mechanism.  SASL [RFC4422] describes how
   discovery of a particular SASL mechanism such as a GSS-API mechanism
   is conducted.  The Simple and Protected Negotiation mechanism
   (SPNEGO) [RFC4178] provides another approach for discovering what
   GSS-API mechanisms are available.  The specific approach used for
   discovery is out of scope for this mechanism.

1.2.  Authentication

   GSS-API authenticates a party called the GSS-API initiator to the
   GSS-API acceptor, optionally providing authentication of the acceptor
   to the initiator.  Authentication starts with a mechanism-specific
   message called a context token sent from the initiator to the
   acceptor.  The acceptor may respond, followed by the initiator, and
   so on until authentication succeeds or fails.  GSS-API context tokens
   are reliably delivered by the application using GSS-API.  The
   application is responsible for in-order delivery and retransmission.

   EAP authentication can be started by either the peer or the
   authenticator.  The EAP peer maps onto the GSS-API initiator and the
   EAP authenticator and EAP server maps onto the GSS-API acceptor.  EAP
   messages from the peer to the authenticator are called responses;
   messages from the authenticator to the peer are called requests.

   This specification permits a GSS-API peer to hand-off the processing
   of the EAP packets to a remote EAP server by using AAA protocols such



Hartman & Howlett       Expires September 2, 2010               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                 EAP GSS-API                    March 2010


   as RADIUS, RadSec or Diameter.  In this case, the GSS-API peer acts
   as an EAP pass-through authenticator.  If EAP authentication is
   successful, and where the chosen EAP method supports key derivation,
   EAP keying material may also be derived.  If an AAA protocol is used,
   this can also be used to replicate the EAP Key from the EAP server to
   the EAP authenticator.

   See Section 5 for details of the authentication exchange.

1.3.  Secure Association Protocol

   After authentication succeeds, GSS-API provides a number of per-
   message security services that can be used:

      GSS_Wrap() provides integrity and optional confidentiality for a
      message.

      GSS_GetMIC() provides integrity protection for data sent
      independently of the GSS-API

      GSS_Pseudo_random [RFC4401] provides key derivation functionality.

   These services perform a function similar to security association
   protocols in network access.  Like security association protocols,
   these services need to be performed near the authenticator/acceptor
   even when a AAA protocol is used to separate the authenticator from
   the EAP server.  The key used for these per-message services is
   derived from the EAP key; the EAP peer and authenticator derive this
   key as a result of a successful EAP authentication.  In the case that
   the EAP authenticator is acting as a pass-through it obtains it via
   the AAA protocol.  See Section 6 for details.




















Hartman & Howlett       Expires September 2, 2010               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                 EAP GSS-API                    March 2010


2.  Requirements notation

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].














































Hartman & Howlett       Expires September 2, 2010               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                 EAP GSS-API                    March 2010


3.  EAP Channel Binding and Naming

   EAP authenticates a realm.  The peer knows that it has exchanged
   authentication with an EAP server in a given realm.  Today, the peer
   does not typically know which NAS it is talking to securely.  That is
   often fine for network access.  However privileges to delegate to a
   chat server seem very different than privileges for a file server or
   trading site.  Also, an EAP peer knows the identity of the home
   realm, but perhaps not even the visited realm.

   In contrast, GSS-API takes a name for both the initiator and acceptor
   as inputs to the authentication process.  When mutual authentication
   is used, both parties are authenticated.  The granularity of these
   names is somewhat mechanism dependent.  In the case of the Kerberos
   mechanism, the acceptor name typically identifies both the protocol
   in use (such as IMAP) and the specific instance of the service being
   connected to.  The acceptor name almost always identifies the
   administrative domain providing service.

   An EAP GSS-API mechanism needs to provide GSS-API naming semantics in
   order to work with existing GSS-API applications.  EAP channel
   binding [I-D.ietf-emu-chbind] is used to provide GSS-API naming
   semantics.  Channel binding sends a set of attributes from the peer
   to the EAP server either as part of the EAP conversation or as part
   of a secure association protocol.  In addition, attributes are sent
   in the backend authentication protocol from the authenticator to the
   EAP server.  The EAP server confirms the consistency of these
   attributes.  Confirming attribute consistency also involves checking
   consistency against a local policy database as discussed below.  In
   particular, the peer sends the name of the acceptor it is
   authenticating to as part of channel binding.  The acceptor sends its
   full name as part of the backend authentication protocol.  The EAP
   server confirms consistency of the names.

   EAP channel binding is easily confused with a facility in GSS-API
   also called channel binding.  GSS-API channel binding provides
   protection against man-in-the-middle attacks when GSS-API is used as
   authentication inside some tunnel; it is similar to a facility called
   cryptographic binding in EAP.  See [RFC5056] for a discussion of the
   differences between these two facilities and Section 6.1 for how GSS-
   API channel binding is handled in this mechanism.

3.1.  Mechanism Name Format

   Before discussing how the initiator and acceptor names are validated
   in the AAA infrastructure, it is necessary to discuss what composes a
   name for an EAP GSS-API mechanism.  GSS-API permits several types of
   generic names to be imported using GSS_Import_name().  Once a



Hartman & Howlett       Expires September 2, 2010               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                 EAP GSS-API                    March 2010


   mechanism is chosen, these names are converted into a mechanism name
   form.  This section first discusses name types that need to be
   imported and then discusses the structure of the mechanism name.

   The GSS_C_NT_USER_NAME form represents the name of an individual
   user.  From the standpoint of this mechanism it may take the form
   either of an undecorated user name or a network access identifier
   (NAI) [RFC4282].

   The GSS_C_NT_HOSTBASED_SERVICE name form represents a service running
   on a host; it is textually represented as "HOST@SERVICE".  This name
   form is required by most SASL profiles and is used by many existing
   applications that use the Kerberos GSS-API mechanism.  While support
   for this name form is critical, it presents an interesting challenge
   in terms of channel binding.  Consider a case where the server
   communicates with a "server proxy," or a AAA server near the server.
   That server proxy communicates with the EAP server.  The EAP server
   and server proxy are in different administrative realms.  The server
   proxy is in a position to verify that the request comes from the
   indicated host.  However the EAP server cannot make this
   determination directly.  So, the EAP server needs to determine
   whether to trust the server proxy to verify the host portion of the
   acceptor name.  This trust decision depends both on the host name and
   the realm of the server proxy.  In effect, the EAP server decides
   whether to trust that the realm of the server proxy is the right
   realm for the given hostname and then makes a trust decision about
   the server proxy itself.  The same problem appears in Kerberos:
   there, clients decide what Kerberos realm to trust for a given
   hostname.

   Sometimes, the client may know what AAA realm a particular host
   should belong to.  In this case it would be desirable to use a name
   form that included a service, host and realm.  Syntactically, this
   appears the same as the domain-based name discussed in [RFC5178], but
   the semantics do not appear sufficiently similar to use the same name
   form.

   A name form is needed to identify a SAML endpoint and a specific
   instance of SAML metadata associated with that endpoint.  The
   metadata describes properties of the endpoint including public keys.
   One of the motivating use cases is to be able to use GSS-API to build
   trust in this metadata.  In this case it is desirable to authenticate
   to an acceptor based on the endpoint and a cryptographic hash of the
   metadata.

   The mechanism name form must be able to represent all of these names.
   In addition, the mechanism name form MUST make it easy for
   intermediate AAA proxies to extract the hostname portion when



Hartman & Howlett       Expires September 2, 2010               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                 EAP GSS-API                    March 2010


   present.  One possible starting point is the Kerberos name form
   discussed in [RFC1964].  The major down side of that approach is that
   there is no guaranteed way to be able to extract a hostname from a
   Kerberos name.  Also, Kerberos naming may provide more flexibility
   than is needed.

3.2.  Exported Mechanism Names

   GSS-API provides the GSS_Export_name call.  This call can be used to
   export the binary representation of a name.  This name form can be
   stored on access control lists for binary comparison.

   This section defines the format of the exported name token for this
   mechanism.

3.3.  Acceptor Name RADIUS AVP

   This section defines an attribute-value pair for transporting the
   name of the acceptor in a RADIUS or Diameter message.  This AVP is
   included by the server to indicate the acceptor name it claims.  This
   AVP is included in channel bindings by the client to indicate what
   acceptor is authenticated against.

3.4.  Proxy Verification of Acceptor Name



























Hartman & Howlett       Expires September 2, 2010               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft                 EAP GSS-API                    March 2010


4.  Selection of EAP Method

   The specification currently describes a single GSS-API mechanism.
   The peer and authenticator exchange EAP messages.  The GSS-API
   mechanism specifies no constraints about what EAP method types are
   used; text in the specification says that negotiation of which EAP
   method to use happens at the EAP layer.

   EAP does not provide a facility for an EAP server to advertise what
   methods are available to a peer.  Instead, a server starts with its
   preferred method selection.  If the peer does not accept that method,
   the peer sends a NAK response containing the list of methods
   supported by the client.

   Providing multiple facilities to negotiate which security mechanism
   to use is undesirable.  Section 7.3 of [RFC4462]describes the problem
   referencing the SSH key exchange negotiation and the SPNEGO GSS-API
   mechanism.  If a client preferred an EAP method A, a non-EAP
   authentication mechanism B, and then an EAP method C, then the client
   would have to commit to using EAP before learning whether A is
   actually supported.  Such a client might end up using C when B is
   available.

   The standard solution to this problem is to perform all the
   negotiation at one layer.  In this case, rather than defining a
   single GSS-API mechanism, a family of mechanisms should be defined.
   Each mechanism corresponds to an EAP method.  The EAP method type
   should be part of the GSS-API OID.  Then, a GSS-API rather than EAP
   facility can be used for negotiation.

   Unfortunately, using a family of mechanisms has a number of problems.
   First, GSS-API assumes that both the initiator and acceptor know the
   entire set of mechanisms that are available.  Some negotiation
   mechanisms are driven by the client; others are driven by the server.
   With EAP GSS-API, the acceptor does not know what methods the EAP
   server implements.  The EAP server that is used depends on the
   identity of the client.  The best solution so far is to accept the
   disadvantages of multi-layer negotiation and commit to using EAP GSS-
   API before a specific EAP method.  This has two main disadvantages.
   First, authentication may fail when other methods might allow
   authentication to succeed.  Second, a non-optimal security mechanism
   may be chosen.









Hartman & Howlett       Expires September 2, 2010              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft                 EAP GSS-API                    March 2010


5.  Context Tokens

   All context establishment tokens emitted by the EAP mechanism SHALL
   have the framing described in section 3.1 of [RFC2743], as
   illustrated by the following pseudo-ASN.1 structures:

   GSS-API DEFINITIONS ::=
            BEGIN

            MechType ::= OBJECT IDENTIFIER
            -- representing EAP mechanism
            GSSAPI-Token ::=
            -- option indication (delegation, etc.) indicated within
            -- mechanism-specific token
            [APPLICATION 0] IMPLICIT SEQUENCE {
                    thisMech MechType,
                    innerToken ANY DEFINED BY thisMech
                       -- contents mechanism-specific
                       -- ASN.1 structure not required
                    }
            END

   The innerToken field contains an EAP packet or special token.  The
   first EAP packet SHALL be a EAP response/identity packet from the
   initiator to acceptor.  The acceptor SHALL respond either with an EAP
   request or an EAP failure packet.

   The initiator and acceptor will continue exchanging response/request
   packets until authentication succeeds or fails.

   After the EAP authentication succeeds, channel binding tokens are
   exchanged; see Section 6.1 for details.  Currently, the channel
   binding tokens are the only types of special tokens in use.

5.1.  Mechanisms and Encryption Types

   This mechanism family uses the security services of the Kerberos
   cryptographic framework [RFC3961].  As such, a particular encryption
   type needs to be chosen.  A new GSS-API OID should be defined for EAP
   GSS-API with a given Kerberos crypto system.  This document defines
   the eap-aes128-cts-hmac-sha1-96 GSS-API mechanism.  XXX define an OID
   for that and use the right language to get that into the appropriate
   SASL registry.

5.2.  Context Options

   GSS-API provides a number of optional per-context services requested
   by flags on the call to GSS_Init_sec_context and indicated as outputs



Hartman & Howlett       Expires September 2, 2010              [Page 11]

Internet-Draft                 EAP GSS-API                    March 2010


   from both GSS_Init_sec_context and GSS_Accept_sec_context.  This
   section describes how these services are handled.

   Integrity, confidentiality, sequencing and replay detection are
   always available.  Regardless of what flags are requested in
   GSS_Init_sec_context, implementations MUST set the flag corresponding
   to these services in the output of GSS_Init_sec_context and
   GSS_Accept_sec_context.

   The PROT_READY service is never available with this mechanism.
   Implementations MUST NOT offer this flag or permit per-message
   security services to be used before context establishment.

   Open issue: how is the mutual authentication request and return
   handled?  The big question here is figuring out how this interacts
   with EAP and transporting state back to a pass-through authenticator.

   Open issue: handling of lifetime parameters.

































Hartman & Howlett       Expires September 2, 2010              [Page 12]

Internet-Draft                 EAP GSS-API                    March 2010


6.  Acceptor Services

   The context establishment process may be passed through to a EAP
   server via a backend authentication protocol.  However after the EAP
   authentication succeeds, security services are provided directly by
   the acceptor.

   This mechanism uses an RFC 3961 cryptographic key called the context
   root key (CRK).  The CRK is the result of the random-to-key operation
   consuming the appropriate number of bits from the EAP master session
   key.  For example for aes128-cts-hmac-sha1-96, the random-to-key
   operation consumes 16 octets of key material; thus the first 16 bytes
   of the master session key are input to random-to-key to form the CRK.

6.1.  GSS-API Channel Binding

   GSS-API channel binding [RFC5554] is a protected facility for
   exchanging a cryptographic name for an enclosing channel between the
   initiator and acceptor.  The initiator sends channel binding data and
   the acceptor confirms that channel binding data has been checked.

   The acceptor SHOULD accept any channel binding providing by the
   initiator if null channel bindings are passed into
   gss_accept_sec_context.  Protocols such as HTTP Negotiate depend on
   this behavior of some Kerberos implementations.  It is reasonable for
   the protocol to distinguish an acceptor ignoring channel bindings
   from an acceptor successfully validating them.  No facility is
   currently provided for an initiator implementation to expose this
   distinction to the initiator code.

   Define a token format, token ID and key usage for this token.

6.2.  Per-message security

   The per-message tokens of section 4 of RFC 4121 are used.  The CRK
   SHALL be treated as the initiator sub-session key, the acceptor sub-
   session key and the ticket session key.

6.3.  Pseudo Random Function

   The pseudo random function defined in [RFC4402] is used.










Hartman & Howlett       Expires September 2, 2010              [Page 13]

Internet-Draft                 EAP GSS-API                    March 2010


7.  Authorization and Naming Extensions

   One goal of this mechanism is to support retrieving a SAML assertion
   as a result of the EAP authentication.  The GSS-API naming extensions
   will be used to access this message.  This section will be expanded
   to discuss details.













































Hartman & Howlett       Expires September 2, 2010              [Page 14]

Internet-Draft                 EAP GSS-API                    March 2010


8.  Applicability Considerations

   Section 1.3 of RFC 3748 provides the applicability statement for EAP.
   Among other constraints, EAP is scoped for use in network access.
   This specification anticipates using EAP beyond its current scope.
   The assumption is that some other document will discuss the issues
   surrounding the use of EAP for application authentication and expand
   EAP's applicability.  That document will likely enumerate
   considerations that a specific use of EAP for application
   authentication needs to handle.  Examples of such considerations
   might include the multi-layer negotiation issue, deciding when EAP or
   some other mechanism should be used, and so forth.  This section
   serves as a placeholder to discuss any such issues with regard to the
   use of EAP and GSS-API.





































Hartman & Howlett       Expires September 2, 2010              [Page 15]

Internet-Draft                 EAP GSS-API                    March 2010


9.  Security Considerations

   RFC 3748 discusses security issues surrounding EAP.  RFC 5247
   discusses the security and requirements surrounding key management
   that leverages the AAA infrastructure.  These documents are critical
   to the security analysis of this mechanism.

   RFC 2743 discusses generic security considerations for the GSS-API.
   RFC 4121 discusses security issues surrounding the specific per-
   message services used in this mechanism.

   As discussed in Section 4, this mechanism may introduce multiple
   layers of security negotiation into application protocols.  Multiple
   layer negotiations are vulnerable to a bid-down attack when a
   mechanism negotiated at the outer layer is preferred to some but not
   all mechanisms negotiated at the inner layer; see section 7.3 of
   [RFC4462] for an example.  One possible approach to mitigate this
   attack is to construct security policy such that the preference for
   all mechanisms negotiated in the inner layer falls between
   preferences for two outer layer mechanisms or falls at one end of the
   overall ranked preferences including both the inner and outer layer.
   Another approach is to only use this mechanism when it has
   specifically been selected for a given service.  The second approach
   is likely to be common in practice because one common deployment will
   involved an EAP supplicant interacting with a user to select a given
   identity.  Only when an identity is successfully chosen by the user
   will this mechanism be attempted.

   The security of this mechanism depends on the use and verification of
   EAP channel binding.  Today EAP channel binding is in very limited
   deployment.  If EAP channel binding is not used, then the system may
   be vulnerable to phishing attacks where a user is diverted from one
   service to another.  These attacks are possible with EAP today
   although not typically with common GSS-API mechanisms.

   Every proxy in the AAA chain from the authenticator to the EAP server
   needs to be trusted to help verify channel bindings and to protect
   the integrity of key material.  GSS-API applications may be built to
   assume a trust model where the acceptor is directly responsible for
   authentication.  However, GSS-API is definitely used with trusted-
   third-party mechanisms such as Kerberos.










Hartman & Howlett       Expires September 2, 2010              [Page 16]

Internet-Draft                 EAP GSS-API                    March 2010


10.  References

10.1.  Normative References

   [I-D.ietf-emu-chbind]
              Clancy, C. and K. Hoeper, "Channel Binding Support for EAP
              Methods", draft-ietf-emu-chbind-04 (work in progress),
              October 2009.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC2743]  Linn, J., "Generic Security Service Application Program
              Interface Version 2, Update 1", RFC 2743, January 2000.

   [RFC3748]  Aboba, B., Blunk, L., Vollbrecht, J., Carlson, J., and H.
              Levkowetz, "Extensible Authentication Protocol (EAP)",
              RFC 3748, June 2004.

   [RFC3961]  Raeburn, K., "Encryption and Checksum Specifications for
              Kerberos 5", RFC 3961, February 2005.

   [RFC4121]  Zhu, L., Jaganathan, K., and S. Hartman, "The Kerberos
              Version 5 Generic Security Service Application Program
              Interface (GSS-API) Mechanism: Version 2", RFC 4121,
              July 2005.

   [RFC4282]  Aboba, B., Beadles, M., Arkko, J., and P. Eronen, "The
              Network Access Identifier", RFC 4282, December 2005.

   [RFC4401]  Williams, N., "A Pseudo-Random Function (PRF) API
              Extension for the Generic Security Service Application
              Program Interface (GSS-API)", RFC 4401, February 2006.

   [RFC4402]  Williams, N., "A Pseudo-Random Function (PRF) for the
              Kerberos V Generic Security Service Application Program
              Interface (GSS-API) Mechanism", RFC 4402, February 2006.

   [RFC5056]  Williams, N., "On the Use of Channel Bindings to Secure
              Channels", RFC 5056, November 2007.

   [RFC5554]  Williams, N., "Clarifications and Extensions to the
              Generic Security Service Application Program Interface
              (GSS-API) for the Use of Channel Bindings", RFC 5554,
              May 2009.






Hartman & Howlett       Expires September 2, 2010              [Page 17]

Internet-Draft                 EAP GSS-API                    March 2010


10.2.  Informative References

   [RFC1964]  Linn, J., "The Kerberos Version 5 GSS-API Mechanism",
              RFC 1964, June 1996.

   [RFC3579]  Aboba, B. and P. Calhoun, "RADIUS (Remote Authentication
              Dial In User Service) Support For Extensible
              Authentication Protocol (EAP)", RFC 3579, September 2003.

   [RFC4072]  Eronen, P., Hiller, T., and G. Zorn, "Diameter Extensible
              Authentication Protocol (EAP) Application", RFC 4072,
              August 2005.

   [RFC4178]  Zhu, L., Leach, P., Jaganathan, K., and W. Ingersoll, "The
              Simple and Protected Generic Security Service Application
              Program Interface (GSS-API) Negotiation Mechanism",
              RFC 4178, October 2005.

   [RFC4422]  Melnikov, A. and K. Zeilenga, "Simple Authentication and
              Security Layer (SASL)", RFC 4422, June 2006.

   [RFC4462]  Hutzelman, J., Salowey, J., Galbraith, J., and V. Welch,
              "Generic Security Service Application Program Interface
              (GSS-API) Authentication and Key Exchange for the Secure
              Shell (SSH) Protocol", RFC 4462, May 2006.

   [RFC5178]  Williams, N. and A. Melnikov, "Generic Security Service
              Application Program Interface (GSS-API)
              Internationalization and Domain-Based Service Names and
              Name Type", RFC 5178, May 2008.

   [RFC5247]  Aboba, B., Simon, D., and P. Eronen, "Extensible
              Authentication Protocol (EAP) Key Management Framework",
              RFC 5247, August 2008.

















Hartman & Howlett       Expires September 2, 2010              [Page 18]

Internet-Draft                 EAP GSS-API                    March 2010


Authors' Addresses

   Sam Hartman (editor)
   Painless Security

   Email: hartmans-ietf@mit.edu


   Josh Howlett
   JANET(UK)

   Email: josh.howlett@ja.net







































Hartman & Howlett       Expires September 2, 2010              [Page 19]

