A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3435

        Title:      Media Gateway Control Protocol (MGCP)
                    Version 1.0
        Author(s):  F. Andreasen, B. Foster
        Status:     Informational
        Date:       January 2003
        Mailbox:    fandreas@cisco.com, bfoster@cisco.com
        Pages:      210
        Characters: 467084
        Obsoletes:  2705

        I-D Tag:    draft-andreasen-mgcp-rfc2705bis-05.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3435.txt


This document describes an application programming interface and a
corresponding protocol (MGCP) which is used between elements of a
decomposed multimedia gateway.  The decomposed multimedia gateway
consists of a Call Agent, which contains the call control
"intelligence", and a media gateway which contains the media
functions, e.g., conversion from TDM voice to Voice over IP.

Media gateways contain endpoints on which the Call Agent can create,
modify and delete connections in order to establish and control
media sessions with other multimedia endpoints.  Also, the Call Agent
can instruct the endpoints to detect certain events and generate
signals.  The endpoints automatically communicate changes in service
state to the Call Agent.  Furthermore, the Call Agent can audit
endpoints as well as the connections on endpoints.

The basic and general MGCP protocol is defined in this document,
however most media gateways will need to implement one or more MGCP
packages, which define extensions to the protocol suitable for use
with specific types of media gateways.  Such packages are defined in
separate documents.

This memo provides information for the Internet community.  It does
not specify an Internet standard of any kind.  Distribution of this
memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.

