


Network Working Group                                      J. Chroboczek
Internet-Draft                          PPS, University of Paris-Diderot
Intended status: Experimental                               July 3, 2013
Expires: January 4, 2014


       Configuration must not be carried by the routing protocol
               draft-chroboczek-configuration-separate-00

Abstract

   Where I argue that configuration information must be carried by a
   protocol separate from the routing protocol.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 4, 2014.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.






Chroboczek               Expires January 4, 2014                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft          Babel Extension Mechanism              July 2013


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Advantages of carrying configuration information over the
       routing protocol  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   3.  Advantages of separating configuration from routing . . . . . . 3
   4.  Possible configuration protocols  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
     4.1.  Router Advertisements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
     4.2.  A standard configuration protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
     4.3.  A new protocol  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   5.  Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   6.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6






































Chroboczek               Expires January 4, 2014                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft          Babel Extension Mechanism              July 2013


1.  Introduction

   The homenet group has given a fair amount to thought to the issue of
   configuring routers automatically.  There appears to be consensus
   that snooping on the routing protocol is not sufficient, and that
   explicit configuration information must be propagated to the routers.
   There is currently no consensus on whether this extra information
   should be carried by the routing protocol (e.g. within opaque LSAs in
   OSPF, or the equivalent in IS-IS), or whether it should be carried by
   a separate protocol.

   In this document, I argue that configuration information should be
   carried by a dedicated protocol separate from the routing protocol.


2.  Advantages of carrying configuration information over the routing
    protocol

   I have heard the following advantages claimed for conflating the two
   functions:

   1.  it is not necessary to implement a new flooding protocol, which
       saves space on resource-limited routers;
   2.  all routers already participate in the routing protocol, while a
       new configuration protocol requires ensuring that all routers
       forward the configuration information;
   3.  merging configuration with routing provides a form of fate
       sharing, where the configuration and the routing information are
       either both propagated or neither is; this might make fault
       detection and isolation easier to perform.

   Concerning the first point -- as I've shown with AHCP [AHCP], a
   reasonably efficient, purely user-space, flooding protocol can be
   implemented in a hundred lines of C code or so, and takes just a few
   kB of flash and a few bytes of memory.

   Concerning the second point, homenet is planning to mandate the
   implementation of a new routing protocol on all home routers,
   compatibility with "legacy" routers is alreeady broken.  Requiring a
   small daemon in order to participate in the flooding of configuration
   information does not break compatibility any further.

   The fate sharing argument is without doubt the more compelling.


3.  Advantages of separating configuration from routing

   There are significant advantages to distributing configuration



Chroboczek               Expires January 4, 2014                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft          Babel Extension Mechanism              July 2013


   information over a separate protocol:

   1.  the architecture is more robust -- issues with the routing
       protocol do not prevent configuration information from being
       distributed;
   2.  distributing configuration information on a simple dedicated
       protocol makes monitoring and trouble-shooting easier;
   3.  separate, well-defined protocols are more likely to be
       implemented in a clean and efficient manner, especially by the
       Open Source/Free Software community;
   4.  should new requirements arise, the architecture is easier to
       evolve: it is possible to reuse most of the homenet architecture
       with a new routing protocol;
   5.  should new requireent arise, the architecture can evolve
       seamlessly: it is possible to reuse all of the homenet
       architecture while running multiple routing protocols.

   The first point is important -- experience with DHCPv4 and RA shows
   how easy it is to run into issues with configuration protocols, and
   how useful it is to be able to identify and decode configuration
   packets without having a full understanding of a complex routing
   protocol.

   The second point is probably of secondary interest, since homenet
   will likely use a routing protocol that has fully debugged
   implementations and doesn't require much troubleshooting.
   Additionally, IPv6 link-local addresses make recovering a router that
   has lost its addresses somewhat easier than in the IPv4 world.
   Still, making debugging and recovery easier remains a desirable
   property.

   Concerning the third point, the experience of the last twenty years
   or so shows that the Open Source/Free Software community is extremely
   efficient at implementing small, self-contained pieces of software
   and using them to build large yet flexible systems.  A prime example
   of that is OpenWRT, which is based on numerous independently
   developed small daemons (udhcp, dnsmasq, uhttpd etc.) which, combined
   into a consistent whole, form a complete, highly modular and flexible
   router platform.  The same community has found itself unable or
   unwilling to implement large, monolitic architectures on the model
   of, say, Microsoft Exchange.

   The remaining two points are very important.  Homenet should aim to
   provide a sound basis for home routers for the next twenty years or
   so; yet, it will not be the end-all of home router architecture.  It
   is absolutely essential that people be able to experiment with
   different approaches even after homenet is finalised.  Being able to
   take an off-the-shelf homenet router and swap or augment its routing



Chroboczek               Expires January 4, 2014                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft          Babel Extension Mechanism              July 2013


   protocol will allow people:

   o  to experiment with the new link technologies that are bound to
      emerge over the next twenty years, and that might not be well
      supported by existing routing protocols;
   o  to experiment with topologies different from the ones that are
      well supported by existing routing protocols.

   In short, homenet must be able to evolve without all of our work
   being thrown out.  I can envision a future "homenet II" stack which
   uses a configuration protocol compatible with homenet, together with
   a different routing protocol and perhaps a different service
   discovery mechanism.


4.  Possible configuration protocols

   If the routing protocol is only in charge of routing, what protocol
   should be used for distributing configuration information?

4.1.  Router Advertisements

   Router Advertisements (RAs) [RFC4861] are ignored by routers, and
   rightly so -- RAs have no loop avoidance mechanism, and using RAs to
   configure routers leads to a number of problems that are very
   difficult to solve.  Extending the RA protocol to be suitable for
   configuring routers is probably not worth the hassle, and will lead
   to avoidable confusion.

4.2.  A standard configuration protocol

   The IETF has a number of standard configuration protocols.  DHCPv6,
   in particular, while originally intended to configure hosts, has been
   coerced into configuring routers [RFC3633].  It is my hope that
   DHCPv6 can be extended to perform router configuration within a
   homenet environment.

4.3.  A new protocol

   In the Babel experiment [BABEL], I have designed a new protocol,
   which I call AHCP [AHCP].  Since AHCP is designed to run before
   routing is functional, it makes minimal assumptions about the network
   -- it only requires each interface to have a link-local IPv6 address
   and to be able to participate in link-local multicast traffic.  An
   AHCP client implements an increasing diameter search in order to
   contact an AHCP server.

   The full AHCP implementation (client+server+forwarder, with support



Chroboczek               Expires January 4, 2014                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft          Babel Extension Mechanism              July 2013


   for both Linux and BSD Unix) consists of 3500 lines of C and 350
   lines of Bourne shell code, and compiles to less than 40 kB.  Subset
   implementations are possible.  We have found AHCP to be very robust
   and reasonably fast even in the presence of massive packet loss.  The
   traffic generated is quite modest, even when simultaneously rebooting
   the whole network.

   As mentioned above, it is my hope that DHCPv6 can be coerced into
   being useful as a router configuration protocol in the homenet
   environment.  However, I believe that the AHCP experiment can serve
   as useful input for the homenet effort.


5.  Conclusions

   In this document, I have argued that configuration information should
   not be carried by the homenet routing protocol.  Homenet routers
   should ideally be configured by a variant of DHCPv6; if that is not
   possible, we should design a simple, self-contained protocol for that
   purpose.


6.  References

   [AHCP]     Chroboczek, J., "The Ad Hoc Configuration Protocol",
              Internet Draft draft-chroboczek-ahcp-00, August 2010.

   [BABEL]    Chroboczek, J., "The Babel Routing Protocol", RFC 6126,
              February 2011.

   [RFC3633]  Troan, O. and R. Droms, "IPv6 Prefix Options for Dynamic
              Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP) version 6", RFC 3633,
              December 2003.

   [RFC4861]  Narten, T., Nordmark, E., Simpson, W., and H. Soliman,
              "Neighbor Discovery for IP version 6 (IPv6)", RFC 4861,
              September 2007.














Chroboczek               Expires January 4, 2014                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft          Babel Extension Mechanism              July 2013


Author's Address

   Juliusz Chroboczek
   PPS, University of Paris-Diderot
   Case 7014
   75205 Paris Cedex 13,
   France

   Email: jch@pps.univ-paris-diderot.fr










































Chroboczek               Expires January 4, 2014                [Page 7]

