


Network Working Group                                          Y. Yoneya
Internet-Draft                                                      JPRS
Intended status: Informational                              P. Wallstrom
Expires: March 9, 2013                                               .SE
                                                       September 5, 2012


             DNSSEC KSK rollover failure recovery practices
             draft-yoneya-dnssec-kskro-failure-recovery-01

Abstract

   This document describes a set of common problems and possible
   recovery methods for DNSSEC when there is a DS published in the
   parent zone which does no longer match any DNSKEY in the child zone.
   As DNSSEC validators are becoming widely deployed, this will have
   serious effect on the availability of the zone, and the need for a
   quick recovery is needed.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on March 9, 2013.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2012 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of



Yoneya & Wallstrom        Expires March 9, 2013                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft              DNSSEC practices              September 2012


   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

















































Yoneya & Wallstrom        Expires March 9, 2013                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft              DNSSEC practices              September 2012


1.  Introduction

   When a zone is signed and a DS has been published in the parent zone
   DNS name resolution will fail when DS in the parent zone and the
   DNSKEY in child zone become inconsistent.  The impact of a DS
   mismatch will be much more severe when it occurs high up in the DNS
   hierarchy, such as for a TLD where it could make millions of child
   zones unresolvable.  IANA have a defined process for registering DS
   records for a TLD to the root zone [IANAPROC] and a validation
   procedure of registered DS [ROOTDNSSEC], but there will still be a
   non-zero risk of human error.  Having a set of best practices for
   emergency countermeasures in the case of a KSK rollover failure will
   be helpful for a stable DNSSEC operation.






































Yoneya & Wallstrom        Expires March 9, 2013                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft              DNSSEC practices              September 2012


2.  Examples of KSK rollover failures

   A DNS operator can cause the chain of trust between the parent and
   child to break in some different ways.  These are just some examples:
   The key storage for the main DNSSEC signer is broken (or even the
   whole machine).  The DNS operator in this case will have to restore
   the keys and the DNSSEC signer process to a normal state, and this
   can take some time - and in some cases it can be impossible to
   restore the system and the keys.  The KSK rollover process misbehaves
   causing the zone to be signed with keys not matched by any DS record
   published in the parent zone.  TODO: more examples?








































Yoneya & Wallstrom        Expires March 9, 2013                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft              DNSSEC practices              September 2012


3.  Countermeasures for KSK rollover failures

   This section lists several countermeasures for KSK rollover failures.

3.1.  Case 1 - remove failing DS

   Countermeasure:

      Ask the parent zone administrator to delete the DS records from
      the parent zone or to replace the wrong DS records with the
      correct set of DS.  For a quick recovery there is also a need to
      ask every major DNSSEC validating resolver operator to flush the
      cache for the failing zone.

   Pros:

      No need to consider TTL of DNS records.

   Cons:

      It is an impossible task to communicate with all the resolver
      operators.

3.2.  Case 2

   Countermeasure:

      Specify short time for TTLs of DS and NS records in parent zone to
      make reflection duration shorter for modification (deletion of
      wrong DS or replace wrong DS with correct DS) to correspond
      registration of wrong DS.

   Pros:

      Modification to correct NS and/or DS will be reflected to full
      resolvers in short duration.

   Cons:

      Increases queries to parent zone and therefore consumes network
      bandwidth and disk space of servers when logging.

3.3.  Case 3








Yoneya & Wallstrom        Expires March 9, 2013                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft              DNSSEC practices              September 2012


   Countermeasure:

      Specify short time for TTL of DS record in parent zone to make
      reflection duration shorter for modification (deletion of wrong DS
      or replace wrong DS with correct DS) to correspond registration of
      wrong DS.

   Pros:

      Modification to correct DS will be reflected to full resolvers in
      short duration.

   Cons:

      Increases queries to parent zone and therefore consumes network
      bandwidth and disk space of servers when logging.

3.4.  Case 4

   Countermeasure:

      Specify short time for TTL of newly registered/modified NS and/or
      DS in parent zone to make reflection duration shorter for
      modification (deletion of wrong DS or replace wrong DS with
      correct DS) to correspond registration of wrong DS.  After a
      certain duration passed, TTL of NS and/or DS be made longer time.

   Pros:

      Modification to correct NS and/or DS will be reflected in short
      duration.

   Cons:

      Registration system (or zone generation system) of parent zone
      will be complicated.

3.5.  Case 5

   Countermeasure:

      Do nothing because registration of wrong DS is responsibility of
      registrant.

   Pros:






Yoneya & Wallstrom        Expires March 9, 2013                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft              DNSSEC practices              September 2012


      No changes to current system/procedure.

   Cons:

      If TTLs of NS and DS in parent zone are long time, it will take a
      time until extinguish of influence since correction of error.













































Yoneya & Wallstrom        Expires March 9, 2013                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft              DNSSEC practices              September 2012


4.  Considerations

   Followings are (not comprehensive) list of points to consider which
   case is the best practice for quick recovery from DS registration
   failure.

   o  TTLs of NS and DS in parent zone should be the same or not.

   o  What are the impacts of combination of long NS TTL (~1day) and
      short DS TTL (~a few hours).

   o  What is the appropriate DS TTL.

   o  How wide range of ISPs should TLDs know point of contacts (PoC)
      for emergency call.  For example, ccTLDs should know PoC of
      domestic major ISPs.



































Yoneya & Wallstrom        Expires March 9, 2013                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft              DNSSEC practices              September 2012


5.  IANA Considerations

   This document does not specify any IANA actions.
















































Yoneya & Wallstrom        Expires March 9, 2013                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft              DNSSEC practices              September 2012


6.  Security Considerations

   TBD.
















































Yoneya & Wallstrom        Expires March 9, 2013                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft              DNSSEC practices              September 2012


7.  References

   [IANAPROC]
              IANA, "Placing TLD delegation signer information in the
              root zone",
               http://www.iana.org/procedures/root-dnssec-records.html,
              2010.

   [ROOTDNSSEC]
              Root DNSSEC, "Enhancements to DNSSEC validation for the
              DNS Root Zone change requests",
               http://www.root-dnssec.org/2011/01/27/rrsig-checking/,
              2011.






































Yoneya & Wallstrom        Expires March 9, 2013                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft              DNSSEC practices              September 2012


Appendix A.  Change Log

A.1.  Changes since -00

   o  New co-author joined.

   o  Some editorial collections and cleanup texts.

   o  Add section 2 to show examples of KSK rollover failures.










































Yoneya & Wallstrom        Expires March 9, 2013                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft              DNSSEC practices              September 2012


Authors' Addresses

   Yoshiro Yoneya
   JPRS
   Chiyoda First Bldg. East 13F
   3-8-1 Nishi-Kanda
   Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo  101-0065
   Japan

   Phone: +81 3 5215 8451
   Email: yoshiro.yoneya@jprs.co.jp


   Patrik Wallstrom
   .SE
   Box 7399
   Stockholm, Stockholm  103 91
   Sweden

   Phone: +46 733 173956
   Email: pawal@iis.se






























Yoneya & Wallstrom        Expires March 9, 2013                [Page 13]

