


Network Working Group                                          Y. YONEYA
Internet-Draft                                                      JPRS
Intended status: Informational                             March 2, 2012
Expires: September 3, 2012


             DNSSEC KSK rollover failure recovery practices
             draft-yoneya-dnssec-kskro-failure-recovery-00

Abstract

   This document intend to consider best practice for quick recovering
   from DNSSEC DS registration failure.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 3, 2012.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2012 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.






YONEYA                  Expires September 3, 2012               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft              DNSSEC practices                  March 2012


1.  Introduction

   In case of DNSSEC DS registration, DNS name resolution will fail when
   DS in parent zone and DNSKEY in child zone become inconsistent.
   Especially, the impact of DS registration failure of TLD will be huge
   because millions of domain names become unresolvable all together.
   IANA had defined process for registering DS for TLD to root zone
   [IANAPROC] and validation procedure of registered DS [ROOTDNSSEC],
   but there will be non zero chance of human error.  Having best
   practice for emergency countermeasure assuming KSK rollover failure
   will be helpful for stable DNSSEC operation.








































YONEYA                  Expires September 3, 2012               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft              DNSSEC practices                  March 2012


2.  Cases of countermeasure for KSK rollover failure

   This section lists several cases of countermasure for KSK rollover
   failure.

2.1.  Case 1

   Countermeasure:

      Ask parent zone administrator to delete wrong DS from parent zone
      or to replace wrong DS with correct DS, and then ask major ISPs to
      flush cache in full resolvers.

   Pros:

      No need to consider TTL of DNS records.

   Cons:

      Impossible to ask all major ISPs.

2.2.  Case 2

   Pros:

      Specify short time for TTLs of DS and NS records in parent zone to
      make reflection duration shorter for modification (deletion of
      wrong DS or replace wrong DS with correct DS) to correspond
      registration of wrong DS.

   Pros:

      Modification to correct NS and/or DS will be reflected to full
      resolvers in short duration.

   Cons:

      Increases queries to parent zone and therefore consumes network
      bandwidth and disk space of servers when logging.

2.3.  Case 3

   Pros:

      Specify short time for TTL of DS record in parent zone to make
      reflection duration shorter for modification (deletion of wrong DS
      or replace wrong DS with correct DS) to correspond registration of
      wrong DS.



YONEYA                  Expires September 3, 2012               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft              DNSSEC practices                  March 2012


   Pros:

      Modification to correct DS will be reflected to full resolvers in
      short duration.

   Cons:

      Increases queries to parent zone and therefore consumes network
      bandwidth and disk space of servers when logging.

2.4.  Case 4

   Pros:

      Specify short time for TTL of newly registered/modified NS and/or
      DS in parent zone to make reflection duration shorter for
      modification (deletion of wrong DS or replace wrong DS with
      correct DS) to correspond registration of wrong DS.  After a
      certain duration passed, TTL of NS and/or DS be made longer time.

   Pros:

      Modification to correct NS and/or DS will be reflected in short
      duration.

   Cons:

      Registration system (or zone generation system) of parent zone
      will be complicated.

2.5.  Case 5

   Pros:

      Do nothing because registration of wrong DS is responsibility of
      registrant.

   Pros:

      No changes to current system/procedure.

   Cons:

      If TTLs of NS and DS in parent zone are long time, it will take a
      time until extinguish of influence since correction of error.






YONEYA                  Expires September 3, 2012               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft              DNSSEC practices                  March 2012


3.  Considerations

   Followings are (not comprehensive) list of points to consider which
   case is the best practice for quick recovery from DS registration
   failure.

   o  TTLs of NS and DS in parent zone should be the same or not.

   o  What are the impacts of combination of long NS TTL (~1day) and
      short DS TTL (~a few hours).

   o  What is the appropriate DS TTL.

   o  How wide range of ISPs should TLDs know point of contacts (PoC)
      for emergency call.  For example, ccTLDs should know PoC of
      domestic major ISPs.



































YONEYA                  Expires September 3, 2012               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft              DNSSEC practices                  March 2012


4.  IANA Considerations

   This document does not specify any IANA actions.
















































YONEYA                  Expires September 3, 2012               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft              DNSSEC practices                  March 2012


5.  Security Considerations

   TBD.
















































YONEYA                  Expires September 3, 2012               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft              DNSSEC practices                  March 2012


6.  References

   [IANAPROC]
              IANA, "Placing TLD delegation signer information in the
              root zone",
               http://www.iana.org/procedures/root-dnssec-records.html,
              2010.

   [ROOTDNSSEC]
              Root DNSSEC, "Enhancements to DNSSEC validation for the
              DNS Root Zone change requests",
               http://www.root-dnssec.org/2011/01/27/rrsig-checking/,
              2011.






































YONEYA                  Expires September 3, 2012               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft              DNSSEC practices                  March 2012


Author's Address

   Yoshiro YONEYA
   JPRS
   Chiyoda First Bldg. East 13F
   3-8-1 Nishi-Kanda
   Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo  101-0065
   Japan

   Phone: +81 3 5215 8451
   Email: yoshiro.yoneya@jprs.co.jp








































YONEYA                  Expires September 3, 2012               [Page 9]

