

Network Working Group                                              T. Li
Internet-Draft                                                    Z. Sun
Intended status: Standards Track                                 H. Wang
Expires: September 7, 2011                                        C. Jia
                                                                    NUDT
                                                             Mar 6, 2011


             Point to Multipoint Streaming Media Delivery 
                  for Edge Network Problem Statement
             draft-li-p2mpsmd-sam-problem-statement-00.txt

Abstract

   Currently, more and more Internet streaming services are getting
   increasingly popular among users.  With the increasing growth of
   streaming media traffic, network awareness and policy-based control
   are required for providing higher QoE to the end users and better OAM
   support to the service providers.  They are especially important for
   point to multipoint streaming media delivery for the edge network.
   However, most of the existing technologies or protocols, such as IP
   multicast, do not provide the network aware and policy-based control
   mechanisms.  This document presents the problem statements in point
   to multipoint streaming media delivery for edge network, explains why
   network awareness and policy-based control should be urgently
   addressed for the point to multipoint streaming media delivery in the
   edge network and introduces what's should be further considered in
   the future.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 7, 2011.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the



Li, et al.              Expires September 7, 2011               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft     Point to Multipoint Streaming Media          Mar 2011


   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   3.  Problem Statement Scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   4.  Architecture Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
     4.1.  Network-aware OAM support for streaming media service
           provider(SMSP)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
     4.2.  QOE for better user experience  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   5.  Why IETF needs to develop solutions instead of relying on
       existing technologies?  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
     5.1.  IP multicast  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
     5.2.  Overlay(CDN P2P)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
     5.3.  Data-Oriented Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   6.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   7.  Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   8.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9




















Li, et al.              Expires September 7, 2011               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft     Point to Multipoint Streaming Media          Mar 2011


1.  Introduction

   Streaming traffic is among the fastest growing traffic on the
   Internet.  As the streaming media delivery has characteristics of
   long-live connection and high stable transmission rate, the Internet
   capacity is imposed with stringent requirements of high bandwidth,
   low delay and jitter, and low packet loss.  The situation is further
   complicated by frequent load variations from the dynamic behavior of
   large asynchronous clients.  The current Internet faces many
   challenges from the core to the edge, as its end-to-end design
   principle with best-effort service cannot be well suited for point to
   multipoint (P2MP) streaming media delivery application.

   From an ISP's perspective, the Internet bandwidths are relatively
   scarce and precious resources, especially in the core network.  When
   end-to-end unicast technology is used for the steaming media delivery
   over the Internet, a separated point-to-point connection (e.g., UDP/
   TCP connections) is employed between the sender and each of the
   receivers.  It leads to the poor use of the available bandwidth due
   to the multiple copies of streaming media object on the same link.
   It is desirable for ISP that an efficient P2MP delivery mechanism is
   established for delivering copies of the streaming media data to
   multiple recipients at different locations, in order to minimize the
   amount of the required network resources (in terms of bandwidth).

   From an end-user's perspective, quality of experience (QoE) is widely
   appreciated as an important subjective measurement for the streaming
   media delivery service, such as IPTV, VoD.  Usually, the quality of
   service (QoS) metrics (such as network delay & jitter and packet
   loss), rather than QoE, is used for the objective measure of the
   streaming media delivery service.  With the dramatic improvement in
   digital video quality (like High Definition) and the prevalence of
   streaming media applications, the Internet is facing with significant
   challenges in providing QoS insurance.  It is essential to build an
   efficient P2MP streaming media delivery mechanism for an optimal end-
   user experience.  The better the QoE is, the more likely the end-
   users subscribe streaming media service, which benefits both ISPs and
   the content providers.

   From a streaming media service provider's perspective, a service
   network requires efficient and low-cost deployment, maintenance and
   management.  However, the existing distributed routing models and
   protocols for P2MP streaming media delivery cannot provide enough
   support to fulfill the above requirements.  It is crucial for network
   fundamental infrastructure to provide efficient protocol and
   mechanisms, such that the service providers can effectively and
   automatically monitor, detect and troubleshoot performance issues in
   the service networks.



Li, et al.              Expires September 7, 2011               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft     Point to Multipoint Streaming Media          Mar 2011


   Much of the research and the dominant technical trend, such as CDN
   (Content Delivery Network) and IPTV, is to push the streaming media
   service from the core network to edge.  The reason is, the main duty
   of core network in the Internet is designed to forward data as
   quickly as possible, i.e., to provide the best performance for packet
   forwarding service.  It will be a great burden for the core network
   if providing various service-relevant processing supports.  On the
   other hand, edge network provides information exchange between the
   access network and the core network.  The bandwidth and throughput in
   the edge network are relatively low, which provide opportunities for
   the devices and facilities in the edge networks to integrate
   supportive functionality for P2MP streaming media delivery.  However,
   the devices in the edge network usually have relative lower
   processing power and less intelligence, which poses challenges for
   the service provisioning of P2MP streaming media delivery.  The
   motivation of this document is to clarify the problems facing the
   P2MP streaming media delivery for the edge network.


2.  Terminology

   Qaulity of Experience (QoE): The overall acceptability of an
   application or service, as perceived subjectively by the end-user.

   Quality of Service (QoS): The collective effect of performance which
   determines the degree of satisfaction of a user of the service.

   Streaming Media Service Provider(SMSP): A company that offers
   delivering streaming media services such as providing video content,
   improving network performance, and enhancing transmission quality,
   etc.


3.  Problem Statement Scope

   There are a number of problems related to the P2MP streaming media
   delivery for edge network.  The two major issues are listed below.

   (1) The difficulty of network state information (NSI) acquisition.

   Unpredictable behaviors of users present unusual challenges to the
   edge network delivering P2MP streaming media.  The links and nodes
   (routers and switches) in the network experience rapid and large-
   scale changes in bandwidth availability.  Therefore, the congestion
   may occur frequently over time and space, which introduces delays and
   jitters to the flows of streaming media.  That is adverse to the
   streaming media delivery due to its stringent demands on
   discontinuity-free and high stable transmission rate.



Li, et al.              Expires September 7, 2011               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft     Point to Multipoint Streaming Media          Mar 2011


   Network-aware streaming media delivery is an attractive approach to
   mitigate the problems.  However, the exact information about the
   current condition of the network is hard to adapt the resource
   demands for QoS.  Such information can be obtained at the transport
   protocol level or directly from the application.  NSI acquisition at
   application level is widely accepted as it can be easily implemented
   and deployed.  However, transport-level NSI acquisition can provide
   more accurate network status information while brings less overhead
   to the network.  It compares very favorable to application-lever NSI
   acquisition in delivery timely and accurate information for
   supporting well-founded adaption decisions in monitoring, diagnostics
   and failure restoration.

   However, most transport protocols in TCP/IP stack implicitly gather
   the network performance metrics only for support embedded control
   mechanism, such as congestion control (TCP) or reliable transmission
   (RTP).  These metrics (information) are currently not available to
   high-level applications.  The fact that few of the transport-level
   protocols explicitly collect and provide the NSI, such as bandwidth
   and timestamp, makes QoS assurance of the P2MP streaming media
   delivery difficult.

   (2) The difficulty of policy-based control

   Most of the P2MP streaming delivery systems deployed in the edge
   network employ pull-based service model based on IP multicast
   technology.  In this model, the streaming data are transmitted along
   the delivery paths which is decided or calculated according to the
   distribution of users' requests.  However, other service models, such
   as push-based and pull-and-push based, are also very useful in
   providing different featured services to the end-users.  For example,
   the subscribed advertisements, video messages and news can be
   directly delivered to the specific end-users without explicit
   requests under push-based service model.  The model improves
   initiative and flexibility of P2MP streaming media delivery service,
   and provides technical support for the implementation of value-added
   services.  Pull-and-push based service model can be very helpful in
   reducing the delivery time derived from the dynamic changes of users'
   request.  For example of the IPTV service in the edge network, the
   channel zapping delay can be shortened, if the streaming data can be
   pushed to some intermediate nodes before the users pull the content.

   The different service models, i.e., pull-based, push-based and pull-
   and-push based model, can provide different optimized characteristic
   to the P2MP delivery service of streaming media.  And, it will be
   significant if the three models can be implemented as different
   policies for the P2MP streaming media delivery in the edge network.
   The current delivery mechanisms, such as IP multicast, do not provide



Li, et al.              Expires September 7, 2011               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft     Point to Multipoint Streaming Media          Mar 2011


   policy-based control in the delivery process, as there is no clear
   separation between policies and functions in these mechanisms.  This
   strictness makes providing policy-based optimized control of P2MP
   delivery difficult in the edge network, and it somehow disencourages
   the evolution, development and improvement of the streaming media
   delivery services.


4.  Architecture Requirements

4.1.  Network-aware OAM support for streaming media service
      provider(SMSP)

   Efficient OAM (Operation, Administration and Maintenance) support is
   fundamental for SMSP to provide high quality of experience to the end
   users.  Network-aware OAM allows SMSP to take more intelligent
   decisions and adapt its streaming media delivery in response to
   network conditions.  Timely and accurate information about network
   status is instrumental in making well-founded adaptation decisions by
   the OAM.  Transport-level monitoring can satisfy the need very
   effectively and efficiently, as it can provide enough information
   while incurring less overhead on the edge network and the end-
   systems.

   Moreover, incremental deployment is an important architectural
   attribution required by SMSP.  The cost of deployment, running, and
   maintaining can be reduced, if the efficient mechanisms for P2MP
   streaming media delivery in the edge network support incremental
   deployment.  That means, new schemes and solutions should not modify
   the original fundamental infrastructure, and the update or the
   substitution can proceed smoothly.

4.2.  QOE for better user experience

   From the user's viewpoint, QoE is the subjective feelings of the
   networks business service performance.  For better QoE, fast failure
   Recovery, traffic engineering, load balance, quality adaption should
   be concerned in P2MP streaming media delivery.  The architecture
   supporting the P2MP streaming media delivery should provide automatic
   mechanisms when an underlay link is down or congestion is appeared
   between two nodes.  Continuity and quality should be ensured even
   when some congestions and failures occur in the network.


5.  Why IETF needs to develop solutions instead of relying on existing
    technologies?





Li, et al.              Expires September 7, 2011               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft     Point to Multipoint Streaming Media          Mar 2011


5.1.  IP multicast

   IP multicast is the most effective technology to solve the bandwidth
   problem in streaming media transmission.  Multicast reduces both
   network link cost and server bandwidth requirement for serving a
   large number of receivers simultaneously.  In IP multicast, the
   source sends only one copy of a packet addressed to a group of
   receivers and the core network bandwidth will not increase with the
   numbers of receivers.  Despite its clear performance benefit,
   multicast has not been wide deployment in the past years.  The IP
   multicast issues related to scalability, reliability, deployment,
   etc.  Routers keep every active group states and the message overhead
   and memory cost grow linearly with the number of multicast groups
   supported by the router.  The UDP is used as the transport layer for
   IP multicast and it cannot provide reliable transport.  However, UDP
   doesn't guarantee reliability or integrity, and there are no obvious
   signs indicating the sequence of packets in a UDP flow.  The
   information carried by UDP header is deficient.  There are also some
   problems with the demanding requirement of global deployment of
   multicast routers and the lack of appropriate pricing models.

5.2.  Overlay(CDN P2P)

   P2P reduce the profit of ISP and violate the fairness principle for
   the business.  ISP cannot benefit from offering service to the peers
   who wish to freely use ISP resources.  P2P distribution just concerns
   the upper logic network rather than physical network states and
   topology, and a great deal of redundant streams pass over the core
   Internet.  Moreover, P2P stream is hard to control and occupy network
   resources deucedly.

   In CDN architecture, the content is first distributed to CDN servers
   which are placed in many regions.  CDN can provide reliable delivery
   and cost-effective scaling, but CDN costs more and it is hard to be
   deployed.

   Both P2P and CDN have their own limitations, so hybrid CDN and P2P
   have been proposed by many researchers.  Hybrid CDN and P2P are the
   common techniques for live streaming and VoD applications.  Hybrid
   Architecture is an effective way to reduce the cost of content
   distribution and guarantee the quality of transmission for streaming
   media service.  Hybrid CDN and P2P architecture requires careful
   dimensioning and design, due to the different contribution policies,
   interrelated system parameters, and their impacts on multiple
   performance metrics.  If the contribution policy is not adopted
   sensibly, the hybrid architecture neither can share the network
   resource nor reduce the overall cost.




Li, et al.              Expires September 7, 2011               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft     Point to Multipoint Streaming Media          Mar 2011


5.3.  Data-Oriented Network

   DON communication is completely different from the traditional IP
   network.  In DON, delivery is driven by the content of data, rather
   than the host identifiers.  This decouples the data delivery and
   request of host, the content can be cached by the network nodes in
   advance.  The forwarding path is determined by looking up the content
   ID in the node and very little overhead is imposed.  However, it can
   hardly be deployed into current Internet architecture gracefully.
   The technology is currently under research and the future of DON is
   still uncertain.


6.  Security Considerations

   This document has no additional requirement for security.


7.  Acknowledgments

   We would like to thank Jigang Wu and Guozhi Song for their valuable
   suggestions.


8.  Informative References

   [1]  "Appendix I to P.10/G.100: Definition of QoE",  ITU-TP.10/
        G. 100, Jan 2007.

   [2]  "Telephone Network and ISDN Quality of Service, Network
        Management and Traffic Engineering: Terms and Definitions
        Related to Quality of Service and Network Performance Including
        Dependability", ITU-T Recommendation E. 800, Aug 1994.

   [3]  Schulzrinne, H., Casner, S., Frederick, R., and V. Jacobson,
        "RTP: A Transport Protocol for Real-Time Application", RFC 1889,
        Jan 1996.

   [4]  Schulzrinne, H., Casner, S., Frederick, R., and V. Jacobson,
        "RTP: A Transport Protocol for Real-Time Application", RFC 3550,
        July 2003.

   [5]  Lao, L., Cui, J., Gerla, M., and D. Maggiorim, "A Comparative
        Study of Multicast Protocols: Top, Bottom, or In the Middle?",
        In Proceedings of INFOCOM' 2006.

   [6]  Xu, D., Kulkarni, SS., and C. Rosenberg, "Analysis of a CDN-P2P
        hybrid architecture for cost-effective streaming media



Li, et al.              Expires September 7, 2011               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft     Point to Multipoint Streaming Media          Mar 2011


        distribution. Multimedia Systems", pp 383-399, Mar 2006.

   [7]  Koponen, T., Chawla, M., and B. Chun, "A data-oriented (and
        beyond) network architecture.", ACM SIGCOMM  2007.


Authors' Addresses

   Tao. Li
   NUDT
   47 Yanwachi St
   Changsha
   China

   Phone: +86-13487568531
   Email: taoli.nudt@gmail.com


   Zhi Gang. Sun
   NUDT
   47 Yanwachi St
   Changsha
   China

   Phone: +86-13875903721
   Email: sunzhigang@nudt.edu.cn


   Hui. Wang
   NUDT
   47 Yanwachi St
   Changsha
   China

   Phone: +86-13467578342
   Email: wanghuinudt@gmail.com


   Chun Bo. Jia
   NUDT
   47 Yanwachi St
   Changsha
   China

   Phone: +86-13407318066
   Email: jiachunbo1988@sina.com





Li, et al.              Expires September 7, 2011               [Page 9]


