

INTERNET DRAFT                                          S. Bandyopadhyay
draft-shyam-mshn-ipv6-00.txt                              November, 2009
Intended status: Proposed Standard
Expires: May, 2010


            Mesh Structured Hierarchical Networking and IPv6

Status of this memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

Abstract

   This document tries to address an approach for reorganization of
   entire network in a large address space. It describes how a three-
   tier mesh structured hierarchy can be established based on
   fragmenting the entire space into some regions and sub regions inside
   each of them. It addresses issues which could be relevant to this
   architecture in the context of IPv6. This document also tries to come
   out with an approach how IP switch based network can perform as good
   as ATM network for the processing of real time traffic.












Bandyopadhyay               Expires May, 2010                   [Page 1]

Internet Draft                MSHN and IPv6               November, 2009


1. Introduction

   Transition from IPv4 to IPv6 is in the process. Work has been done to
   upgrade individual nodes (workstations) from IPv4 to IPv6. Also,
   there are established documents to make router/switches to work to
   support IPv4 as well as IPv6 packets simultaneously in order to make
   the transition possible [1].  The CIDR[2] based hierarchical
   architecture in the existing 32-bit system is supposed to be
   continued in IPv6 too with a large address space. There are
   documents/concern over BGP table entries to become too large in the
   existing system [3]. There are proposals to upgrade Autonomous System
   number to 32-bit from 16-bit to support the demand at the same time
   [4]. The challenge relies on how to make the transition smooth from
   IPv4 to a real IP world with least changes possible. ATM network
   performs faster than the network with IP switches. The difference
   becomes more prominent for real time applications.  Whereas they have
   disadvantages as far as bandwidth usages is concerned compared to the
   IP-switch based network. This document tries to address approaches
   for IP-switch based network to process real-time applications as fast
   as ATM network also a mesh structured hierarchical network with flat
   address space for routing convenience.

2. A Three-tier mesh structured hierarchical network

   Existing system is in work with Autonomous System (AS) and inter-AS
   layer with the approach of CIDR. In order to meet the need within the
   32-bit address space, Autonomous Systems of various sizes maintains
   CIDR based hierarchical architecture. With the help of NAT [5], a
   stub network can maintain an user ID space as large as a class A
   network and can meet its useful need to communicate with the rest of
   the world with very few real IP addresses. With the combination of
   CIDR and NAT applied in the entire space, most of the part of 32-bit
   address space gets effectively used as network ID. This is how,
   16-bit 'Autonomous System Number' is realized as insufficient in
   order to meet the need of growing customers. If the same gets
   continued with a larger network ID, load in the switches will become
   too high.

   As Autonomous Systems of various sizes are supported, Autonomous
   Systems and the nodes inside the Autonomous Systems can be viewed as
   graphically lying in the same plane within the address apace. If
   network can be viewed as lying in different planes, routing issues
   can be made simpler. If network is designed with a fixed length of
   prefix for the Autonomous System everywhere, routing information for
   the rest will get confined with the other part of the network prefix.
   Which means the maximum size of AS gets assigned to all irrespective
   of their actual sizes. This can be made possible with the advantage
   of using a large address space and dividing it into number of regions



Bandyopadhyay               Expires May, 2010                   [Page 2]

Internet Draft                MSHN and IPv6               November, 2009


   of fixed sizes inside it. Thus entire network can be viewed as a
   network of inter-AS layer nodes. Each node in the inter-AS layer can
   act either only as a router only in the inter-AS layer or as a router
   in the inter-AS layer with an Autonomous System attached to it with a
   single point of attachment or as an Autonomous System with multiple
   Autonomous System border routers (ASBR) appearing like a mesh. Thus
   two tier mesh structured hierarchy gets established between AS layer
   and inter-AS layer with each AS having a fixed length of prefix.

   Based on the definition of Autonomous System, it is a small area
   within the entire network that maintains its own independent identity
   that communicates with the rest of the world through some specific
   border routers. In the similar manner, if a larger area (say region
   or state) can be considered as network of Autonomous Systems, that
   can maintain its own identity by communicating with the rest of the
   world through some border routers (say, state border router), mesh
   structured hierarchy can be established within inter-AS layer. The
   inter-AS layer will be split into inter-AS-top and inter-AS-bottom.
   To maintain this hierarchy, each node of inter-AS-top needs to have
   multiple regional or state border router(say, SBR) through which each
   one will communicate with the rest of the world in the similar manner
   an Autonomous System maintains ASBRs. Thus, the entire network will
   appear as a network of nodes of inter-AS-top layer. To maintain
   hierarchy, each node of the inter-AS-top needs to have a fixed length
   of prefix. i.e. each layer of the inter-AS top will have a fixed
   number of nodes of inter-AS-bottom layers.

   Thus, with three-tier mesh structured hierarchy in the network layer,
   network ID can be viewed as A.B.C. If pA, pB and pC be the prefix
   lengths of inter-AS-top, inter-AS-bottom and AS layers respectively,
   there will be 2^pA nodes at the topmost layer, 2^pB at the inter-AS-
   bottom layer and 2^pC nodes at the AS layer. Thus the entire space
   gets divided into a fixed number of regions and each regions gets
   divided into fixed number of sub regions. This division is supposed
   to be made based on geography, population density and their demands
   and related factors.

   It is worth noting that for the ease of use as well as computation,
   pA and pB are (most probably) selected at the nearest octet
   boundaries. Even for the sake of openness, they may be picked up much
   more than the nearest value needed. Let nMaxInterASTopNodes be the
   possible maximum number of nodes assigned at the top most layer and
   nMaxInterASBottomNodes be that at the inter-AS-bottom layer and
   nMaxASNodes at the AS layer. Where nMaxInterASTopNodes <= 2^pA and
   nMaxInterASBottomNodes <= 2^pB and nMaxASNodes <= 2^pC.






Bandyopadhyay               Expires May, 2010                   [Page 3]

Internet Draft                MSHN and IPv6               November, 2009


2.1. Route propagation

   With hierarchy established, routing information that gets established
   inside a node of inter-AS-top, does not need to be propagated to
   another node of inter-AS-top. Entire routing information of inter-AS-
   top layer needs to be propagated to inter-AS-bottom layer. So, each
   router of inter-AS layer will have two tables of information, one for
   the inter-AS-top and another for the inter-AS-bottom of the inter-AS-
   top node that it belongs to. BGP (with little modification) will work
   very well with a trick applied at the SBRs. Each SBR will not
   propagate the routing information of inter-AS-bottom layer of its
   domain to another SBR of another domain. i.e. SBR of one top layer
   node will propagate routing information only of inter-AS-top layer to
   SBR of another top layer node. Inside a node of inter-AS-top, routing
   information of inter-AS-top and inter-AS-bottom need to be propagated
   from one ASBR to another neighboring ASBR. Inside a top layer node A,
   routing information of another top layer node B will have two parts;
   one for the list of SBRs through which a packet will traverse from
   top layer node A to B and another for the list of ASBRs through which
   the packet will traverse from one AS to another inside A. In terms of
   BGP, AS_PATH attribute will be split into two parts; one for the
   information of the top layer and another for the bottom layer. Within
   the same node A routing information of one AS to another AS will not
   have any top layer information. i.e. the top layer information will
   be set to NULL.

   Similarly, each node of the AS layer will have three tables of
   routing entries. One for the inter-AS-top, one for the inter-AS-
   bottom and another for the routing information inside the Autonomous
   System itself.

   With traditional CIDR based hierarchy, a node of higher prefix can be
   divided into number of nodes with lower prefixes. Each divided node
   can further be subdivided with nodes of further lower prefixes. This
   process can be continued till no further division is possible. The
   point worth noting is at each point the designer of the network has
   to preconceive the future expansion of the network with the concept
   in the mind that the resource can not be exhausted at any point of
   time. This phenomenon leads the designer to allocate resources much
   higher than whatever is needed which leads to a space of unused
   address space and the concept of H-D (host-density) ratio comes into
   play. The problem gets aggravated once resource gets exhausted by any
   chance. e.g. a node of prefix /16 can be divided with a number of
   nodes of prefixes /24. If any one of the nodes /24 gets exhausted,
   resources of other nodes of prefixes /24 can not be used even if they
   are available.

   Introduction of hierarchy at the inter-AS layer reduces the size of



Bandyopadhyay               Expires May, 2010                   [Page 4]

Internet Draft                MSHN and IPv6               November, 2009


   the routing table substantially. With the availability of hardware
   resources if flat address space is maintained at each layer, problems
   related to CIDR can be avoided. With flat address space, no
   hierarchical relationship needs to be established between any two
   nodes in the same layer. So, all the nodes inside each layer can be
   used till they get exhausted. With flat address space (i.e.  without
   prefix reduction), BGP tables will have nMaxInterASTopNodes +
   nMaxInterASBottomNodes entries.

   IGP like OSPF has got provision to divide AS into smaller areas. OSPF
   hides the topology of an area from the rest of the Autonomous System.
   This information hiding enables a significant reduction in routing
   traffic. With the support of subnetting, OSPF attaches an IP address
   mask to indicate a range of IP addresses being described by that
   particular route. With this approach it reduces the size of the
   routing traffic instead of describing all the nodes inside it, but
   introduces another level of hierarchy. If subnetting concept can be
   avoided from the AS layer(with the additional overhead of computation
   inside the SPF tree), each area can be configured from a free pool of
   addresses based on its requirement dynamically. So, an AS can be
   divided into number of areas of heterogeneous sizes with the nodes
   from a free pool of addresses.

   With this architecture, each network(i.e. a node inside an AS) acts
   as a leaf node, i.e. a network will not act as a transit. In order to
   make use of user-id space properly and to support customer networks
   of heterogeneous sizes, the user-ID space needs to be divided as
   subnet-ID and user-ID.  Profoundly, a VLSM (variable length subnet
   mask, or CIDR whichever term is more applicable) type of approach has
   to be adopted at each node of an AS.  So, each node of the AS layer
   will act as the root of a tree whose leaves are independent small
   customer networks which will act as stub. As the routing information
   of inter-AS layer as well as AS layer need not be passed inside any
   node of the VLSM tree, each router inside the tree should maintain
   default route for any address outside of its network. With this
   approach, load on each router of the service providers will become
   negligible.  Protocols that supports VLSM with MPLS/VPN has to be
   implemented inside the tree (inside the VLSM tree, all the physical
   ports of a switch have to be configured with the subnet mask. So,
   mere MPLS on top of static routing table should do the rest).

   To reduce complexity, packets are sent from SBR of one inter-AS-top
   node to SBR of its neighboring inter-AS-top node just by looking at
   the routing table entries of the inter-AS-top layer. i.e. no label
   switching activity within the inter-AS-top layer. This will reduce
   the maximum label stack depth by one as well (maximum label stack
   depth may become a criteria to process real time packets as discussed
   in the next section). Label switching is done at the inter-AS-bottom,



Bandyopadhyay               Expires May, 2010                   [Page 5]

Internet Draft                MSHN and IPv6               November, 2009


   AS layer as well as inside the VLSM tree of the user id space.  While
   a packet gets transported from one inter-AS-bottom node to another
   through a node at the middle, packet needs to be label stacked at the
   middle node if it contains multiple ASBRs.

   The fundamental assumptions based on which this architecture lies can
   be summarized as follows:

   i) Entire network can be viewed as a network of regions or states
   where each region or state can have its own identity by communicating
   with the rest of the world through some state border routers. Each
   region or state is a network of Autonomous Systems. Each region as
   well as each Autonomous System inside them will have a fixed
   (maximum) length of prefix.

   ii) Availability of hardware resources is such that flat address
   space can be maintained at the inter-AS layer.

   Introduction of mesh-structured hierarchy at the inter-AS layer will
   have several advantages:

        o   Load at each router will get reduced substantially.
        o   Concept of CIDR style approach and complexity related to
              prefix reduction can be easily avoided.
        o   Protection due to failure will become more stable.
        o   Full mesh hierarchy will make traffic evenly distributed.
        o   Physical cable connection can be optimized.
        o   Administrative issues will become easier.

3. Processing of real time packets (QoS issue)

   Here is an attempt to come out with a solution for Gigabit Ethernet
   switches (in full duplex mode) to operate in the most user-friendly
   manner to transport data traffic (IP) as well as real time (RT)
   traffic (as RTP[6] packet) in the existing 32-bit system.

   In case of IP routing/switching entire packet gets collected at the
   intermediate router/switch and forwarded based on the forwarding
   table. Inside the switch/router the variable length IP packet gets
   fragmented into smaller size frames at the ingress side. The frames
   gets transported through the switching fabric with proper priority
   mechanism (to support QoS) and then reassembled at the egress side
   and passed through the media for the next hop.

   In case of ATM, packets get fragmented at the ingress edge devices
   into small size cells. Entire packet gets transported as a stream of
   cells and gets collected at the egress edge device. The success of
   ATM over IP routing as far as speed is concerned is due to the fact



Bandyopadhyay               Expires May, 2010                   [Page 6]

Internet Draft                MSHN and IPv6               November, 2009


   that the latency gets reduced as the entire packet does not get
   collected, fragmented and reassembled at the intermediate nodes. So,
   in case of Gigabit Ethernet, if RT packets can be passed without
   getting fragmented inside the switch, better performance can be
   expected. i.e. one RT packet needs to get to fit inside one internal
   frame of the switch fabric. Additionally, to make this approach
   successful, maximum size of MPLS label stack has to be defined.
   Inside the switch all the IP packets will be assumed to carry same
   number of MPLS labels whether they are having one or the maximum in
   real sense. In fact, to reduce overhead, this limit should be the
   minimum number of labels needed to satisfy all sorts of features
   supported by MPLS. i.e. label stacking of depth n (without limit)
   needs modification.

   If minimum frame size is selected to fit one RTP packet, overhead
   becomes too high due to very large (40 bytes: 20 bytes IP + 8bytes
   UDP + 12 bytes RTP) packet header. Again, if large frame size is
   used, fragmentation loss becomes too high for the small size packets
   (say, 40 bytes IP packets). So, a compromise is needed that will give
   a better result based on the IP packet size distribution. Frame size
   is selected based on the minimum value of the overhead due to the
   fragmentation loss of data packet as well as the overhead as header
   of the RT packets.

   Studies show that primarily IP data packets of three different sizes
   are found common in nature. Almost
          ~50% packets of size 40 bytes (TCP ACK),
          ~20% packets of size 576 bytes (path MTU set by X.25) and
          ~30% packets of size 1500 bytes (path MTU set by ethernet)
   Other packets are less compared to the above three categories and
   almost evenly distributed. For the sake of simplicity of calculation,
   traffic of the first three categories are only considered. Payload of
   the data traffic is the actual IP packet size where as the payload of
   RT traffic is the payload inside RTP packet.

   If totBytes are to be transported across the internet and dataPcnt be
   the %of data traffic,

        totBytes*dataPcnt/100 = data traffic and
        (100-dataPcnt)*totBytes/100 = RT traffic;

   Out of data traffic 50% of 40 bytes length; 20% of 576 bytes length;&
                       30% of 1500 bytes length.

   If totDataPkts be the total data packets,
      totDataPkts*(50*40/100 + 20*576/100 + 30*1500/100) =
                                   totBytes*dataPcnt/100;
   or, totDataPkts*58520 = totBytes*dataPcnt;



Bandyopadhyay               Expires May, 2010                   [Page 7]

Internet Draft                MSHN and IPv6               November, 2009


   Let totBytes = 58520*100, for the ease of calculation;
   i.e.  totDataPkt = dataPcnt*100;
      40 bytes packets = 50*totDataPkt/100 i.e. 50*dataPcnt
      576 bytes packets = 20*totDataPkt/100 i.e. 20*dataPcnt
      1500 bytes packets = 30*totDataPkt/100 i.e. 30*dataPcnt

   RT packets = totBytes * (100 - dataPcnt)/100
              = 58520 * (100-dataPcnt);

   If n is considered to be the depth of MPLS label stack,
   inside the switch, actual size of
           40 bytes packet = 40+4*n bytes,
           576 bytes packet = 576+4*n bytes &
           1500 bytes packet = 1500+4*n bytes

   Let frameSize be the payload of a frame (excluding the frame header)
   inside the switch. If a RT packet fits exactly inside frameSize,

        RT packet payload = (frameSize-40-4*n) bytes;

   Total overhead = packet header overhead (of RT packets) +
                    fragmentation overhead (of data packets);

   If a plot is drawn for frameSize = 40+4*n+1 to 1500+4*n for different
   dataPcnt (with dataPcnt=80 to 100) minimum of overhead are found at
   frameSize = (84, 101, 118, 126 and 152) for n==3; frameSize = (119,
   127 and 152) for n==4 and at frameSize = (118, 127 and 152) for n==5.

   Actual data of the IP traffic has to be collected to get the best
   result. As dataPcnt increases minimum values are found at a lower
   frameSize and it gives better result with the higher range for lower
   dataPcnt. With average IP packet size 585 bytes, switches will
   encounter a loss of 4*(n-1) bytes for packets that will need only one
   label.

   In order to make this scheme work, a standard for maximum label stack
   size has to be defined. RTP packet size also has to be standardized.

3.1. Duel mode operation

   Inside ingress as well as in the egress card, packets need to follow
   certain functional steps. In order to maximize the output, a series
   of processing units work in pipeline mode for these operations.
   Ingress service cards need to act in duel mode to process RT packets
   and non-RT packets. i.e. the RT packets should follow a direct path
   that won't need fragmentation and related complexities before they
   are sent to the VOQs (virtual output queues, where from packets gets
   picked up to be sent to the switching fabric). Whereas other packets



Bandyopadhyay               Expires May, 2010                   [Page 8]

Internet Draft                MSHN and IPv6               November, 2009


   need to follow a different path for fragmentation operations. This
   will prevent a RT packet to be blocked by the fragmentation procedure
   of not-RT packets that arrive in the service card prior to the
   arrival of RT packet. So, mere mapping of RT packet size with the
   frameSize of switch fabric will not achieve the speed of ATM
   switches.

4. Refinements over existing IPv6 specification

   As IPv6 was envisioned long before some of the newer technologies
   e.g. MPLS came into picture, some refinements can be made over the
   existing specification. These considerations are related to bandwidth
   usages and performance inside switches. Previous chapter shows that
   smaller packet size gives better result for processing of RT packet.
   So, it is desirable to have IP packet header to be as small as
   possible.

   With this architecture, IP address can be described as A.B.C.D where
   the D part represents the user id. The value nMaxInterASTopNodes can
   be determined easily and expected to be changed least frequently. The
   values nMaxInterASBottomNodes, nMaxASNodes and length of user id will
   vary from place to place; country to country and are purely geo-
   political on top of the limitations imposed by their hardwares. Once
   these parameters are determined with mutual agreements, values of pA,
   pB, pC and prefix length of user id can be determined. If the total
   length comes out to be less than 128, length of IP header will be
   reduced accordingly.

   The 'flow label' field of IPv6 packet header may not be of any use
   with MPLS is in use. ATM used to have 4 priority classes. The first
   specification of IPv6 RFC-1883 used a 4bit type of service field
   along with a 24bits flow label field. These two were modified to a
   8bit type of service field and a 20bit flow label field in the
   current spec RFC-2460.  Too many priority classes may increase
   complexities to process inside switches. If type of service field of
   IPv6 header may be reduced to be of 4bit length as it was stated in
   RFC-1883 and 'flow label' field gets removed, another three bytes may
   be reduced from the IPv6 header.

   The field 'Hop Limit' has got a 8bit value in the existing spec. The
   role of this field needs to be discussed properly. For a long route-
   ID (say 48bit) whether 8bit would be sufficient or how this field
   will be processed needs to be discussed.

4.1. Distributed processing and Multicasting

   With the inherent hierarchy involved in this architecture,
   distributed applications can also be structured in a suitable manner.



Bandyopadhyay               Expires May, 2010                   [Page 9]

Internet Draft                MSHN and IPv6               November, 2009


   Say, for a commonly used web based application a master level server
   will be there at every top level node. Any changes that might happen
   in the application, has to be synchronized within these master level
   servers first. There might be servers at the middle layer (inside
   each inter-AS-bottom) inside each top level node. Once the changes
   get reflected at the master node, all the servers at the middle layer
   needs to update themselves with their master level node. This will
   reduce network traffic substantially. Multicasting can also be looked
   at in the similar manner. Work on these issues can be progressed only
   after this architecture gets approved.

5. Expected changes at the application layer

   IP packets with size 576 in most of the cases come out of those TCP
   layers that do not process maximum path-MTU and takes the default one
   that was set during X.25. The 576 factor can be corrected very easily
   with path-MTU set to 1500. With the consideration that label switch
   path do not get changed very frequently in between two arbitrary
   network points for any particular type of packet, most of the
   applications are expected to become UDP based with negative ACK. TCP
   in turn might go through changes. Once this comes into effect, 40
   bytes packets will come down drastically. Switch fabric frame size
   needs to be determined keeping these two factors in mind along with
   changes in IP packet header. With the existing 32-bit system, frame
   size (excluding the frame header) of 152 and 127 are most viable
   solution in general for label stack depth=3,4 &5.

6. IANA Consideration

   This is a first level draft for proposed standard. Hence, IANA
   actions should come into play at a later stage, if needed.

7. Security Consideration

   This document does not include any security related issues.

8. Normative Refereences

   [1]  Nordmark, E. and R. Gilligan, "Basic Transition Mechanisms for
        IPv6 Hosts and Routers", RFC 4213, October 2005.

   [2]  Fuller V., Li. T., "Classless Inter-Domain Routing (CIDR): The
        Internet Address Assignment and Aggregation Plan", RFC 4632,
        August 2006.

   [3]  Huston, G., "Commentary on Inter-Domain Routing in the
        Internet", RFC 3221, December 2001.




Bandyopadhyay               Expires May, 2010                  [Page 10]

Internet Draft                MSHN and IPv6               November, 2009


   [4]  Q. Vohra, E. Chen., "BGP Support for Four-octet AS Number
        Space", RFC 4893, May 2007.

   [5]  Srisuresh, P. and K. Egevang, "Traditional IP Network Address
        Translator (Traditional NAT)", RFC 3022, January 2001.

   [6]  Schulzrinne, H., Casner, S., Frederick, R., and V. Jacobson.
        "RTP: A Transport Protocol for Real-Time Applications", RFC
        3550, July 2003.

9. Informative References

   [7]  Postel, J., "Internet Protocol", STD 5, RFC 791,
        September 1981.

   [8]  Rekhter, Y., and T., Li, "A Border Gateway Protocol 4 (BGP-
        4)",RFC 1771, March 1995.

   [9]  Deering, S. and R. Hinden, "Internet Protocol, Version 6 (IPv6)
        Specification, RFC 1883, December 1995.

   [10] Moy, J., "OSPF Version 2", STD 54, RFC 2328, April 1998.

   [11] Deering, S. and R. Hinden, "Internet Protocol, Version 6 (IPv6)
        Specification", RFC 2460, December 1998.

   [12] Rosen, E. and Y. Rekhter, "BGP/MPLS VPNs", March 1999.

   [13] Rosen, E., Viswanathan, A. and R. Callon, "Multiprotocol
        Label Switching Architecture", RFC 3031, January 2001.



10. Author's Address
Shyam Bandyopadhyay
HL No 205/157/7, Inda
Kharagpur 721305
India

Phone: +91 3222 225137
e-mail: shyamb66@gmail.com










Bandyopadhyay               Expires May, 2010                  [Page 11]

Internet Draft                MSHN and IPv6               November, 2009


Copyright and License Notice

   Copyright (c) 2009 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors. All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents in effect on the date of
   publication of this document (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info).
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.









































Bandyopadhyay               Expires May, 2010                  [Page 12]
