A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3545

        Title:      Enhanced Compressed RTP (CRTP) for Links with High
                    Delay, Packet Loss and Reordering
        Author(s):  T. Koren, S. Casner, J. Geevarghese, B. Thompson,
                    P. Ruddy
        Status:     Standards Track
        Date:       July 2003
        Mailbox:    tmima@cisco.com, casner@acm.org,
                    geevjohn@hotmail.com, brucet@cisco.com,
                    pruddy@cisco.com
        Pages:      22
        Characters: 48278
        Updates/Obsoletes/SeeAlso:  None

        I-D Tag:    draft-ietf-avt-crtp-enhance-07.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3545.txt


This document describes a header compression scheme for point to
point links with packet loss and long delays.  It is based on
Compressed Real-time Transport Protocol (CRTP), the IP/UDP/RTP
header compression described in RFC 2508.  CRTP does not perform well
on such links: packet loss results in context corruption and due to
the long delay, many more packets are discarded before the context
is repaired.  To correct the behavior of CRTP over such links, a few
extensions to the protocol are specified here.  The extensions aim to
reduce context corruption by changing the way the compressor updates
the context at the decompressor: updates are repeated and include
updates to full and differential context parameters.  With these
extensions, CRTP performs well over links with packet loss, packet
reordering and long delays.

This document is a product of the Audio Video Transport Working Group
of the IETF.

This is now a Proposed Standard Protocol.

This document specifies an Internet standards track protocol for
the Internet community, and requests discussion and suggestions
for improvements.  Please refer to the current edition of the
"Internet Official Protocol Standards" (STD 1) for the
standardization state and status of this protocol.  Distribution
of this memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.