A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3190

        Title:      RTP Payload Format for 12-bit DAT Audio 
                    and 20- and 24-bit Linear Sampled Audio
        Author(s):  K. Kobayashi, A. Ogawa, S. Casner, C. Bormann
        Status:     Standards Track
        Date:       January 2002
        Mailbox:    ikob@koganei.wide.ad.jp, akimichi@sfc.wide.ad.jp,
                    casner@acm.org, cabo@tzi.org
        Pages:      17
        Characters: 34977
        Updates/Obsoletes/SeeAlso:  None

        I-D Tag:    draft-ietf-avt-dv-audio-04.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3190.txt


This document specifies a packetization scheme for encapsulating
12-bit nonlinear, 20-bit linear, and 24-bit linear audio data streams
using the Real-time Transport Protocol (RTP).  This document also
specifies the format of a Session Description Protocol (SDP) parameter
to indicate when audio data is preemphasized before sampling.  The
parameter may be used with other audio payload formats, in particular
L16 (16-bit linear).

This document is a product of the Audio/Video Transport Working Group
of the IETF.

This is now a Proposed Standard Protocol.

This document specifies an Internet standards track protocol for
the Internet community, and requests discussion and suggestions
for improvements.  Please refer to the current edition of the
"Internet Official Protocol Standards" (STD 1) for the
standardization state and status of this protocol.  Distribution
of this memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.


