A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3551

        Title:      RTP Profile for Audio and Video Conferences
                    with Minimal Control
        Author(s):  H. Schulzrinne, S. Casner
        Status:     Standards Track
        Date:       July 2003
        Mailbox:    schulzrinne@cs.columbia.edu, casner@acm.org
        Pages:      44
        Characters: 106621
        Obsoletes:  1890

        I-D Tag:    draft-ietf-avt-profile-new-13.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3551.txt
                    ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3551.ps            


This document describes a profile called "RTP/AVP" for the use of the
real-time transport protocol (RTP), version 2, and the associated
control protocol, RTCP, within audio and video multiparticipant
conferences with minimal control.  It provides interpretations of
generic fields within the RTP specification suitable for audio and
video conferences.  In particular, this document defines a set of
default mappings from payload type numbers to encodings.

This document also describes how audio and video data may be carried
within RTP.  It defines a set of standard encodings and their names
when used within RTP.  The descriptions provide pointers to reference
implementations and the detailed standards.  This document is meant
as an aid for implementors of audio, video and other real-time
multimedia applications.

This memorandum obsoletes RFC 1890.  It is mostly backwards-compatible
except for functions removed because two interoperable implementations
were not found.  The additions to RFC 1890 codify existing practice in
the use of payload formats under this profile and include new payload
formats defined since RFC 1890 was published.

This document is a product of the Audio/Video Transport Working Group
of the IETF.

This is now a Draft Standard Protocol.

This document specifies an Internet standards track protocol for
the Internet community, and requests discussion and suggestions
for improvements.  Please refer to the current edition of the
"Internet Official Protocol Standards" (STD 1) for the
standardization state and status of this protocol.  Distribution
of this memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.
