A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3550

        Title:      RTP: A Transport Protocol for Real-Time
                    Applications
        Author(s):  H. Schulzrinne, S. Casner, R. Frederick,
                    V. Jacobson 
        Status:     Standards Track
        Date:       July 2003
        Mailbox:    schulzrinne@cs.columbia.edu, casner@acm.org,
                    ronf@bluecoat.com, van@packetdesign.com
        Pages:      104
        Characters: 259985
        Obsoletes:  1889

        I-D Tag:    draft-ietf-avt-rtp-new-12.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3550.txt
                    ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3550.ps

This memorandum describes RTP, the real-time transport protocol.  RTP
provides end-to-end network transport functions suitable for
applications transmitting real-time data, such as audio, video or
simulation data, over multicast or unicast network services.  RTP
does not address resource reservation and does not guarantee
quality-of-service for real-time services.  The data transport is
augmented by a control protocol (RTCP) to allow monitoring of the
data delivery in a manner scalable to large multicast networks, and
to provide minimal control and identification functionality.  RTP and
RTCP are designed to be independent of the underlying transport and
network layers.  The protocol supports the use of RTP-level
translators and mixers.

Most of the text in this memorandum is identical to RFC 1889 which it
obsoletes.  There are no changes in the packet formats on the wire,
only changes to the rules and algorithms governing how the protocol
is used.  The biggest change is an enhancement to the scalable timer
algorithm for calculating when to send RTCP packets in order to
minimize transmission in excess of the intended rate when many
participants join a session simultaneously.

This document is a product of the Audio/Video Tranposrt Working Group
of the IETF.

This is now a Draft Standard Protocol.

This document specifies an Internet standards track protocol for
the Internet community, and requests discussion and suggestions
for improvements.  Please refer to the current edition of the
"Internet Official Protocol Standards" (STD 1) for the
standardization state and status of this protocol.  Distribution
of this memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.

