


DISPATCH WG                                                    J. Elwell
Internet-Draft                         Siemens Enterprise Communications
Intended status:  Informational                               V. Pascual
Expires:  April 9, 2010                                          Tekelec
                                                         October 6, 2009


Requirements for secure caller identification in the Session Initiation
                             Protocol (SIP)
               draft-elwell-dispatch-identity-reqs-01.txt

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 9, 2010.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2009 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents in effect on the date of
   publication of this document (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info).
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.

Abstract

   This document examines requirements for secure caller identification



Elwell & Pascual          Expires April 9, 2010                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft      SIP Secure Caller ID Requirements       October 2009


   in SIP.  Although existing mechanisms exist to achieve this, there
   are some known shortcomings or deployment difficulties.

   This work is being discussed on the dispatch@ietf.org mailing list.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   3.  Caller identification versus sender identification . . . . . .  4
   4.  Connected user identification  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   5.  Scope  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   6.  Uses of caller identification  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   7.  Forms of caller identification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   8.  Security of caller identification  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   9.  Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   10. IANA considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   11. Security considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   12. Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   13. Open Issues  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   14. Change log . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   15. Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11



























Elwell & Pascual          Expires April 9, 2010                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft      SIP Secure Caller ID Requirements       October 2009


1.  Introduction

   This document examines requirements for secure caller identification
   in the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) [RFC3261].  The primary
   purpose of SIP is establishment of a session, or call, between two
   users, each represented by a user agent (UA).  One UA (the calling
   UA) originates the call (on behalf of the calling user or caller) and
   the other UA (the called UA) receives the call (on behalf of the
   called user or callee).  Call establishment is achieved using the SIP
   INVITE method.  Caller identification is the provision of calling
   user identification to the called UA, which can then make it
   available to the called user.

   Caller identification can be used for many purposes, some of which
   require the information to be secure (e.g., not subject to forgery).
   SIP already has some mechanisms for achieving caller identification,
   and some of these mechanisms can be secure, depending on how they are
   deployed.  One mechanism uses the From header field, with
   authentication provided by the Identity header field (SIP Identity)
   [RFC4474].  Alternatively, in trusted environments, the P-Asserted-
   Identity header field [RFC3325] can be used.  Doubts have been
   expressed as to whether these mechanisms are sufficient to address
   all requirements for secure caller identification.  This document
   examines requirements for secure caller identification and secure
   connected user identification as a step towards evaluating existing
   mechanisms and proposing new or modified mechanisms where
   requirements are not yet met.

   The importance of secure end-to-end identification is discussed in
   more detail in [I-D.elwell-sip-e2e-identity-important].


2.  Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].

   This specification defines the following additional terms:

   o  Sender identification:  Identification of the user whose SIP UA
      sends a SIP request.

   o  Caller identification:  Identification of the user whose SIP UA
      initiates a call by issuing a SIP INVITE request and with which
      information is exchanged during that call.





Elwell & Pascual          Expires April 9, 2010                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft      SIP Secure Caller ID Requirements       October 2009


   o  Connected user identification:  Identification of the user whose
      SIP UA successfully accepts a call by sending a SIP 200 response
      to a SIP INVITE request and with which information is exchanged
      during that call.

   The other terms and concepts used in this document are consistent
   with [RFC3261], [RFC4474] and [RFC4916].


3.  Caller identification versus sender identification

   Existing SIP mechanisms (SIP Identity and P-Asserted-Identity) serve
   the purpose of providing secure identification of the sender of a SIP
   request (sender identification).  They can be applied to a variety of
   request types, including:

   o  INVITE requests (for initiating a call);

   o  other dialog-initiating requests (e.g.  SUBSCRIBE, REFER);

   o  mid-dialog requests (e.g., BYE or re-INVITE requests during an
      INVITE-initiated dialog, NOTIFY requests);

   o  stand-alone requests (e.g., MESSAGE, PUBLISH).

   Therefore in one sense, caller identification is a particular
   instance of sender identification (i.e., the sender of an INVITE
   request).  However, caller identification is more than that, because
   a call comprises not only the signalling messages exchanged between
   UAs, but also the media streams established as a result of that
   signalling.  The average user does not distinguish signalling and
   media, and expects caller identification to identify the other party
   in the call (i.e., both signalling and media).


4.  Connected user identification

   A caller sometimes needs to know to which user the call has been
   delivered.  Because of serial or parallel forking of an INVITE
   request, a call can be offered to more than one called UA, perhaps
   representing different called users.  The call is normally awarded to
   the first UA that answers, which might not represent the user that
   the caller expected to reach.  Identification of the user whose UA
   successfully answers a call is known as connected user identification
   (often shortened to "connected identity").  This needs to be
   delivered to the calling UA securely.  An existing mechanism for
   achieving secure connected user identification is specified in
   [RFC4916] and builds on the SIP Identity mechanism [RFC4474].



Elwell & Pascual          Expires April 9, 2010                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft      SIP Secure Caller ID Requirements       October 2009


5.  Scope

   There is some overlap between requirements for caller identification
   and requirements for sender identification, but this document focuses
   on requirements for caller identification.  Because there are both
   similarities and differences in requirements between caller
   identification and sender identification, it may or may not be
   possible to use a single mechanism to solve the two problems.

   This document also covers requirements for connected user
   identification, which are similar to those for caller identification.


6.  Uses of caller identification

   Caller identification is delivered to the called UA, which can use it
   for a number of purposes, for example:

   o  presentation to the called user;

   o  access to other information about the caller (e.g., account
      details);

   o  automatic call handling (e.g., rejection of unwanted calls,
      forwarding to voice mail, forwarding to another user);

   o  logging of received and missed calls;

   o  facilitating the establishment of a return call.

   The called user can use this information for a number of purposes,
   for example:

   o  deciding whether to answer a call, ignore a call, reject a call or
      cause a call to be forwarded to voicemail or elsewhere;

   o  deciding how to greet the caller;

   o  deciding how to behave during the call (e.g., whether it is safe
      to disclose sensitive information).

   Recognition of the caller by voice or video is clearly an alternative
   means of accomplishing the last of these, but only if the called user
   knows the caller in person.

   Sometimes decisions can be made on the basis of the name, telephone
   number or other form of identification of the particular caller, but
   on other occasions the caller's affiliation may be of more use.  For



Elwell & Pascual          Expires April 9, 2010                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft      SIP Secure Caller ID Requirements       October 2009


   example, a called user may not know a particular employee of company
   X, but can make useful decisions in the knowledge that the call is
   from company X.

   Handling of received identification information by a UA and use by a
   user is discussed in more detail in
   [I-D.elwell-sip-identity-handling-ua].


7.  Forms of caller identification

   Caller identification, as delivered to the called UA, is in the form
   of a SIP (or SIPS) URI or a TEL URI.  In practice it is usually a SIP
   URI.

   A SIP URI can be based on an E.164 telephone number, in which case
   the meaning of the domain part is unclear.  However, generally the
   call will have arrived from or via the indicated domain.  If all
   calls arriving via the called user's service provider carry that
   service provider's domain name, the domain name says nothing about
   the origin of the call.  The domain part would be far more useful if
   it represented the originating domain.  This is particularly true if
   the called user or called UA does not recognise the particular
   telephone number.  For example, if caller identification

      sip:+123456789@example.com;user=phone

   is received, even if the telephone number is not recognised, the fact
   that the call has come from the example.com domain might be of use,
   but not if all calls arrive via example.com.  In some cases the
   telephone number alone may be useful and the domain part can be
   ignored.

   In the case of a SIP URI not based on an E.164 number (e.g., with a
   name or private telephone number in the user part) either the domain
   part alone or the domain part plus user part might be of use to the
   called UA or called user.  The user part alone might be of use, but
   only if it is fairly unique.


8.  Security of caller identification

   A user often needs to know whether a call is secure.  Typically a
   user's expectation is that information (media) cannot be eavesdropped
   during a secure call, e.g., anything spoken cannot be overheard by
   third parties.  Another reasonable expectation is that information
   received has not been inserted, removed or modified by a third party.
   These expectations imply that the user must know with certainty who



Elwell & Pascual          Expires April 9, 2010                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft      SIP Secure Caller ID Requirements       October 2009


   is the other party in the call.  Therefore secure caller or connected
   user identification plays an important part in determining whether a
   call is secure.  The need for a visual indication that caller
   identification can be trusted is discussed in
   [I-D.york-sip-visual-identifier-trusted-identity].

   Identification information in a SIP message can be subject to
   forgery, unless a trusted entity can assert that the information is
   correct.  Any assertion must itself be protected against forgery, and
   must be accompanied by evidence that the assertion is made by an
   entity that possesses secret information (e.g., a private key known
   only to the trusted entity or a shared secret known only to the
   trusted party and a relying party).  The asserting entity has to be
   trusted not to disclose the secret information to other parties and
   to assert only what it knows to be true.

   For example, a user might trust his/her local SIP service provider to
   assert the identity of the other user.  This is the solution provided
   by P-Asserted-Identity, the assertion being secured by using TLS
   transport between the local proxy and the UA, the UA having
   authenticated the proxy at TLS establishment time.  However, if the
   remote user is not within the local domain, the local domain must
   rely on an assertion from an upstream domain.  Depending on how many
   domains the call passes through, there could be a chain of assertions
   of arbitrary length.  The first domain should have based its
   assertion on authentication of its user (e.g., using SIP digest
   authentication).  It is not uncommon for a call to pass through 4
   domains (e.g., enterprise 1, service provider 1, service provider 2
   and enterprise 2), resulting in a chain of assertions.  There can be
   more domains in the case of a forwarded call.  The UA receiving an
   assertion is not aware of the length of the chain or the intermediate
   domains whose assertions are being relied upon.

   As another example, a user might trust the other user's domain to
   assert the identity of that user, this assertion being based on
   authentication of the user (e.g., using SIP digest authentication).
   Authentication of the asserting domain requires that the UA knows in
   advance the expected certificate of that domain or the expected
   certification authority (CA) certificate.  This is the solution
   provided by SIP Identity.  The assertion has to pass through any
   intermediate domains en route to the validating UA, and this tends to
   encounter deployment difficulties.  In particular, the common
   practice of performing media steering results in changes to SDP at
   intermediate domains and breaking the SIP Identity signature.

   As yet another example, a UA could initiate some form or return
   routability check.  For example, on receipt of an INVITE request, the
   UA could send a SIP request to the identified calling user or domain.



Elwell & Pascual          Expires April 9, 2010                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft      SIP Secure Caller ID Requirements       October 2009


   Trust then is in any intermediate domains to route only to the target
   domain or user, and in the target domain or user to reject the
   request if it cannot be correlated with an outbound call request.

   In all cases, the identified calling or connected user is the user
   that the calling or connected UA is acting on behalf of.  Whether it
   really is that particular user or another person gaining authorised
   or unauthorised access to the device cannot be known.  It depends on
   the user interface provided by the UA (e.g., whether it is password
   protected) and user discipline (e.g., not leaving the device
   unattended and unlocked, not disclosing the password to others).
   This aspect of the problem cannot be solved by protocols and is not
   addressed in this document.


9.  Requirements

   Based on the above discussion, the following requirements can be
   identified for secure caller identification.  These requirements are
   not intended to replace any existing sender identification
   requirements for SIP messages outside the context of a call (e.g.,
   using the MESSAGE method).

   REQ1 - It MUST be possible to ensure that sensitive information sent
   and received during a call cannot be eavesdropped by a third party
   (confidentiality) and assert such a property to a caller or called
   user.

   REQ2 - It MUST be possible to ensure that information sent and
   received during a call is not inserted, modified or deleted by a
   third party (integrity) and assert such a property to a caller or
   called user.

   REQ3 - It MUST be possible to provide a called user with verified
   information identifying the party to which information is sent and
   from which information is received during a call (authenticated
   caller identification).

   REQ4 - It MUST be possible for a called user to receive caller
   identification that includes the calling user's domain and the
   calling user's name or telephone number within that domain.

   REQ5 - It MUST be possible for a called UA to receive an assertion
   from the calling user's domain that the call originates in that
   domain and that caller identification is correct, based on that
   domain having authenticated the calling UA.

   REQ6 - It MUST be possible for a called UA to verify such an



Elwell & Pascual          Expires April 9, 2010                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft      SIP Secure Caller ID Requirements       October 2009


   assertion based on a trust anchor, such as a CA certificate.

   REQ7 - It MUST be possible to bind the source and sink of secure
   media (e.g., using SRTP or TLS) to an asserted caller identification.

   REQ8 - It MUST be possible to bind sensitive end-to-end information
   sent by the calling UA in call-related SIP messages to an asserted
   caller identification.

   REQ9 - The solution MUST work when a call traverses multiple domains,
   including cases where domains perform media steering.

   REQ10 - It MUST be possible for a calling user to receive connected
   user identification meeting corresponding requirements to those above
   for caller identification.

   REQ11 - The resulting mechanisms MUST be backward compatible with
   [RFC3261].


10.  IANA considerations

   This document requires no IANA actions.


11.  Security considerations

   Authentication of parties involved in a call is an essential part of
   this document and is fully discussed in the preceding sections.
   There are no other security considerations.


12.  Acknowledgements

   The authors were motivated to write this document by the extensive
   discussions on the subject in the former SIPPING Working Group and
   more recently in the DISPATCH Working Group.


13.  Open Issues

   This current draft does not address PSTN interworking, where clearly
   considerations are very different.

   This current draft does not address 3PCC situations.

   Does anything need to be said about the special requirements of
   conferences?



Elwell & Pascual          Expires April 9, 2010                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft      SIP Secure Caller ID Requirements       October 2009


14.  Change log

   -00 New document.

   -01 Shortening of Introduction and moving remaining material into
   separate sections.  Additional requirements.  Change to requirement
   concerning multiple domains.  Minor changes.


15.  Informative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC3261]  Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., Camarillo, G., Johnston,
              A., Peterson, J., Sparks, R., Handley, M., and E.
              Schooler, "SIP: Session Initiation Protocol", RFC 3261,
              June 2002.

   [RFC3325]  Jennings, C., Peterson, J., and M. Watson, "Private
              Extensions to the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) for
              Asserted Identity within Trusted Networks", RFC 3325,
              November 2002.

   [RFC4474]  Peterson, J. and C. Jennings, "Enhancements for
              Authenticated Identity Management in the Session
              Initiation Protocol (SIP)", RFC 4474, August 2006.

   [RFC4916]  Elwell, J., "Connected Identity in the Session Initiation
              Protocol (SIP)", RFC 4916, June 2007.

   [I-D.elwell-sip-e2e-identity-important]
              Elwell, J., "End-to-End Identity Important in the Session
              Initiation Protocol (SIP)",
              draft-elwell-sip-e2e-identity-important-03 (work in
              progress), February 2009.

   [I-D.elwell-sip-identity-handling-ua]
              Elwell, J., "Identity Handling at a Session Initiation
              Protocol (SIP) User Agent",
              draft-elwell-sip-identity-handling-ua-00 (work in
              progress), October 2008.

   [I-D.york-sip-visual-identifier-trusted-identity]
              York, D., "The Importance of a Visual Identifier of
              Trusted Identity",
              draft-york-sip-visual-identifier-trusted-identity-01 (work
              in progress), November 2008.



Elwell & Pascual          Expires April 9, 2010                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft      SIP Secure Caller ID Requirements       October 2009


Authors' Addresses

   John Elwell
   Siemens Enterprise Communications

   Phone:  +44 1908 855608
   Email:  john.elwell@siemens-enterprise.com


   Victor Pascual Avila
   Tekelec
   Am Borsigturm 11
   Berlin
   Germany

   Email:  victor@iptel.org



































Elwell & Pascual          Expires April 9, 2010                [Page 11]


