





Network Working Group                                  Pradosh Mohapatra
Internet Draft                                              Rex Fernando
Intended Status: Proposed Standard                         Eric C. Rosen
Expires: October 2, 2010                             Cisco Systems, Inc.

                                                            James Uttaro
                                                                     ATT

                                                           April 2, 2010


              The Accumulated IGP Metric Attribute for BGP


                       draft-ietf-idr-aigp-02.txt

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.


Copyright and License Notice

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors. All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document. Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect



Mohapatra, et al.                                               [Page 1]


Internet Draft         draft-ietf-idr-aigp-02.txt             April 2010


   to this document. Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Abstract

   Routing protocols that have been designed to run within a single
   administrative domain ("IGPs") generally do so by assigning a metric
   to each link, and then choosing as the installed path between two
   nodes the path for which the total distance (sum of the metric of
   each link along the path) is minimized.  BGP, designed to provide
   routing over a large number of independent administrative domains
   ("autonomous systems"), does not make its path selection decisions
   through the use of a metric.  It is generally recognized that any
   attempt to do so would incur significant scalability problems, as
   well as inter-administration coordination problems.  However, there
   are deployments in which a single administration runs several
   contiguous BGP networks.  In such cases, it can be desirable, within
   that single administrative domain, for BGP to select paths based on a
   metric, just as an IGP would do.  The purpose of this document is to
   provide a specification for doing so.




























Mohapatra, et al.                                               [Page 2]


Internet Draft         draft-ietf-idr-aigp-02.txt             April 2010


Table of Contents

 1          Specification of requirements  .........................   3
 2          Introduction  ..........................................   3
 3          AIGP Attribute  ........................................   5
 3.1        Applicability Restrictions and Cautions  ...............   6
 3.2        Restrictions on Sending/Receiving  .....................   6
 3.3        Creating and Modifying the AIGP Attribute  .............   7
 3.3.1      Originating the AIGP Attribute  ........................   7
 3.3.2      Modifications by the Originator  .......................   7
 3.3.3      Modifications by a Non-Originator  .....................   8
 4          Decision Process  ......................................   9
 4.1        When a Route has an AIGP Attribute  ....................   9
 4.2        When the Route to the Next Hop has an AIGP attribute  ..  10
 5          Deployment Considerations  .............................  11
 6          IANA Considerations  ...................................  11
 7          Security Considerations  ...............................  11
 8          Acknowledgments  .......................................  11
 9          Authors' Addresses  ....................................  12
10          Normative References  ..................................  12
11          Informative References  ................................  13






1. Specification of requirements

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].


2. Introduction

   There are many routing protocols that have been designed to run
   within a single administrative domain.  These are known collectively
   as "Interior Gateway Protocols" (IGPs).  Typically, each link is
   assigned a particular "metric" value.  The path between two nodes can
   then be assigned a "distance", which is the sum of the metrics of all
   the links that belong to that path.  An IGP selects the "shortest"
   (minimal distance) path between any two nodes, perhaps subject to the
   constraint that if the IGP provides multiple "areas", it may prefer



Mohapatra, et al.                                               [Page 3]


Internet Draft         draft-ietf-idr-aigp-02.txt             April 2010


   the shortest path within an area to a path that traverses more than
   one area.  Typically the administration of the network has some
   routing policy which can be approximated by selecting shortest paths
   in this way.

   BGP, as distinguished from the IGPs, was designed to run over an
   arbitrarily large number of administrative domains ("autonomous
   systems", or "ASes") with limited coordination among the various
   administrations.  BGP does not make its path selection decisions
   based on a metric; there is no such thing as an "inter-AS metric".
   There are two fundamental reasons for this:

     - The distance between two nodes in a common administrative domain
       may change at any time due to events occurring in that domain.
       These changes are not propagated around the Internet unless they
       actually cause the border routers of the domain to select routes
       with different BGP attributes for some set of address prefixes.
       This accords with a fundamental principle of scaling, viz., that
       changes with only local significance must not have global
       effects.  If local changes in distance were always propagated
       around the Internet, this principle would be violated.

     - A basic principle of inter-domain routing is that the different
       administrative domains may have their own policies, which do not
       have to be revealed to other domains, and which certainly do not
       have to be agreed to by other domains.  Yet the use of inter-AS
       metric in the Internet would have exactly these effects.

   There are, however, deployments in which a single administration runs
   a network which has been sub-divided into multiple, contiguous ASes,
   each running BGP.  There are several reasons why a single
   administrative domain may be broken into several ASes (which, in this
   case, are not really "autonomous".)  It may be that the existing IGPs
   do not scale well in the particular environment; it may be that a
   more generalized topology is desired than could be obtained by use of
   a single IGP domain; it may be that a more finely grained routing
   policy is desired than can be supported by an IGP.  In such
   deployments, it can be useful to allow BGP to make its routing
   decisions based on the IGP metric, so that BGP chooses the "shortest"
   path between two nodes, even if the nodes are in two different ASes
   within that same administrative domain.

   There are in fact some implementations which already do something
   like this, using the MULTI_EXIT_DISC (MED) attribute to carry the IGP
   metric.  However, that doesn't really provide IGP-like "shortest
   path" routing, as the BGP decision process gives priority to other
   factors, such as LOCAL_PREF and AS_PATH length.  Also, the standard
   procedures for use of the MED do not ensure that the IGP metric is



Mohapatra, et al.                                               [Page 4]


Internet Draft         draft-ietf-idr-aigp-02.txt             April 2010


   properly accumulated so that it covers all the links along the path.

   In this document, we define a new optional, non-transitive BGP
   attribute, called the "Accumulated IGP Metric Attribute", or "AIGP
   attribute", and specify the procedures for using it.

   The specified procedures prevent the AIGP attribute from "leaking
   out" past the administrative domain boundaries into the Internet.

   The specified procedures also ensure that the value in the AIGP
   attribute has been accumulated all along the path from the
   destination, i.e., that the AIGP attribute does not appear when there
   are "gaps" along the path where the IGP metric is unknown.


3. AIGP Attribute

   The AIGP Attribute is an optional non-transitive BGP Path Attribute.
   The attribute type code for the AIGP Attribute is to be assigned by
   IANA.  The value field of the AIGP Attribute is defined here to be a
   set of TLVs (elements encoded as "Type/Length/Value"). However, this
   document defines only a single such TLV, the AIGP TLV, that contains
   the Accumulated IGP Metric.  The AIGP TLV is encoded as shown in
   Figure 1.  An AIGP Attribute MUST NOT contain more than one AIGP TLV.


       0                   1                   2                   3
       0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
       +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
       |    Type=1     |         Length                |               |
       +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+               |
       ~                                                               ~
       |                   Accumulated IGP Metric                      |
       |                                               +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
       |                                               |
       +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+

                            AIGP  Attribute
                                 Figure 1


    - Type: A single octet encoding the AIGP Attribute Type.  Only type
      1 is defined in this document.

    - Length: Two octets encoding the length in octets of the attribute,
      including the type and length fields.  The length is encoded as an
      unsigned binary integer.




Mohapatra, et al.                                               [Page 5]


Internet Draft         draft-ietf-idr-aigp-02.txt             April 2010


      The length of the AIGP TLV is always 11.

    - Accumulated IGP Metric: For a type 1 AIGP attribute, the value
      field is always 8 bytes long.  IGP metrics are frequently
      expressed as 4-octet values, and this ensures that the AIGP
      attribute can be used to hold the sum of an arbitrary number of
      4-octet values.


3.1. Applicability Restrictions and Cautions

   This document only considers the use of the AIGP attribute in
   networks where each router uses tunneling of some sort to deliver a
   packet to its BGP next hop.  Use of the AIGP attribute in networks
   that do not use tunneling is outside the scope of this document.

   If a Route Reflector supports the AIGP attribute, but some of its
   clients do not, then the routing choices that result may not all
   reflect the intended routing policy.


3.2. Restrictions on Sending/Receiving

   An implementation that supports the AIGP attribute MUST support a
   per-session configuration item, AIGP_SESSION, that indicates whether
   the attribute is enabled or disabled for use on that session.

     - The default value of AIGP_SESSION, for EBGP sessions, MUST be
       "disabled".

     - The default value of AIGP_SESSION, for IBGP and confederation-
       EBGP sessions, MUST be "enabled."

   The AIGP attribute MUST NOT be sent on any BGP session for which
   AIGP_SESSION is disabled.

   If an AIGP attribute is received on a BGP session for which
   AIGP_SESSION is disabled, the attribute MUST be treated exactly as if
   it were an unrecognized non-transitive attribute.  That is, "it MUST
   be quietly ignored and not passed along to other BGP peers" (see
   [BGP], section 5).










Mohapatra, et al.                                               [Page 6]


Internet Draft         draft-ietf-idr-aigp-02.txt             April 2010


3.3. Creating and Modifying the AIGP Attribute

3.3.1. Originating the AIGP Attribute

   A BGP speaker MUST NOT add the AIGP attribute to any route whose path
   leads outside the AS to which the BGP speaker belongs.  It may be
   added only to routes that satisfy one of the following conditions:

     - The route is a static route that is being redistributed into BGP

     - The route is an IGP route that is being redistributed into BGP

     - The route is an IBGP-learned route whose AS_PATH attribute is
       empty.

   An implementation that supports the AIGP attribute MUST support a
   configuration item, AIGP_ORIGINATE, that enables or disables its
   creation and attachment to routes.  The default value of
   AIGP_ORIGINATE MUST be "disabled".

   It SHOULD be possible to set AIGP_ORIGINATE to "enabled for the
   routes of a particular IGP that are redistributed into BGP" (where "a
   particular IGP" might be "OSPF" or "ISIS").

   When a BGP speaker R learns a route to address prefix P from an IGP,
   the IGP will have computed a "distance" from R  to P.  The value
   assigned to the AIGP attribute is either the IGP-computed distance,
   or some other value determined by policy.

   In the case of a static route whose next hop matches a BGP route that
   has an AIGP attribute, the static route MAY inherit the AIGP
   attribute value of that BGP route.


3.3.2. Modifications by the Originator

   If BGP speaker R is the originator of the AIGP attribute of prefix P,
   and at some point the distance from R to P changes, R SHOULD issue a
   new BGP update containing the new value of the AIGP attribute.
   However, if the difference between the new distance and the distance
   advertised in the AIGP attribute is less than a configurable
   threshold, the update MAY be suppressed.









Mohapatra, et al.                                               [Page 7]


Internet Draft         draft-ietf-idr-aigp-02.txt             April 2010


3.3.3. Modifications by a Non-Originator

   Suppose a BGP speaker R1 receives a route with an AIGP attribute
   whose value is A, and a Next Hop whose value is R2.  Suppose also
   that R1 is about to redistribute that route on a BGP session that is
   enabled for sending/receiving the attribute.

   If R1 does not change the Next Hop of the route, then R1 MUST NOT
   change the AIGP attribute value of the route.

   If R1 changes the Next Hop of the route from R2 to R1, and if R1's
   route to R2 is an IGP-learned route, or a static route that does not
   require recursive next hop resolution, then R1 must increase the
   value of the AIGP attribute by adding to A the distance from R1 to
   R2.  This distance is either the IGP-computed distance from R1 to R2,
   or some value determined by policy.  However, A MUST be increased by
   a non-zero amount.

   Note that if R1 and R2 above are EBGP neighbors, and there is a
   direct link between them on which no IGP is running, then when R1
   changes the next hop of a route from R2 to R1, the AIGP metric value
   MUST be increased by a non-zero amount.  The amount of the increase
   SHOULD be such that it is properly comparable to the IGP metrics.
   E.g., if the IGP metric is a function of latency, then the amount of
   the increase should be a function of the latency from R1 to R2.

   If R1 changes the Next Hop of the route from R2 to R1, and if R1's
   route to R2 is a BGP-learned route, or a static route that requires
   recursive next hop resolution, then the AIGP attribute value needs to
   be increased in several steps:

      1. Let Xattr be the new AIGP attribute value.

      2. Initialize Xattr to A.

      3. Set the XNH to R2.

      4. Find the route to XNH.

      5. If the route to XNH does not require recursive next hop
         resolution, get the distance D from R1 to XNH.  If D is above a
         configurable threshold, set the AIGP attribute value to
         Xattr+D.  If D is below a configurable threshold, set the AIGP
         attribute value to Xattr.  In either case, exit this procedure.







Mohapatra, et al.                                               [Page 8]


Internet Draft         draft-ietf-idr-aigp-02.txt             April 2010


      6. If the route to XNH is a BGP-learned route, and the route does
         NOT have an AIGP attribute, then exit this procedure and do not
         pass on any AIGP attribute.

      7. If the route to XNH is a BGP-learned route, and the route has
         an AIGP attribute value of Y, then set Xattr=Xattr+Y, and set
         XNH to the next hop of this route.  (The intention here is that
         Y is the AIGP value of the route as it was received by R1,
         without having been modified by R1.)

      8. Go to step 4.

   The AIGP value of a given route depends on (a) the AIGP values of all
   the next hops that are recursively resolved during this procedure,
   and (b) the IGP distance to any next hop that is not recursively
   resolved.  Any change due to (a) in any of these values MUST trigger
   a new AIGP computation for that route.  Whether a change due to (b)
   triggers a new AIGP computation depends upon whether the change in
   IGP distance exceeds a configurable threshold.

   Note that the overall shortest path may not be selected if the next
   hop has to be recursively resolved more than once.

   If the AIGP attribute is carried across several ASes, each with its
   own IGP domain, it is clear that these procedures are unlikely to
   give a sensible result if the IGPs are different (e.g., some OSPF and
   some IS-IS), or if the meaning of the metrics is different in the
   different IGPs (e.g., if the metric represents bandwidth in some IGP
   domains but represents latency in others). These procedures also are
   unlikely to give a sensible result if the metric assigned to inter-AS
   BGP links (on which no IGP is running) or to static routes is not
   comparable to the IGP metrics.  All such cases are outside the scope
   of the current document.



4. Decision Process

4.1. When a Route has an AIGP Attribute

   Use of the AIGP attribute involves several modifications to the BGP
   "phase 2" decision process as described in [BGP], section 9.1.2.2.
   The procedures defined in this section MUST be executed BEFORE any of
   the tie breaking procedures described therein are executed.

   If any routes have an AIGP attribute, remove from consideration all
   routes that do not have an AIGP attribute.




Mohapatra, et al.                                               [Page 9]


Internet Draft         draft-ietf-idr-aigp-02.txt             April 2010


   If router R is considering route T, where T has an AIGP attribute,

     - then R must compute the value A, defined as follows: set A to the
       sum of (a) T's AIGP attribute value and (b) the IGP distance from
       R to T's next hop.

     - remove from consideration all routes that are not tied for the
       lowest value of A.


4.2. When the Route to the Next Hop has an AIGP attribute

   Suppose that a given router R1 is comparing two routes, neither of
   which has an AIGP attribute.  The BGP decision process as specified
   in [BGP] makes use, in its tie breaker procedures, of "interior
   cost", defined as follows:

       "interior cost of a route is determined by calculating the metric
       to the NEXT_HOP for the route using the Routing Table."

   Suppose route T has a next hop of N.  We modify the notion of the
   "interior cost" from node R to node N as follows:

     - If the route to N has an AIGP attribute, set A to the AIGP value
       of the route to N, computing the AIGP value of the route
       according to the procedure of section 3.3.3.  (This will have
       been computed at the time the route to N was installed.)

     - If the route to N does not have an AIGP value, set A to 0.  (This
       can only be the case if there is no route to N that does have an
       AIGP value.)

     - Let R2 be the next hop of the route to N, after all recursive
       resolution of the next hop is done.  Let m be the IGP distance
       (or in the case of a static route, the configured distance) from
       R1 to R2.

     - The "interior cost" of route T is the quantity A+m.













Mohapatra, et al.                                              [Page 10]


Internet Draft         draft-ietf-idr-aigp-02.txt             April 2010


5. Deployment Considerations

   Using the AIGP attribute to achieve a desired routing policy will be
   more effective if each BGP speaker can use it to choose from among
   multiple routes. Thus is it highly recommended that the procedures of
   [BESTEXT] and [ADDPATH] be used in conjunction with the AIGP
   Attribute.

   If a Route Reflector does not pass all paths to its clients, then it
   will tend to pass the paths for which the IGP distance from the Route
   Reflector itself to the next hop is smallest.  This may result in a
   non-optimal choice by the clients.


6. IANA Considerations

   IANA shall assign a codepoint for the AIGP attribute.  This codepoint
   will come from the "BGP Path Attributes" registry.

   IANA shall create a registry for "BGP AIGP Attribute Types".  Type 1
   should be defined as "AIGP", and should refer to this document.


7. Security Considerations

   The spurious introduction, though error or malfeasance, of an AIGP
   attribute, could result in the selection of paths other than those
   desired.

   Improper configuration on both ends of an EBGP connection could
   result in an AIGP attribute being passed from one service provider to
   another.  This would likely result in an unsound selection of paths.


8. Acknowledgments

   The authors would like to thank Rajiv Asati, Clarence Filsfils,
   Robert Raszuk, Yakov Rekhter, Samir Saad, and John Scudder for their
   input.












Mohapatra, et al.                                              [Page 11]


Internet Draft         draft-ietf-idr-aigp-02.txt             April 2010


9. Authors' Addresses

   Rex Fernando
   Juniper Networks
   1194 N. Mathilda Ave
   Sunnyvale, CA  94089
   USA
   Email: rex@juniper.net



   Pradosh Mohapatra
   Cisco Systems, Inc.
   170 Tasman Drive
   San Jose, CA  95134
   Email: pmohapat@cisco.com



   Eric C. Rosen
   Cisco Systems, Inc.
   1414 Massachusetts Avenue
   Boxborough, MA, 01719
   Email: erosen@cisco.com



   James Uttaro
   AT&T
   200 S. Laurel Avenue
   Middletown, NJ 07748
   Email: uttaro@att.com



10. Normative References

   [BGP], "A Border Gateway Protocol 4 (BGP-4)", Y. Rekhter, T. Li, S.
   Hares, RFC 4271, January 2006.












Mohapatra, et al.                                              [Page 12]


Internet Draft         draft-ietf-idr-aigp-02.txt             April 2010


11. Informative References

   [ADDPATH] "Fast Connectivity Restoration Using BGP Add-Path", P.
   Mohapatra, R. Fernando, C. Filsfils, R. Raszuk, draft-pmohapat-idr-
   fast-conn-restore-00.txt, September 2008.

   [BESTEXT], " Advertisement of the Best External Route in BGP", P.
   Marques, R. Fernando, E. Chen, P. Mohapatra, draft-ietf-idr-best-
   external-01.txt, February 2010.

   [RFC2119] "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
   Levels.", S. Bradner, March 1997







































Mohapatra, et al.                                              [Page 13]
