


Network Working Group                                         E. Harjula
Internet-Draft                                             M. Ylianttila
Intended status: Informational                        University of Oulu
Expires: April 18, 2010                                 October 15, 2009


       Load balancing models for DHT-based Peer-to-Peer Networks
              draft-harjula-p2psip-loadbalancing-survey-00

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 18, 2010.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2009 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents in effect on the date of
   publication of this document (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info).
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.

Abstract

   This draft provides a review of the proposed load balancing methods
   for structured (DHT-based) P2P systems, and introduces their
   operating principles and main characteristics.  To maximize



Harjula & Ylianttila     Expires April 18, 2010                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft          DHT Load Balancing Models           October 2009


   performance, reliability and fairness of a structured P2P system, the
   load between the nodes should be equally or nearly equally
   distributed.  Structured P2P systems are usually based on Distributed
   Hash Tables (DHT), that distribute peers to the identifier space and
   objects among peers by choosing random identifiers for them.  In the
   worst case, this may result in O(log N) imbalance of object
   distribution between the peers, causing high degree of heterogeneity
   in loads of peer nodes.  Other sources for load imbalance are
   frequent arrival and departure of nodes (i.e. churn) and the
   variation in both the size and the popularity of objects.  Load
   balancing in structured P2P systems has been thoroughly studied
   during the past years.  In this draft, we introduce and compare the
   existing fundamental load balancing models.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   3.  Fundamental load balancing models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
     3.1.  Virtual servers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
     3.2.  Controlling the object location . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
     3.3.  Controlling the node location . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
     3.4.  Address space balancing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
     3.5.  Other mechanisms  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   4.  Performance Analysis  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
     4.1.  Virtual servers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
     4.2.  Controlling the object location . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
     4.3.  Controlling the node location . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
     4.4.  Address space balancing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   5.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   6.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   7.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   8.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
     8.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
     8.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9














Harjula & Ylianttila     Expires April 18, 2010                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft          DHT Load Balancing Models           October 2009


1.  Introduction

   In most of the dedicated client/server systems it is enough to
   prevent the load within a node to grow in such extent that it would
   fail in performing its tasks.  However, in P2P systems the
   requirements for the fairness of load balancing are higher since P2P
   nodes are not usually dedicated to certain tasks.  Instead, the P2P
   software usually runs on the background while the user is doing
   something else with the node.  This emphasizes the importance of fair
   load distribution between the networked nodes.

   The network management and routing in structured P2P systems are
   based on a collaborative effort of the participating nodes instead of
   centralized solutions.  Structured P2P networks were developed to
   improve routing efficiency and success rate, and thus to decrease the
   communication overhead.  In structured P2P networks, the overlay uses
   specialized algorithms for generating topologies for the nodes
   participating the system.  The overlay has specific control for the
   routing between the nodes, and the overlay controls the content
   placement.  Thus, the exact location of the specific content is
   always known by the overlay.  The load generated by the overlay
   signaling, is called signaling load.  Another source of load in P2P
   networks is data transfer load, which originates from content
   transfers between the nodes.  In the basic P2P scenario, the content
   is moved directly between the nodes, and thus the content transfer
   generates load only to the source and target node.  In addition, most
   of the systems allows the content to be stored outside the node which
   is actually sharing it.  In the case of realtime content, the media
   cannot be split in similar manner to third party nodes.  However, the
   realtime streams may be routed through one or more third party nodes.
   The reason for using third party streaming relays is usually the
   restrictions of the access network of source or target node, such as
   Network Addres Translation (NAT).

   This draft provides a survey of the existing and emerging load
   balancing technologies in the area of signaling in structured P2P
   networking.  The main purpose of this draft is to provide a
   scientific background for defining which load balancing model or
   models are the most suitable for P2PSIP environment.


2.  Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].

   Load: The stress caused to a certain node in the network, concerning



Harjula & Ylianttila     Expires April 18, 2010                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft          DHT Load Balancing Models           October 2009


   e.g. the node's computational, network, memory, storage, or battery
   capacity.

   Overload: A computing entity can be interpreted as overloaded if its
   functionality, performance, reliability, or usability substantially
   suffers from the load.

   Load balancing: a technique to distribute workload evenly across two
   or more networked nodes, in order to get optimal resource
   utilization, maximize throughput, minimize response time, and avoid
   overload


3.  Fundamental load balancing models

   Load balancing in P2P has special aspects and requirements that
   distinguish it from load balancing in distributed server systems.
   P2P systems usually consist of two distinguishable functions: 1)
   Search and discovery of nodes, content, or services (also called as
   signaling part), and 2) Transferring content or information between
   the nodes in either realtime or non-realtime manner (also called as
   media part).  Thus, also load balancing has to consider both parts.
   In the first version of this draft, we consider only signaling part.
   However, also media transfer-related load balancing mechanisms has to
   be considered.  This part remains in TBD status.

3.1.  Virtual servers

   During the past years, a great deal of research has been conducted to
   improve the load balancing in structured P2P networks.  Many of the
   proposed load balancing mechanisms are based on the concept of
   virtual servers [CHORD], where single physical node may host several
   virtual servers that are all participating independently the same
   overlay.  The concept of multiple virtual servers per physical node
   balances the load statistically.  The model also enables resource-
   aware load balancing, since the number of virtual servers allocated
   per node can vary.  In dynamic virtual server load balancing
   [VIRTUALSERVER_1], [VIRTUALSERVER_2], the load between the physical
   nodes is balanced by dynamically controlling the number of virtual
   servers per physical node (i.e. moving them between physical nodes
   during runtime).

3.2.  Controlling the object location

   Another fundamental load balancing concept is to directly control the
   object location on the overlay.  Power of Two Choices [POWEROF2], is
   based on the concept of using multiple hash functions per object.
   When inserting an object to an overlay, all respective hash values



Harjula & Ylianttila     Expires April 18, 2010                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft          DHT Load Balancing Models           October 2009


   are computed and the load information of the corresponding peer
   candidates is retrieved.  Finally, the object is stored on the peer
   with the lightest load.  Searching the object can be implemented by;
   1) sending separate lookups using each respective hash values, or 2)
   using redirection pointers between the corresponding peer candidates,
   and sending single lookup using some of the hash functions (if the
   peer receiving the lookup does not contain the object, it forwards
   the request to the containing peer, using the redirection pointer).

3.3.  Controlling the node location

   Controlling the node location on the overlay can as well be used for
   load balancing.  Node migration, proposed by Karger&Ruhl
   [SIMPLELOADBAL], is a mechanism allowing underloaded nodes to migrate
   to portions of the address space occupied by too many data items, to
   share the load of the node responsible for the overloaded address
   space.  In this model, an underloaded node queries the load of a
   randomly chosen remote node and makes a pairwise load comparison
   between itself and the remote node.  If the load of the remote node
   is higher, the node relocates to share the address space of the
   remote node.  Rieche et al [HEATDISP], presented another load
   balancing model, which is fundamentally based on moving objects
   between the overlay nodes.  In this model, the address space is
   divided to intervals, containing f nodes, where f is a fixed minimum
   number of nodes assigned to an interval.  The nodes within the
   interval are collectively responsible for all of the objects stored
   in the interval.  If the interval gets overloaded,; 1) the overloaded
   interval can be split to two intervals if the interval contains more
   than 2f nodes, 2) move nodes from other intervals to the overloaded
   interval to reach 2f nodes in the interval and split it (as in the
   first case), or 3) move the border between the overloaded interval
   and its successor or predecessor to balance the load between them.

3.4.  Address space balancing

   Yet another fundamental load balancing model is address space
   balancing between the overlay nodes.  The concept was introduced in
   [SIMPLELOADBAL], together with the previously introduced object
   location controlling model.  The main idea in the address space
   balancing is that each node has a fixed set of O(log N) possible
   locations, called virtual nodes, on the overlay, calculated using
   different hash algorithms (notice the difference in the terms between
   virtual node and virtual server).  Each node has only one of these
   virtual nodes active at any time.  The virtual node that spans the
   smallest address space between the real node owning it and the
   succeeding real node, is selected as the active node.  The selection
   is made occasionally.  With high probability, each node will be
   responsible for O(1/N) fraction of the address space.



Harjula & Ylianttila     Expires April 18, 2010                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft          DHT Load Balancing Models           October 2009


3.5.  Other mechanisms

   Several improvements have been developed for most of the presented
   fundamental load balancing models, offering e.g. better performance,
   lower overhead or locality awareness.  However, as they do not
   significantly change the fundamental working principles, they are not
   presented as separate load balancing categories.


4.  Performance Analysis

   Common goal for each of the presented fundamental load balancing
   mechanisms is to achieve fair load distribution between the overlay
   nodes without generating too much overhead to the overlay.  However,
   there are significant differences in both the fairness of load
   distribution and the generated overhead.  The following subsections
   discuss the benefits and drawbacks of each of the presented
   fundamental mechanisms.

4.1.  Virtual servers

   In its basic form, the virtual server model affects the load balance
   statistically.  The situation can be compared to throwing a die once
   versus throwing it n times and calculating their average result.
   Even though simple and powerful, this method is also unable to
   address neither the heterogeneity in the node capabilities nor the
   dynamic changes in the load.  The heterogeneity between the nodes can
   be addressed by allocating more virtual servers to higher-capacity
   devices and less virtual servers to lower-capacity devices.  Dynamic
   load variations can be addressed by a mechanism that allows moving
   virtual nodes (and the objects they are responsible for) between the
   nodes during runtime.

   The general problem with the virtual server model is the overhead it
   generates.  As a physical node appears as multiple virtual nodes in
   the overlay, the overlay size grows with O(N) relation to the number
   of virtual nodes per physical device.  The problem is emphasized with
   structured P2P networks, due to their dependence on network
   management signaling, which grows with the overlay size.  With some
   optimizations, such as sending only one request message per physical
   node and keeping common node-specific routing tables, the signaling
   overhead does not grow with the same proportion, but is still a major
   problem.  The situation gets even worse with dynamic load balancing,
   which requires mechanisms for runtime load monitoring and moving
   virtual nodes between the nodes.






Harjula & Ylianttila     Expires April 18, 2010                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft          DHT Load Balancing Models           October 2009


4.2.  Controlling the object location

   Controlling the object location, with e.g. the power of two choices
   method, is simple but efficient load balancing method.  The method
   does not generate any additional management overhead, since each
   physical device appears as a single node in the overlay, in contrast
   to the virtual server model.  Instead, the model generates some
   additional overhead to payload messaging due to the redundancy in
   storing and looking up an object.  However, as proved by multiple
   research results [REFERENCES], the management signaling dominates the
   traffic in structured P2P networks.  Thus, the generated overall
   overhead is significantly lower than with virtual server model in
   most of the P2P networks.  With redirection pointers, the payload
   signaling overhead can be alleviated with the cost of increased
   maintenance signalling, as the pointers need maintenance.

   The basic model of power of two choices is a passive mechanism, i.e.
   it does not provide active load transfers between the nodes.  Thus,
   even though with high probability an overloaded node does not receive
   any additional objects during runtime, the objects (causing overload
   to the node) cannot be moved to another node.  However, if the
   redirection pointers are in use, and thus the responsible node
   candidates for a certain object know each other, they can move
   objects between each other to provide dynamic load balancing.  In
   general, the model works better in dynamic, high churn networks with
   short object lifetimes.  The model also inherently takes into account
   the node heterogeneity, as the load is calculated locally at each
   node.

4.3.  Controlling the node location

   Similarly to previous model, controlling the node location aims to
   balance the load between nodes by controlling the number of objects
   per node.  However, instead of controlling object locations, the
   locations of nodes themselves are controlled by the load balancing
   mechanism.  In a passive form, additional overhead is generated only
   during the joining phase and when the nodes are looked up.  Object
   lookups are not affected by the model.  Active node location
   management generates also load transfer overhead, as the objects are
   moved between the moved node and the node taking over the objects the
   moving node was storing in the original location and, similarly,
   between the moving node and the node that was holding the objects in
   the new location.  Depending on the used load balancing model, the
   distribution of load information between the devices may also
   generate overhead to the overlay.  Also this model takes into account
   the node heterogeneity, as the load is calculated locally.





Harjula & Ylianttila     Expires April 18, 2010                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft          DHT Load Balancing Models           October 2009


4.4.  Address space balancing

   This load balancing model is somehow similar to the previously
   presented node location management mechanism, but the goal is
   different.  Address space balancing aims to place the nodes to the
   overlay so that the address space controlled by each node is as equal
   as possible.  This model generates management and load transfer
   overhead, as the node optimum node location is determined every time
   the address space of a node is changed due to neighbour node
   departures and new node arrivals, and changed when needed.  A
   drawback of this model is that it does not take into account the
   actual load of the node.


5.  Acknowledgements

   The authors would like to acknowledge...


6.  IANA Considerations

   This draft includes no request to IANA at this time.


7.  Security Considerations

   No security considerations at this time.


8.  References

8.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

8.2.  Informative References

   [CHORD]    Stoica, I., Morris, R., Liben-Nowell, D., Karger, D.,
              Kaashoek, M., Dabek, F., and H. Balakrishnan, "Chord: a
              scalable peer-to-peer lookup protocol for Internet
              applications", <IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking,
              Volume 11, Issue 1,  Feb. 2003, Page(s) 17-32.>.

   [HEATDISP]
              Rieche, S., Petra, L., and K. Wehrle, "A Thermal-
              Dissipation-based Approach for Balancing Data Load in
              Distributed Hash Tables", <IEEE Conference on Local



Harjula & Ylianttila     Expires April 18, 2010                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft          DHT Load Balancing Models           October 2009


              Computer Networks. (LCN 2004), Tampa, USA, 2004.>.

   [POWEROF2]
              Byers, J., Considine, J., and M. Mitzenmacher, "Simple
              Load Balancing for DHTs", <2nd International Workshop on
              Peer-to-Peer Systems (IPTPS 03),  Berkeley, USA, 2003,
              IEEE.>.

   [SIMPLELOADBAL]
              Karger, D. and M. Ruhl, "Simple Efficient Load Balancing
              Algorithms for Peer-to-Peer Systems", <4th International
              Workshop on Peer-to-Peer Systems (IPTPS 04),  San Diego,
              USA, 2004.>.

   [VIRTUALSERVER_1]
              Rao, A., Laksminarayanan, K., Surana, S., Karp, R., and I.
              Stoica, "Load Balancing in Structured P2P Systems",
              <International Workshop on Peer-to-Peer Systems (IPTPS),
              pages 68-79.>.

   [VIRTUALSERVER_2]
              Dabek, F., Kaashoek, M., Karger, D., Morris, R., and I.
              Stoica, "Wide-area Cooperative Storage with CFS", <18th
              ACM Symposium on Operating System Principles (SOSP),
              Chateau Lake Louise, Banff, Alberta, Canada. pp. 202-
              215.>.


Authors' Addresses

   Erkki Harjula
   University of Oulu
   Erkki Koiso-Kanttilan katu 3
   University of Oulu,   90014
   Finland

   Phone: +358 8 553 2522
   Email: erkki.harjula@ee.oulu.fi













Harjula & Ylianttila     Expires April 18, 2010                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft          DHT Load Balancing Models           October 2009


   Mika Ylianttila
   University of Oulu
   Erkki Koiso-Kanttilan katu 3
   University of Oulu,   90014
   Finland

   Phone: +358 8 553 25311
   Email: mika.ylianttila@ee.oulu.fi











































Harjula & Ylianttila     Expires April 18, 2010                [Page 10]

