 



Network Work Group                                        Trevor Freeman
Internet-Draft                                           Microsoft Corp.
Intended status: Informational                                Jim Schaad
Expires: July 29, 2011                           Soaring Hawk Consulting
                                                       Patrick Patterson
                                       Carillon Information Security Inc
                                                        January 20, 2011

                Requirements for Message Access Control
              draft-freeman-message-access-control-req-00

Abstract

  There are many situations where organizations want to include
  information which is subject to regulatory or other complex access
  control policy in email. Regulated information requires some form of
  robust access control to protect the confidentiality of the
  information. The Enhanced Security Services for S/MIME [rfc2634]
  defines an access control mechanism for S/MIME (eSSSecurityLabel).
  This is a signed attribute of a SignedData object which indicates the
  access control policy for the message. The fact that this is a signed
  attribute protects the integrity of the data and the binding of the
  label to the message but does not protect the confidentiality of the
  information i.e. at the point where you lean the access control policy
  to the data you also have access to the data. While the signature
  provides integrity for the label over the clear text, it is
  susceptible to unauthorized removal i.e. if you only have SignedData
  message, any MTA in the mail path can remove a signature layer and
  therefore remove the access control data.  Encrypting the signed
  message protects the confidentiality of the data and protects the
  SignedData from unauthorized removal but this hides the ESS security
  label.

  From a regulatory enforcement perspective this is an extremely weak
  form of access control because cryptographic access to the data is
  given before the access check. The correct enforcement of the access
  check totally depends on the configuration of the recipients email
  client. Since the cryptographic access is granted before the access
  checks, there is no significant impediment for a recipient who is
  unauthorized under the policy to access the data. A stronger
  enforcement model is needed for regulatory control for email where
  cryptographic access is only granted after the access check.

  There are also many users on the Internet today who have some form of
  authentication credential but they are not X.509 certificates and who
  therefore cannot use S/MIME. There are now available, standard based
  services (e.g. [SAML-overview]) which abstract the specifics of a
  technology used to authenticate uses from the application itself
 


Freeman et al.           Expires July 24, 2011                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft  Requirements for Message Access Control     January 2011


  (S/MIME in this case). Adoption of this abstraction model would enable
  a broader set of users who have other types to authentication
  credentials to be able to use S/MIME to secure email. It also allows
  for new authentication technology to be deployed without impacting the
  core S/MIME protocol. 

  This document specifies the requirements for:-

      Providing robust access control for S/MIME

      An abstraction layer for supporting other types of credentials for
      using S/MIME.

Status of This Memo

  This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
  provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79. Internet-Drafts are working documents
  of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its
  working groups. Note that other groups may also distribute working
  documents as Internet-Drafts.

  Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
  and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
  time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference material
  or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

  The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
  http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html.

  The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
  http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html

  This Internet-Draft will expire on July 29, 2011.

Copyright Notice

  Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
  document authors.  All rights reserved.

  This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
  Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
  (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
  publication of this document.  Please review these documents
  carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
  to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
  include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of the
  Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as described
  in the Simplified BSD License.
 


Freeman et al.           Expires July 24, 2011                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft  Requirements for Message Access Control     January 2011


















































 


Freeman et al.           Expires July 24, 2011                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft  Requirements for Message Access Control     January 2011


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
      1.2  Keywords  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   3.  Background  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
      3.1  ESS Security Labels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
      3.2 Access Control and the Web . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
      3.3 Information Asset Protection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
      3.4 Authentication Assurance Frameworks  . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
   4 Use Case Scenarios  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
      4.1 Business to Consumer Secure Email  . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
      4.2 Business to Business Ad-Hoc  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
      4.3 Business to Business Regulated . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
      4.4 Email Pipeline Inspection  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   5 Message Protection Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
      5.1 General Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
      5.2 Basic Policy Requirements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
      5.3 Advanced Policy Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
   5.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
   6.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
   7.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
      7.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
      7.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16


1.  Introduction

   The S/MIME (Secure/Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions) standard
   today provides digital signatures for message integrity,
   authentication, and non-repudiation of origin and encryption for data
   confidentiality. These security services are currently solely based
   on X.509 certificates. This means anyone without an X.509 certificate
   is unable to leverage the S/MIME protocol for securing email. The
   vast majority of users on the Internet have other forms of
   credentials (passwords, one time passwords, GPG/PGP keys etc.). 

   An access control policy defines a set of criteria which is required
   in order to grant access to the information. These criteria are
   defined in terms of attributes about the subject requesting access.
   Examples of the types of attributes would include what roles the
   subject is assigned to (Role Based Access Control) or one or more
   attributes about the subject (attribute Based Access Control).
   Standards now exist to exchange subject attributes [SAML-overview].
   Adoption of these subject attribute protocols would allow a rich set
   of access control polices to be supported by S/MIME in line with
   other applications. 

 


Freeman et al.           Expires July 24, 2011                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft  Requirements for Message Access Control     January 2011


1.2  Keywords

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119.

3.  Background

   The S/MIME standard [rfc5751] provides a method to send and receive
   secure MIME messages. While CMS (Cryptographic Message Syntax) allows
   for other types of security credentials to be used, S/MIME
   exclusively uses X.509 certificates [rfc5750] for the security
   credentials used for signing and encryption operations.  S/MIME uses
   an early binding mechanism for encryption keys where the sender needs
   to discover the public key for every recipient of encrypted messages
   before they can send the encrypted message. The sender needs to
   maintain a cache of all potential recipient certificates (e.g. in a
   personal address book) and/or find an acceptable certificate for the
   recipient from a repository. This key management model has limited
   the use of S/MIME for encryption for a variety of reasons. For
   example:

   o  The recipient may not have an X.509 encryption certificate
   o  The sender may not have received a signed email with the recipient
      certificate
   o  The recipient may not have an available repository
   o  The sender may be unaware of the location of the recipients
      repository
   o  The recipient's repository may not be accessible to the sender
      e.g. it's behind a firewall

  If one or more recipient certificates are missing then the sender is
  left with a stark choice: send the message unencrypted or remove the
  recipients without certificates from the message.

  The use of secure mailing lists can be thought of as a form of late-
  binding of recipient information as the originating sender does not
  need to know the set of recipients or the security information for the
  recipients.  However it is still early-binding for the mail list agent
  as it needs to perform all of the gathering and processing of
  certificate information for every recipient that it will be sending
  the message to.

  In many regulated environments end-to-end confidentiality between
  sender and recipients by itself is not enough. The regulatory policy
  requires some form of access control checks before access to the data
  should be granted. In many inter-organization collaboration scenarios
  it's impossible for the sender to satisfy the access checks on behalf
 


Freeman et al.           Expires July 24, 2011                  [Page 5]

Internet-Draft  Requirements for Message Access Control     January 2011


  of the recipients since they don't have and should not have access to
  all the attributes about the recipients because to do so may be a
  breach of the recipients privacy. It's a fundamental tenet of good
  security practice that users must be in control of the release of data
  about themselves.

3.1  ESS Security Labels

  Security labels are an optional security service for S/MIME defined in
  Enhanced Security Services for S/MIME [rfc2634].  The ESS security
  label allows classification of the sensitivity of the message contents
  using a hierarchical taxonomy in terms of the impact of unauthorized
  disclosure of the information [rfc3114].  The security label can also
  indicate access control such as full time employees only or US
  nationals only. ESS security labels are authenticated attributes of a
  signer-info structure in a SignedData object.  The label when applied
  to signed clear text data provides the access control decisions for
  the plain text. If applied to cipher text such as with the other layer
  of a triple wrapped S/MIME message the label is used for course
  grained optimization such as routing. 

3.1.1 Problems With ESS Security Labels

  ESS Security Labels have been found to have a number of limitations.

   1. They do not provide a mechanism for an email client to discover a
      new access control policy if the message contains a policy the
      client is unaware of. This provides a stark choice: ignore the
      access control policy and grant access to the message or block
      access to the message. 
   2. The current ESS standard only allows a single policy label. This
      is adequate for course grained policy binding to express a limited
      set of choices such as with sensitivity which typically a
      hierarchy of 3-5 choices. Many data sets are subject to multiple
      fine-grained access control polices. For instance, a message may
      contain information that is both proprietary and export
      controlled. Trying to represent combinations of polices via a
      single policy label would lead to an exponential growth in the
      number of policy labels. 
   3. They do not provide for any auditing of who has been granted
      accessed the message.
   4. The authoritative label for the access control is a signed
      attribute inside the enveloped data. The envelope is decrypted by
      the client who then reads and hopefully enforces the access
      control.  What that means is users who under the policy are not
      allowed access to the information have no cryptographic impediment
      to access the information. Compliance with the policy is dependent
      on the state of the configuration of every receiving agent. This
 


Freeman et al.           Expires July 24, 2011                  [Page 6]

Internet-Draft  Requirements for Message Access Control     January 2011


      makes policy compliance practically impossible anything but a
      small closed environment. 
   5. Access to the message cannot be granted or removed after the
      message has been sent, but before it has been received.

  The policy is implemented and enforced solely by the receiving agent.
  This means that all access polices have to be distributed to all
  recipients receiving agents. This again makes policy compliance
  practically impossible anything but a small closed environment.

3.2 Access Control and the Web

  A prerequisite for many web transactions is the disclosure of
  attributes about the subject such as name, age, email address,
  physical location, address, credit card number, social security number
  etc. Some attributes lend themselves to easy verification but many do
  not. An assertion of an email address can be verified by sending an
  email to the address containing a secret ephemeral challenge.
  Subsequent demonstration of knowledge of the ephemeral challenge
  verifies the email address assertion. Other assertions such as "this
  is my credit card account number" are not easily verified. The fact it
  is a valid credit card number can be verified but not the binding to
  the subject attempting to use it.  Where a claim is not easily
  verified they are often combined with other assertions under the
  assumption that knowledge of this larger data set verifies all the
  assertions in the data set if you know the account number, billing
  address etc., of course you must be the account holder. This is a very
  weak form of verification as is often demonstrated via the growth of
  identity theft much of this bigger data set data set is often publicly
  via social networks or easily guessed e.g. the most popular
  professions for a parent is dead or retired. Many of these assertions
  which are harder to verify are based on government issued documents
  such as a birth certificates, driver's license, identity card or
  passport. This requires an exchange of the documents between the
  relying party and the subject. For a small number of high value
  transactions (e.g. opening a new account) with relying parties that
  have widespread physical presence (a bank) this is acceptable because
  the applicant can present themselves with the required documentation
  in person. However with web based relying parties they cannot perform
  an in person exchange of documents to verify information on government
  issued documents. The approach taken with such relying parties is to
  have trusted assertion providers where the assertion provider can
  perform an in person exchange of documents with the subject then vouch
  for the set of assertions they have verified.

  SAML [SAML-core] defines an XML framework for describing and
  exchanging attributes about subjects. The entity making the assertions
  about the subject is known as the assertion provider, the entity
 


Freeman et al.           Expires July 24, 2011                  [Page 7]

Internet-Draft  Requirements for Message Access Control     January 2011


  consuming the assertions is known as the relying party. The well-known
  scenarios for using SAML are:


      o Single Sign On across systems on different platform technology

      o Federated Identity between business partners

      o Web Services and other standards e.g. SOAP based protocols

  The critical difference between SAML and pure authentication protocols
  such as mutually authenticated TLS is that SAML is able to exchange a
  rich set of assertions which are frequently necessary for authorizing
  transactions. X.509 certificate can exchange a limited set of identity
  assertions such as an x.500 distinguished name, email address,
  Kerberos principal name, etc. SAML is able to do this plus an
  extensible set of other assertions about the subject such as, date of
  birth or business sign-off limits levels etc., etc.

  SAML also abstracts the details of the authentication protocol from
  the relying party. The assertion provider can use a broad range of
  authentication mechanisms such as passwords, one time passwords,
  biometrics, X.509 etc., without impacting the relying party. The
  assertion provider can include the details of the authentication
  mechanism or its strength using an established strength scale such as
  NIST SP800-63-1[sp800-63-1]. The relying party can then inspect the
  claims about how or how strongly the subject authenticated to the
  identity provider to determine if it complies with its access policy.
  Low value transactions can use simple short lived assertions where
  possession of the assertion alone is considered acceptable for the
  transaction risk. These are known as Bearer assertions.  Higher value
  transaction can require proof of possession keys (either symmetric or
  asymmetric cryptographic keys) where the subject demonstrates
  knowledge of a cryptographic secret to the relying party via a HMAC or
  digital signature. These are defined by the SAML specification as
  Holder of Key assertions. The subject has to demonstrate possession of
  the key to the relying party.  Holder of key assertions can be either
  symmetric or asymmetric keys.

3.3 Information Asset Protection

  Information Asset Protection (IAP) is a concept developed by the
  Trasglobal Secure Collaboration Program (TSCP), a working group
  comprised of the major players in the western Aerospace and Defense
  industry.  The industry is highly regulated and operates in an
  environment with many policies governing the access to information
  assets. These policies may be motivated by the desire to protect
  intellectual property, the confidentiality of information, or are
 


Freeman et al.           Expires July 24, 2011                  [Page 8]

Internet-Draft  Requirements for Message Access Control     January 2011


  imposed by government regulators such as the US International
  Trafficking Arms Regulations (ITAR). They apply to the information
  assets in whatever form the asset may take and are independent of the
  application used to create the information. These policies take many
  forms, e.g. verification the recipient has demonstrated a need to know
  the information because they are working on a specific project, that
  they have passed the appropriate background and nationality checks, or
  that they have signed the appropriate non-disclosure agreement. What
  is needed is a policy driven information centric protection where the
  applicable policies either is manually or automatically attached to
  the information and based on the policy the system understands what
  access control and data protection is necessary.

  Email is an application widely used in the Aerospace and Defense
  industry. S/MIME is widely used today and provides sender to recipient
  confidentiality. This protects the contents of the message from
  discloser to unauthorized third parties e.g. while it is in transit
  between MTA's or while at rest in a MTA message queue or recipients
  mailbox. However it does not impose any finer grained access control
  such as those required by many policies. S/MIME does define an
  extension mechanism for access control via an ESS security label
  [rfc2634] thou this mechanism has drawbacks (see above).

3.4 Authentication Assurance Frameworks

  A number of organizations have created taxonomies to define the
  possible levels of identity assurance for electronic authentication.
  These taxonomies have been drafted by industry organizations [lib-
  iaf][kan-iaf] and governments [sp800-63-1]. The objective of the
  framework is to define a simple abstraction for use between identity
  providers and relying parties which more easily maps to the business
  requirements. While all of these frameworks may not agree on every
  aspect, at a macro level they do exhibit many similarities. A common
  theme in many is the adoption of 4 levels of identity assurance.

   1. Negligible confidence in the asserted identity
   2. Some confidence in the asserted identity
   3. Significant confidence in the asserted identity
   4. High confidence in the asserted identity

  The framework defines broad characteristics in the area of identity
  proofing, credential type and management, identity provider
  authentication and relying party authentication.

4 Use Case Scenarios

  This section documents some use case scenarios the new protocol aims
  to support.
 


Freeman et al.           Expires July 24, 2011                  [Page 9]

Internet-Draft  Requirements for Message Access Control     January 2011


4.1 Business to Consumer Secure Email

  There are many examples of business to consumer secure email scenarios
  where the email would contain potentially sensitive data. This would
  include doctor, patient; bank, account holder, Medical insurance,
  insured person. A doctor has received test results their patient.  The
  information is confidential so any channel of communication they
  selects must protect the patient's privacy. The doctor elects to use
  email to reach their patient quickly with news of the results. They
  must ensure that:

   1. Only the patient can read the email 
   2. The patent authenticates with an acceptable level of assurance
   3. The patient can verify the email is from their doctor
   4. The patient can verify the email has not been tampered with


  The doctor composes the email their patient. They include some
  comments and suggestions for the patient and attach the test results.

  The doctor's email client allows classifications to be bound to an
  email. The doctor classifies the email as a Doctor-Patient
  communication.

  The email client knows the protections to apply to Doctor-Patient
  communication; to encrypt and integrity-protect and the level of
  assurance required for the recipients identity.

  The email is able to flow securely and seamlessly through existing
  email infrastructure to the patient.  The data is protected while in
  transit or at rest.

4.2 Business to Business Ad-Hoc

  Early in the relationship between two companies there may be an
  exchange of sensitive information before the relationship has matured
  to the point where the relationship may be formally reflected in some
  form of agreement. Business owners want the agility to interact with
  potential partners without having to engage there IT staff as a
  prerequisite of the transaction. 

  A group of people have met to discuss the prospect of a potential new
  business opportunity. Following the meeting the participants now want
  to exchange some documents. When the mail is sent with the sensitive
  content the sender must ensure:-

   1. Only the business colleagues can read the email 
   2. The colleague authenticates with an acceptable level of assurance
 


Freeman et al.           Expires July 24, 2011                 [Page 10]

Internet-Draft  Requirements for Message Access Control     January 2011


   3. The colleague can verify the email is from another colleague
   4. The colleague can verify the email has not been tampered with


  The sender composes the email their colleague. They include some
  information relation to their assigned actions and attach the draft
  contact.

  The senders email client allows classifications to be bound to an
  email. The sender classifies the email as an Ad-hoc pre-contractual
  communication.

  The email client knows the protections to apply to Ad-hoc pre-
  contractual communication; to encrypt and integrity-protect and the
  level of assurance required for the recipients identity.

  The email is able to flow securely and seamlessly through existing
  email infrastructure to the patient.  The data is protected while in
  transit or at rest.

4.3 Business to Business Regulated 

  As business relationship mature they often result in a formal
  contractual agreement to work together. The agreement may define a
  number of work areas and deliverables. These deliverable may be
  regulated and require precise polices for access control,
  authentication and integrity for the applicable data.

  Company Foo has been awarded a contract to build some equipment
  (Program X). The equipment is covered by export control. Company Bar
  is a subcontractor to company Foo working on the program X. Company
  Foo as set up some business rules for access to program X data to
  ensure compliance with export control requirements. Company foo has
  given pointers to the policies to company Bar.

  An employee of foo has been assigned to program X. They want to send
  some mail to colleagues in both Foo and Bar who are working on program
  X.  When the mail is sent with the sensitive content the employee must
  ensure

      1. Only the persons who meet the program X policy as defined by
      company Foo can read the email 

      2. The recipients authenticates with an acceptable level of
      assurance as defined by the company foo policy

      3. The recipients can verify who the email is from 

 


Freeman et al.           Expires July 24, 2011                 [Page 11]

Internet-Draft  Requirements for Message Access Control     January 2011


      4. The recipients can verify the email has not been tampered with

      5. They can also tell it is a program email and the contents can
      only be shared with other program workers.

  The sender composes the email and includes a set of recipients in both
  Foo and Bar. They include some information relation to their assigned
  actions for the program.

  The senders email client allows classifications to be bound to an
  email. The sender classifies the email as Program X and contains
  export controlled information.

  The email client knows the protections to apply to Program X email; to
  encrypt and integrity-protect and the level of assurance required for
  the recipients identity.

  The email is able to flow securely and seamlessly through existing
  email infrastructure to the patient.  The data is protected while in
  transit or at rest.

  Only recipients who meet the Program X policy are able to read the
  email.

4.4 Email Pipeline Inspection

  Unsolicited bulk email (aka spam) is a problem for organizations.
  Email can also contain malicious content such as viruses or attempts
  at phishing. To combat these threats, server side scanning of the
  email messages before they reach the recipient is an effective
  countermeasure. Authorized agents must be capable of getting access to
  the message.

  Company Foo receives email from the Internet. Company Foo has a policy
  to scan inbound email with a view to remove inappropriate or malicious
  content. They have a server which scans email from the Internet. The
  server has the ability to identify itself as a subject for Foo who is
  authorized to scan email on behalf of Foo recipients. It has or can
  request access to encrypted email. It has a local policy on what
  content to remove and on to reject email which is cannot scan.

5 Message Protection Requirements

5.1 General Requirements

  Protected email MUST be where messages can be considered "secure"
  which means confidential, integrity protected AND authenticated. 

 


Freeman et al.           Expires July 24, 2011                 [Page 12]

Internet-Draft  Requirements for Message Access Control     January 2011


  Every authentication has a level of assurance associated with it
  depending on attributes such as the identity checks made about the
  subject and the authentication technology used. The authentication of
  senders and recipients MUST allow for the multiple levels of identity
  assurance.

  The specifics of how the recipient achieves the required level of
  identity assurance MUST be abstracted from the email system e.g. by
  the use of SAML [SAML-core] attributes.

  Cryptographic access the message MUST only be provided after the
  recipient has provided suitable valid attributes as defined by the
  sender.

  If the sender has not signed the message themselves i.e. the message
  is signed on behalf of the sender, Recipients MUST receive
  authenticated attributes from the signer about the identity of the
  sender, the level of identity assurance of the sender with the signer
  and the cryptographic fingerprint of the senders' message so the
  recipient can confirm the signed messages is the same as the senders
  message.

  The decryption key exchange MUST support multiple levels of assurance.
  The level of assurance requited MUST be selected by the sender. 

  Recipients MUST securely receive the message decryption key(s). A
  range of assurance levels MUST be provides for the key exchange. For
  example, for low assurance situations this could be over a secure
  transport such as SSL. For high assurance situations recipient MAY be
  required to provide a suitable key exchange key such as an X.509
  certificate.

  Mail pipeline agents MUST be able to get access to encrypted content
  under the control of policy of the sender. It MUST be possible for
  domains to publish keys for such agents so senders can pre-authorize
  agents of recipient domains at send time for email scanning. It MUST
  be possible for domains to request access to protected messages which
  have not been preauthorized by the sender. 

  If a third party is used to arbitrate the message access control, the
  third party MUST NOT be required to maintain per message state.

5.2 Basic Policy Requirements

  Basic policy is intended to be equivalent to sending encrypted email
  with S/MIME today. It is a simple policy that authenticated recipients
  of the email get access to the message. Its intended target is simple
  scenarios involving consumers and small businesses. 
 


Freeman et al.           Expires July 24, 2011                 [Page 13]

Internet-Draft  Requirements for Message Access Control     January 2011


  When using Basic Policy, the sending agent MUST define the list of
  recipients AND the level of authentication assurance required. 

  The recipient MUST be required to provide at least two attributes,
  their email address and the level of authentication assurance of the
  identity.

  Basic policy MUST support multiple levels of identity assurance. The
  levels of identity assurance MUST map to an existing identity
  authentication assurance framework e.g. to NIST 800-63-1 or
  equivalent.

  A sender using Basic policy MUST be able to send protected messages
  without discovering any recipient's encryption key.

  Using basic policy MUST NOT require bilateral agreements between
  sender and recipients a priori to sending the message. 

  The use of Basic Policy MUST be backwards compatible with existing
  S/MIME. A sender's agent MAY discover some recipient's certificates
  and create recipient info structures as per the existing standard and
  elect to use the new mechanism for recipients it cannot discover keys
  for rather than remove the recipients without certificates.

5.3 Advanced Policy Requirements

  Advanced policy is intended to be used where one or more arbitrary
  access control policies are required on the content of the message. It
  is intended to target more complex scenarios such as email with
  regulated content or content subject to organization policies.

  It MUST be possible to apply one or more Advanced Policies to a
  message. Where 2 or more policies are applied to a message, the
  logical relationship between the policies MUST also be expressed i.e.
  are the policies a logical AND or a logical OR.

  The specifics of the access control policy MUST be abstracted from the
  client i.e. the recipients client MUST NOT make the access control
  decision.

  Advanced policy can use either early or late key binding. The choice
  MUST be defined by the message access control policy.  If using early
  key binding, the binding data can only be disclosed to the recipient
  after they have successfully passed the access check.

  The recipient's client MUST NOT be expected to have received a priori
  of the message arrival any access control policies or configuration
  specific to an access control policy.
 


Freeman et al.           Expires July 24, 2011                 [Page 14]

Internet-Draft  Requirements for Message Access Control     January 2011


  Upon each access of the content of the email, the attributes MUST be
  verified anew prior to cryptographic access being granted to the
  content of the email.

5.  IANA Considerations

  This document describes the requirements for message access control.
  As such no action by IANA is necessary for this document

6.  Security Considerations

  Authentication by itself is not a good trust indicator for users.
  Authentication raises the level of assurance the identity is correct
  but does not address whether the identity is trustworthy or noteworthy
  to the recipient.  Authentication should be coupled with some form of
  reputation e.g. the domain is on a white list or is not or a black
  list. Malicious actors may attempt to "legitimize" a message if an
  indication of authentication is not coupled with some form of
  reputation.

  Malicious actors could attempt to use encrypted email as a way to
  bypass existing message pipeline controls or to mine information from
  a domain. Domain should have sufficient granularity of policy to
  handle situations where their email pipeline agents have not been
  authorized to inspect the contents.

  It must be possible for a third party to, upon correctly presenting a
  legitimate legal justification, to recover the content of a message.
  This includes the Senders and Recipients companies for business
  continuity purposes, as well as Law Enforcement. If the entity
  requesting the information and the entity controlling the access are
  in different jurisdictions, then the process would be subject to some
  form of rendition. 


7.  References

7.1.  Normative References

   [rfc2119]        Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
                    Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [rfc2634]        Hoffman, P. Ed., "Enhanced Security Services for
                    S/MIME", RFC 2634, June 1999.

   [rfc5280]        Cooper, D, et al, "Internet X.509 Public Key
                    Infrastructure Certificate and Certificate
                    Revocation List (CRL) Profile", RFC 5280, May 2008
 


Freeman et al.           Expires July 24, 2011                 [Page 15]

Internet-Draft  Requirements for Message Access Control     January 2011


   [rfc5652]        Housley, R., "Cryptographic Message Syntax (CMS)",
                    RFC 5652, September 2009.

   [rfc5750]        Ramsdell, B. and S. Turner, "Secure/Multipurpose
                    Internet Mail Extensions (S/MIME) Version 3.2
                    Certificate Handling", RFC 5750, January 2010.

   [rfc5751]        Ramsdell B., Turner S., "Secure/Multipurpose
                    Internet Mail Extensions (S/MIME) Version 3.2
                    Message Specification, January 2010

   [SAML-core]      OASIS, Assertions and Protocols for the Security
                    Assertion Markup Language (SAML) Version 2.0, March
                    2005

   [sp800-63-1]     NIST SP 800-63-1 "Electronic Authentication
                    Guideline", December 2008



7.2.  Informative References

   [bc-iaf]         Province of British Columbia; Electronic Credential
                    And Authentication Standard, version 1.0

   [kan-iaf]        Kantara Initiative; Identity Assurance Framework: 4
                    Assurance Levels, version 2.0

   [lib-iaf]        Liberty Alliance; Liberty Identity Assurance
                    Framework, version 1.1 

   [rfc3114]        Nicolls W., "Implementing Company Classification
                    Policy with the S/MIME Security Label, RFC 3114, May
                    2002. [SAML-overview] OASIS, Security Assertion
                    Markup Language (SAML) V2.0 Technical 

Author's Address

                    Trevor Freeman

                    Microsoft Corporation

                    Email: trevorf@microsoft.com 


                    Jim Schaad

                    Soaring Hawk Consulting
 


Freeman et al.           Expires July 24, 2011                 [Page 16]

Internet-Draft  Requirements for Message Access Control     January 2011


                    Email: ietf@augustcellars.com


                    Patrick Patterson

                    Carillon Information Security Inc

                    Email: ppatterson@carillon.ca











































Freeman et al.           Expires July 24, 2011                 [Page 17]
