 



INTERNET-DRAFT                                         S. Moonesamy, Ed.
Obsoletes: 3184 (if approved)                                           
Intended Status: Best Current Practice                                  
Expires: February 18, 2014                               August 17, 2013


                      IETF Guidelines for Conduct
                draft-moonesamy-ietf-conduct-3184bis-00

Abstract

   This document provides a set of guidelines for personal interaction
   in the Internet Engineering Task Force.  The Guidelines recognize the
   diversity of IETF participants, emphasize the value of mutual
   respect, and stress the broad applicability of our work.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as
   Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors. All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document. Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document. Code Components extracted from this document must
 


                       Expires February 18, 2014                [Page 1]

S. Moonesamy          IETF Guidelines for Conduct        August 17, 2013


   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

   This document may contain material from IETF Documents or IETF
   Contributions published or made publicly available before November
   10, 2008.  The person(s) controlling the copyright in some of this
   material may not have granted the IETF Trust the right to allow
   modifications of such material outside the IETF Standards Process. 
   Without obtaining an adequate license from the person(s) controlling
   the copyright in such materials,this document may not be modified
   outside the IETF Standards Process, and derivative works of it may
   not be created outside the IETF Standards Process, except to format
   it for publication as an RFC or to translate it into languages other
   than English.

1. Introduction

   The work of the IETF relies on cooperation among a broad cultural
   diversity of peoples, ideas, and communication styles.  The
   Guidelines for Conduct inform our interaction as we work together to
   develop multiple, interoperable technologies for the Internet.  All
   IETF participants aim to abide by these Guidelines as we build
   consensus in person and through email discussions.  If conflicts
   arise they are resolved according to the procedures outlined in RFC
   2026 [RFC2026].

2. Principles of Conduct

   1. IETF participants extend respect and courtesy to their colleagues
      at all times.

      IETF participants come from diverse origins and backgrounds and
      are equipped with multiple capabilities and ideals.  Regardless of
      these individual differences, participants treat their colleagues
      with respect as persons especially when it is difficult to agree
      with them.  Seeing from another's point of view is often
      revealing, even when it fails to be compelling.

      English is the de facto language of the IETF.  However, it is not
      the native language of many IETF participants.  Native English
      speakers will limit the use of slang in order to accommodate the
      needs of all listeners.

   2. IETF participants develop and test ideas impartially without
      finding fault with the colleague proposing the idea.

      We dispute ideas by using reasoned argument rather than through
 


                       Expires February 18, 2014                [Page 2]

S. Moonesamy          IETF Guidelines for Conduct        August 17, 2013


      intimidation or personal attack.

   3. IETF participants think globally, devising solutions that meet the
      needs of diverse technical and operational environments.

      The goal of the IETF is to maintain and enhance a working, viable,
      scalable, global Internet, and the problems we encounter are
      genuinely very difficult.  We understand that "scaling is the
      ultimate problem" and that many ideas quite workable in the small
      fail this crucial test.  IETF participants use their best
      engineering judgment to find the best solution for the whole
      Internet, not just the best solution for any particular network,
      technology, vendor, or user.

   4. Individuals are prepared to contribute to the ongoing work of the
      group.

      IETF participants read the relevant Internet-Drafts, RFCs, and
      email archives beforehand, in order to familiarize themselves with
      the technology under discussion.  This may represent a challenge
      for newcomers, as email archives can be difficult to locate and
      search, and it may not be easy to trace the history of
      longstanding Working Group debates.

3. Security Considerations

   Guidelines about IETF conduct do not affect the security of the
   Internet in any way.

4. Acknowledgements

   Most of the text in this document is based on RFC 3184 which was
   written by Sandy Harris.  Mike O'Dell wrote the first draft of the
   Guidelines for Conduct, and many of his thoughts, statements, and
   observations are included in this version.  Many useful editorial
   comments were supplied by Dave Crocker.  Members of the POISSON
   Working Group provided many significant additions to the text.

5. IANA Considerations

   [RFC Editor: please remove this section]

6. References

6.1  Informative References

   [RFC2026]  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision
              3", BCP 9, RFC 2026, October 1996.
 


                       Expires February 18, 2014                [Page 3]

S. Moonesamy          IETF Guidelines for Conduct        August 17, 2013


7. Author's Address


   S. Moonesamy (editor)
   76, Ylang Ylang Avenue
   Quatres Bornes
   Mauritius

   Email: sm+ietf@elandsys.com










































                       Expires February 18, 2014                [Page 4]
