





Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF)                      S. Moonesamy
Internet Draft                                            March 23, 2010
Intended status: Informational
Expires: September 22, 2010

            Security Consideration Issues for Internet Mail
                  draft-moonesamy-mail-security-00.txt

Abstract

   This memo discusses about security consideration issues for Internet
   Mail.  It should not be considered as a replacement for RFC 3552 or
   Security Consideration Sections in mail standards.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 22, 2010

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must



S. Moonesamy            Expires September 2010                  [Page 1]

Internet Draft     Security Considerations for Mail      March 5, 2010


   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.
















































S. Moonesamy            Expires September 2010                  [Page 2]

Internet Draft     Security Considerations for Mail      March 5, 2010


1. Introduction

   During a discussion about security considerations [RFC3552] for
   Internet Mail, the use of Internet Mail to facilitate the
   distribution of hostile content was raised as an issue. It is
   important to distinguish between transmission and content. The
   Simple Mail Transfer Protocol [RFC5321] is used for transmission.
   The Internet Message Format [RFC5322] is used for the content. Both
   the transmission and the content are restricted to US-ASCII [RFC20].

   There is a risk that combinations of US-ASCII control characters
   could be used to affect the operation of message viewers.  In the
   current mail environment, the number of such "attacks" is low
   compared to the amount of hostile content that requires the
   delivery of 8-bit content to the message viewer.

   Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions [RFC2045][RFC2046], commonly
   known as MIME, describes the mechanisms for the delivery of 8-bit
   data.  This document discusses about an approach where the focus
   is on security considerations issues for the 8-bit content instead
   of the functionality provided by the Simple Mail Transfer Protocol
   (SMTP) or through SMTP service extensions for data transmission.

1.1. Comments

   Given the security issues attributed to Internet Mail, comments
   about this draft should be delivered to the author by postal mail.
   [RFC Editor: Please remove this subsection]

2. Mail Security

   Internet Mail is generally not secure.  There is no inherent
   authentication of the sender.  This intrinsic property has
   enabled people to communicate over long distances at a low cost
   without constraining the sender and receiver to be connected to
   the Internet at the same time.

   With the introduction of media types [RFC2046], there are serious
   security risks as some media types required interpreters or
   external programs.  The execution of any content delivered by
   Internet Mail is a dangerous operation as the potential for harm
   is only limited by what the user can do on the computer.  It is
   not obvious to the end-users that they may be allowing an unknown
   person to take control of their computer.

2.1. Spoofing the Sender

   It is trivial to "spoof" the sender.  The sending address is usually



S. Moonesamy            Expires September 2010                  [Page 3]

Internet Draft     Security Considerations for Mail      March 5, 2010


   not a reliable way to identify the author of the message.  Even if
   that information can be authenticated, appropriate care is
   recommended as blind faith may increase the probability of other
   attacks.

2.2. Content Disposition

   Although automatic execution or rendering of content delivered by
   Internet Mail can be disabled, that doesn't prevent manual
   execution.  As the saying goes, the user is the weakest link.

2.3. Misinterpreting Content

   Some implementations rely on the file extension to determine the
   media type.  The content can be misinterpreted as being safe as it
   is incorrectly assumed that the file extension is a reliable way
   to identify the actual content.

2.4. Social Attacks

   Social attacks or "social engineering" remains the easiest form of
   attack.  It is only a matter of convincing the user, whether it is
   through deceit or by providing the right motivation.

   Filtering out all binary (8-bit) content does not protect the user
   from all attacks.  Curiousity is after all a basic human trait.  The
   user can be led to an external source to acquire the hostile content.

3. Security Considerations

   This document emphasizes that the payload can be a security issue.
   That does not mean that the transmission channel is without risk.
   It is important for implementers to consider what attacks are
   possible, which ones are out of scope and why they are out of scope.

4. Internationalization Considerations

   There is a need for people to communicate in their native language.
   Some of these languages cannot be written in a Roman-derived script.
   The changes to the mail specifications for full internationalization
   opens the door to new security issues.  Some of the issues such as
   those relating to sensorial perceptions cannot be addressed at the
   transport level.

5. IANA Considerations

   This document does not require the IANA to take any action.




S. Moonesamy            Expires September 2010                  [Page 4]

Internet Draft     Security Considerations for Mail      March 5, 2010


6. Acknowledgements

   The author would like to thank Dave Crocker, Ned Freed and John
   Klensin for providing a better perspective of the mail standards
   and Stephen Kent for the discussion about security issues.

7.  References

7.1.  Normative References

   [RFC20]    Cert, V., "ASCII format for Network Interchange", RFC 20,
              October 1969.

   [RFC2045]  Freed, N. and N. Borenstein, "Multipurpose Internet Mail
              Extensions (MIME) Part One: Format of Internet Message
              Bodies", RFC 2045, November 1996.

   [RFC2046]  Freed, N. and N. Borenstein, "Multipurpose Internet Mail
              Extensions (MIME) Part Two: Media Types", RFC 2046,
              November 1996.

   [RFC3552]  Rescorla, E. and B. Korver, "Guidelines for
              Writing RFC Text on Security Considerations",
              BCP 72, RFC 3552, July 2003.

   [RFC5321]  Klensin, J., "Simple Mail Transfer Protocol", RFC 5321,
              October 2008.

   [RFC5322]  Resnick, P., Ed., "Internet Message Format", RFC 5322,
              October 2008.

Author's Address

   S. Moonesamy
   76, Ylang Ylang Avenue
   Quatre Bornes
   Mauritius

   Email: sm+ietf@elandsys.com












S. Moonesamy            Expires September 2010                  [Page 5]

