


Interdomain Routing Working Group                                X. Chen
Internet-Draft                                                     Z. Li
Intended status: Informational                       Huawei Technologies
Expires: April 23, 2014                                 October 20, 2013


               Use Cases for an Interface to LDP Protocol
                  draft-chen-i2rs-mpls-ldp-usecases-00

Abstract

   The Label Distribution Protocol (LDP) [RFC5036] is a protocol defined
   for distributing labels in MPLS domain.  Traditionally LDP protocol
   may be managed via CLI, SNMP or NETCONF.  Interface to the Routing
   System's (I2RS) Programmatic interfaces, as defined in
   [I-D.ward-i2rs-framework], provides an alternate way to control the
   configuration and diagnose the operation of the LDP protocol.  This
   document describes requirement and use cases for which I2RS can be
   used for LDP protocol.

Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 23, 2014.









Chen & Li                Expires April 23, 2014                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft Use Cases for an Interface to LDP Protocol   October 2013


Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  LDP Configuration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     2.1.  LDP Protocol Configuration  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     2.2.  LDP Policy Configuration  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   3.  LDP Events  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     3.1.  Notification of LDP Session or LSP Events . . . . . . . .   4
     3.2.  LDP Protocol Statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   4.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   5.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     5.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     5.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6

1.  Introduction

   The Label Distribution Protocol (LDP) is a protocol defined for
   distributing labels in MPLS domain.  Traditionally LDP protocol may
   be managed via CLI, SNMP or NETCONF.

   The I2RS, as defined in [I-D.ward-i2rs-framework], may be used for
   the configuration, manipulation, polling or analyzing protocol data.
   The I2RS is not intended to replace any existing configuration
   mechanisms.  Instead, I2RS is intended to augment those existing
   mechanisms by defining a standardized set of programmatic interfaces
   to enable easier configuration, interrogation and analysis of the
   protocol.

   This document describes requirement and use cases for which I2RS can
   be used for LDP protocol.  The use cases described in this document
   encompass: LDP protocol configuration, LDP policy configuration, LDP
   protocol events.



Chen & Li                Expires April 23, 2014                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft Use Cases for an Interface to LDP Protocol   October 2013


2.  LDP Configuration

   LDP can be used to create transport LSPs to carry MPLS-based service
   and establish the pseudowires for MPLS PWE3 service [RFC4447] or MPLS
   VPLS service [RFC4762].  LDP is deployed widely in the network
   because of its simple protocol configuration and flexible policy.

   For illustration purposes one service type related to pseudowires is
   described in following document: PWE3 service.

   By I2RS interface the network application can configure LDP sessions
   to deploy PWE3 service and can configure LDP policy to control the
   setup of LDP LSPs.  The application can select proper programmatic
   interface.

2.1.  LDP Protocol Configuration

   The basic configuration of LDP includes establishing and maintaining
   LDP sessions, setting parameters of LDP sessions like type of
   application over the established LDP session
   [I-D.ietf-mpls-ldp-ip-pw-capability] etc.

   An LDP session is set up between the pseudowire endpoints to provide
   MPLS-based PWE3 services.  The PW label bindings are distributed over
   the LDP session.  The pseudowire endpoints is normally configured as
   the LSR ID which is the first four octets of LDP Identifier.  LSR can
   use the different local LSR ID to build sessions with different peers
   in order to isolate VPN services.

   LDP sessions used by PWE3 services are established normally by LDP
   extended discovery that the LSR periodically sending LDP Targeted
   Hellos to the specific address.

   I2RS would allow an application to push configuration using a set of
   programmatic APIs from a central location where a global PWE3
   provisioning information could be stored.  This helps avoid manual
   configuration of PWE3 and LDP on multiple pseudowire endpoints.  Use
   of I2RS programmatic API can push the configuration of the local LDP
   LSR ID and peer address to set up the targeted session to the
   pseudowire endpoints.

   Sometimes end-user wants to disable IPoMPLS application on a L2VPN/PW
   Tarted LDP session [I-D.ietf-mpls-ldp-ip-pw-capability].  Use of I2RS
   programmatic API can set type of application over the established LDP
   session.  In this way LDP speaker can only advertise to its peer the
   application data which is interested by the user.





Chen & Li                Expires April 23, 2014                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft Use Cases for an Interface to LDP Protocol   October 2013


2.2.  LDP Policy Configuration

   LDP supports some policy configuration used to control the allocation
   of labels, to filter the advertisement and acceptance of label
   bindings, to trigger LDP DoD request for some prefixes and so on.

   In seamless MPLS scenario [I-D.ietf-mpls-seamless-mpls] access
   devices can only hold limited amount of state because of their
   compute and memory constraints.

   If LDP DU advertisement mode is used between AN and AGN, the outbound
   policy can be configured on AGN to advertise selective prefixes to
   specified AN.

   With I2RS a network operator can push LDP outbound policy
   configuration using a programmatic API from an I2RS controller to
   specific AGN according to the network condition.

   If LDP DoD advertisement mode is used between AN and AGN, and there
   is only default route in AN, the feature which is LDP Extension for
   Inter-Area LSPs [RFC5283] must be adopted and the LDP DoD request
   policy [I-D.ietf-mpls-ldp-dod] should be configured to trigger the
   establishment of LSP for /32 FEC which is PWE3 destination /32 FEC in
   PWE3 service or BGP next-hop /32 FEC BGP/MPLS IPVPN service
   [RFC4364].

   With I2RS a network operator can push LDP DoD request policy
   configuration using a programmatic API from an I2RS controller to
   specific AN according to the service requirement.

3.  LDP Events

   I2RS could provide a publish-subscribe capability to applications to:

   o  subscribe state of LDP sessions or LSPs and related events; and,

   o  subscribe number of LDP sessions or LSPs or other protocol-related
      events of interest.

3.1.  Notification of LDP Session or LSP Events

   Some applications adopt LSPs established by LDP protocol to carry
   service and the end-user would care about the state of such LSPs and
   hope to know about changes of their state immediately.  PWE3 service
   adopt targeted LDP sessions to establish pseudowires and the end-user
   would care about the state of such LDP sessions and hope to receive
   the immediate notification of changes in their state.




Chen & Li                Expires April 23, 2014                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft Use Cases for an Interface to LDP Protocol   October 2013


   The applications can use the I2RS interface to subscribe the state of
   LDP sessions or LDP LSPs.  When the requisite events about sessions
   coming up or going down are observed by an LSR, it would notify I2RS
   controllers.  So applications would immediately receive the published
   events and take the appropriate action, for example, diagnosing why
   the service is invalid or analyzing whether an alternate path should
   be switched to and how the link failure or node failure is recovered.

3.2.  LDP Protocol Statistics

   There are several statistics related to LDP protocol like the number
   of LDP sessions, the count of LDP LSPs.  These statistics can help
   network operators know about the status of the resources LDP protocol
   makes use of.

   Some access device has limited label entry resource and need
   restricting the maximum number of LDP LSPs.  The network
   administrator wants to know whether the current number of LDP LSPs is
   close to the maximum number and if close the administrator can take
   necessary action.

   The application can set the maximum number of LDP LSPs by I2RS
   programmatic API before LDP is enabled.  The application can set the
   warning threshold too.  When the number of LDP LSPs reaches the
   threshold the warning message is triggered and notified to the
   application in the I2RS controller.  The operator can take some
   action according to the warning message.

4.  Security Considerations

   The LDP use cases described in this document assumes use of I2RS's
   programmatic interfaces described in the I2RS framework mentioned in
   [I-D.ward-i2rs-framework].  This document does not change the
   underlying security issues inherent in the existing [I-D.ward-i2rs-
   framework].

5.  References

5.1.  Normative References

   [I-D.ward-i2rs-framework]
              Atlas, A., Nadeau, T., and D. Ward, "Interface to the
              Routing System Framework", draft-ward-i2rs-framework-00
              (work in progress), February 2013.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.




Chen & Li                Expires April 23, 2014                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft Use Cases for an Interface to LDP Protocol   October 2013


   [RFC5036]  Andersson, L., Minei, I., and B. Thomas, "LDP
              Specification", RFC 5036, October 2007.

5.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.ietf-mpls-ldp-dod]
              Beckhaus, T., Decraene, B., Tiruveedhula, K.,
              Konstantynowicz, M., and L. Martini, "LDP Downstream-on-
              Demand in Seamless MPLS", draft-ietf-mpls-ldp-dod-09 (work
              in progress), July 2013.

   [I-D.ietf-mpls-ldp-ip-pw-capability]
              Raza, K. and S. Boutros, "Disabling IPoMPLS and P2P PW LDP
              Application's State Advertisement", draft-ietf-mpls-ldp-
              ip-pw-capability-06 (work in progress), June 2013.

   [I-D.ietf-mpls-seamless-mpls]
              Leymann, N., Decraene, B., Filsfils, C., Konstantynowicz,
              M., and D. Steinberg, "Seamless MPLS Architecture", draft-
              ietf-mpls-seamless-mpls-04 (work in progress), July 2013.

   [RFC4364]  Rosen, E. and Y. Rekhter, "BGP/MPLS IP Virtual Private
              Networks (VPNs)", RFC 4364, February 2006.

   [RFC4447]  Martini, L., Rosen, E., El-Aawar, N., Smith, T., and G.
              Heron, "Pseudowire Setup and Maintenance Using the Label
              Distribution Protocol (LDP)", RFC 4447, April 2006.

   [RFC4762]  Lasserre, M. and V. Kompella, "Virtual Private LAN Service
              (VPLS) Using Label Distribution Protocol (LDP) Signaling",
              RFC 4762, January 2007.

   [RFC5283]  Decraene, B., Le Roux, JL., and I. Minei, "LDP Extension
              for Inter-Area Label Switched Paths (LSPs)", RFC 5283,
              July 2008.

Authors' Addresses

   Xia Chen
   Huawei Technologies
   Huawei Bld., No.156 Beiqing Rd.
   Beijing  100095
   China

   Email: smile.chen@huawei.com






Chen & Li                Expires April 23, 2014                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft Use Cases for an Interface to LDP Protocol   October 2013


   Zhenbin Li
   Huawei Technologies
   Huawei Bld., No.156 Beiqing Rd.
   Beijing  100095
   China

   Email: lizhenbin@huawei.com












































Chen & Li                Expires April 23, 2014                 [Page 7]

