


Internet Engineering Task Force                                  G. Chen
Internet-Draft                                                   H. Deng
Intended status: Informational                              China Mobile
Expires: September 8, 2011                                 March 7, 2011


             Problem Statement of Long-lived TCP Connection
                 draft-chen-long-lived-connection-ps-00

Abstract

   This memo describes issues encountered by a long-lived TCP
   connection.  Long-lived TCP connections are served for several
   applications, which are quite popularly used in our daily life, such
   as chat and messaging(MSN, Skype).  Others are computer-to-computer
   communications, which are also demanding at long-lived TCP
   connection.  Issues such as network resources consumption happen when
   there are frequent keepalive message has been transmitted
   periodically.  Moreover, other issues are occurring during long TCP
   connection, such as TCP congestion, TCP connection recovery.
   Depending on raised issues, protocol optimization could be considered
   to optimize network quality.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 8, 2011.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of



Chen & Deng             Expires September 8, 2011               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft            Long-lived-connection               March 2011


   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

   This document may contain material from IETF Documents or IETF
   Contributions published or made publicly available before November
   10, 2008.  The person(s) controlling the copyright in some of this
   material may not have granted the IETF Trust the right to allow
   modifications of such material outside the IETF Standards Process.
   Without obtaining an adequate license from the person(s) controlling
   the copyright in such materials, this document may not be modified
   outside the IETF Standards Process, and derivative works of it may
   not be created outside the IETF Standards Process, except to format
   it for publication as an RFC or to translate it into languages other
   than English.

































Chen & Deng             Expires September 8, 2011               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft            Long-lived-connection               March 2011


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   2.  Traffic Features of Long-lived TCP Connection . . . . . . . . . 4
   3.  Problems caused by Long-Lived TCP Connection  . . . . . . . . . 5
     3.1.  Keepalive issues  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
     3.2.  TCP Congestion Issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
     3.3.  TCP connection Recovery Issues  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   4.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   5.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   6.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6







































Chen & Deng             Expires September 8, 2011               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft            Long-lived-connection               March 2011


1.  Introduction

   Traffic in the Internet is a complex mix of effects from protocols,
   different application characteristics, and user behaviors.
   Understanding traffic is essential for network protocol optimization
   and quality improvement.  This memo describes issues encountered by a
   long-lived TCP connection.  Long-lived TCP connection is served for
   several applications, which are quite popularly used in our daily
   life, such as chat and messaging(MSN, Skype).  Others are computer-
   to-computer communications.  Such traffic is growing due to automated
   control and sensing, online backup, and distributed processing in the
   cloud and across distributed data centers.  This kind applications
   are demanding at long-lived TCP connection.

   The long-lived TCP connections have impacts on normal network
   behavior.Issues such as network resources consumption happen when
   there are frequent keepalive message has been transmitted
   periodically.  Moreover, long TCP connection will lead to others
   issues, such as TCP congestion, TCP connection recovery.  Depending
   on raised issues, protocol optimization could be considered to
   optimize the network quality.


2.  Traffic Features of Long-lived TCP Connection

   The traffic features of long-lived TCP depends on specific
   applications usages characteristics.

   In some cases, TCP is not able to fully utilize the transport or
   network layer resources because the application does not produce data
   fast enough.  The application is producing small amounts of data at a
   relatively constant rate for the TCP layer.  This results in small
   bursts of packets, in the extreme case a single packet of size less
   than the maximum segment size of the connection.  Typical examples
   are live streaming applications such as Skype that transfer data over
   TCP at a constant rate of 32 Kbit/s.  Also, applications that use
   permanent TCP connections and send keep-alive packets during inactive
   periods, fall in this category (BitTorrent exhibits this behavior
   during choke periods).

   In some scenarios, application is producing data in bursts separated
   from each other by idle periods.  An example of such behavior is web
   browsing with persistent HTTP connections.  The user clicks on a link
   to load a web page, causing a transfer period, reads the page,
   causing an idle period, and clicks on another link, causing another
   transfer period.

   From duration point of view, hour time-scales are dominated by web



Chen & Deng             Expires September 8, 2011               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft            Long-lived-connection               March 2011


   (HTTP, HTTPS, ports 80 and 443) destinations.Day-long flows contain
   background traffic, with computer-driven but human initiated
   protocols like chat and messaging.  Week-long flows are almost all
   computer-to-computer protocols that run without human involvement,
   such as time synchronization (ntp) and multicast control (sd, pim,
   sapv1).


3.  Problems caused by Long-Lived TCP Connection

   This section describes possible problems caused by long-lived TCP
   connection.

3.1.  Keepalive issues

   Keepalive is to prevent inactivity from disconnecting the channel.
   It's a very common phenomenons, when you are behind a NAT proxy or a
   firewall, you could be disconnected without a reason.  This behavior
   is caused by the connection tracking procedures implemented in
   NAT/FW, which keep track of all connections that pass through them.
   Because of the physical limits of these machines, they can only keep
   a finite number of connections in their memory.  The most common and
   logical policy is to keep newest connections and to discard old and
   inactive connections first.

   Frequent TCP keepalive message will help to constantly maintain
   mapping records in NAT/FW, and eliminate interruptions of TCP
   connections.  However, it will cause significant network resource
   consumption, especially, in wireless environment.  The dedicated air
   channel resource need to be assigned to each keepalive signaling.
   The numerous keepalive messages might cause air resource depletion,
   and degrade other application performance.  Currently, PCP [PCP] is a
   way to optimize this situation.

3.2.  TCP Congestion Issues

   When long-lived TCP connections produce data in bursts, it mostly
   operates in congestion avoidance phase probing for bandwidth with
   larger windows, they produce larger packet bursts.  TCP connections
   with large window sizes are more tolerant of packet loss than those
   with small windows.  While long-lived TCP flows may recover from
   multiple packet losses in one round-trip time (RTT), short-lived TCP
   flows may have to wait for a timeout period to recover from a single
   packet loss.  It is observed that long-lived TCP flows may completely
   shut off short-lived TCP flows.  This causes performance problems for
   short-lived TCP flows, which generally carry interactive/delay
   sensitive data.




Chen & Deng             Expires September 8, 2011               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft            Long-lived-connection               March 2011


3.3.  TCP connection Recovery Issues

   TCP was not initially designed to cope with some of the extreme
   conditions which cause frequent disconnections.  In this sceanrio,
   TCP connection will try to re-transmit to re-establish TCP
   connection.  It will cause bad user experiences and network
   consumptions.


4.  IANA Considerations

   This memo includes no request to IANA.


5.  Security Considerations

   TBD


6.  Normative References

   [PCP]  Wing, D., "Pinhole Control Protocol (PCP)",
          draft-ietf-pcp-base-06.txt (work in progress), February 2011.


Authors' Addresses

   Gang Chen
   China Mobile
   53A,Xibianmennei Ave.,
   Xuanwu District,
   Beijing  100053
   China

   Email: chengang@chinamobile.com


   Hui Deng
   China Mobile
   53A,Xibianmennei Ave.
   Beijing  100053
   P.R.China

   Phone: +86-13910750201
   Email: denghui02@gmail.com






Chen & Deng             Expires September 8, 2011               [Page 6]

