


Internet Engineering Task Force                                  G. Chen
Internet-Draft                                                    T. Sun
Intended status: Informational                              China Mobile
Expires: April 21, 2011                                 October 18, 2010


   Rapid Deployment of Lightweight IP Technologies on Mobile Gateways
                        draft-chen-lwip-rd-mg-00

Abstract

   This memo presents an SD-based mobile gateway to wireless sensor
   network (WSN), which aims at helping users with mobile terminals to
   access WSN conveniently and efficiently.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 21, 2011.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

   This document may contain material from IETF Documents or IETF



Chen & Sun               Expires April 21, 2011                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                    rd-mg                     October 2010


   Contributions published or made publicly available before November
   10, 2008.  The person(s) controlling the copyright in some of this
   material may not have granted the IETF Trust the right to allow
   modifications of such material outside the IETF Standards Process.
   Without obtaining an adequate license from the person(s) controlling
   the copyright in such materials, this document may not be modified
   outside the IETF Standards Process, and derivative works of it may
   not be created outside the IETF Standards Process, except to format
   it for publication as an RFC or to translate it into languages other
   than English.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Lightweight SD Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   3.  Lightweight SD Usage Model  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   4.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   5.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   6.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5






























Chen & Sun               Expires April 21, 2011                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                    rd-mg                     October 2010


1.  Introduction

   The combination of cellular network and wireless sensor networks
   (WSN) [WSN] gives birth to mobile wireless sensor networks (mWSN).
   mWSN can not only bring cellular network with new applications and
   services, but also bring WSN with more users and flexible long-
   distance communication.  However, the communication protocols in WSN
   are usually designed according to specific applications, not unified.
   It leads to the fact that mobile terminals cannot be equipped with
   all relevant transceivers in advance.  Meanwhile, there are numerous
   kinds of mobile terminals with heterogeneous platforms.  It is so
   difficult for developers to design universal expansion hardware to
   help mobile terminals access WSN.

   Considering the situation discussed above, this memo has designed a
   novel mobile gateway, which helps to address the problem of mobile
   terminal accessing WSN.  The mechanical dimensions are completely
   same as normal SD Memory Card, but it integrates a communication
   module.  It's most significant characteristic is its platform-
   independence.  In the eyes of Host, lightweight SD makes no
   difference with a normal SD Memory Card.  However, uSD translates the
   normal SD Memory Card file access commands (from Host) into the
   operations of communication module on it, and returns the operation
   results (to Host) in the form of file access results.  Due to the
   fact that the SD slot of any hardware platform supports SD Memory
   Card and file operation, lightweight SD is assured to be compatible
   with all of them.


2.  Lightweight SD Design

   Digital electronic devices with an expansion SD Card slot at least
   support the expansion of storage capacity, and files in normal SD
   Memory Card can be directly operated by heterogeneous platforms.
   Hence the plug-and-play quality of normal SD Memory Card has already
   been realized regardless of the low-level details of these files
   operations.

   Based on this normal SD Memory Card!_s plug-and-play quality, we
   advance a novel hardware expansion method only via lightweight IP
   file operations, as Figure 1 shows.










Chen & Sun               Expires April 21, 2011                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                    rd-mg                     October 2010


          +---------------------------------------+
          | Special Application OS-Independent    |
          +---------------------------------------+
                              |
          +---------------------------------------+
          |      Lightweight IP File System       |
          +---------------------------------------+
                              |
          +---------------------------------------+
          |         SD Memory Card Driver         |
          +---------------------------------------+
               (software-hardware interface)
                              |
          +---------------------------------------+
          |               SD Hardware             |
          +---------------------------------------+



                                 Figure 1

   Through SD Memory Card Interface, Lightweight SD pretend to be a
   normal SD Memory Card and Host can directly access files in
   Lightweight SD!_s memory through File System.  Some special virtual
   files are stored in Lightweight SD in advance, in which
   "Dvirtual![not] means we format the memory of Lightweight SD with
   special File System instead of Host formatting it.  The FAT Region of
   this special File System has been modified and some virtual files are
   registered there.  These virtual files are just the vehicle of
   communication between Lightweight SD and Host.  According to
   different functions, virtual files in memory are categorized into
   different groups, such as files for responding from RF, files for
   controlling RF.

   Once the RF Chips in Lightweight SD wants to inform Host with some
   new information, Lightweight SD would put the information into a FIFO
   in it.  When Host needs new response, it will access thevirtual files
   for responding through the Special Application and Lightweight SD
   will respond to Host with the new information in FIFO.  Finally the
   new information will be displayed in Host!_s user interface.  If Host
   intends to execute some control on the RF, it will access the
   corresponding virtual files for controlling through the Special
   Application, the process of which will be detected and executed by
   Lightweight SD.  Special Application refers to the special purpose
   programs and applications, which are specially written for the RF and
   with such platform-independent language like Python or Java.  Those
   platform-independent languages supply API of file operation;
   meanwhile, data interaction between Lightweight SD and Host only



Chen & Sun               Expires April 21, 2011                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                    rd-mg                     October 2010


   needs upper-level file operations.  Therefore, Lightweight SD truly
   accomplishes platform independence in terms of both hardware and
   software.


3.  Lightweight SD Usage Model

   The combination of Lightweight SD and users!_ portal devices or home
   appliances can help to build a WPAN with high performance, which
   makes the efficient private communication and activity more
   convenient and is also a supplement to WPAN.  Home networking is one
   important branch of WPAN, and the following context displays
   Lightweight SD!_s applications in home networking.

   With Lightweight SD, users!_ terminals will become the home gateway,.
   Considering most home appliances are control via infrared,
   Lightweight SD!_s RF part should be customized as infrared chips.
   Additionally, terminals with Lightweight SD can receive the
   environment parameters through the sensors of temperature and
   brightness placed around the house.  In turn, the auto-control
   application in the terminal can adjust air-conditions and lights in
   the house respectively according to these environment parameters via
   Lightweight SD.  Furthermore, Lightweight SD also can be competent
   for home security supervising through accessing the wireless sensors
   and cameras in the house.


4.  IANA Considerations

   This memo includes no request to IANA.


5.  Security Considerations

   It needs to be further identified.


6.  Informative References

   [WSN]  Chen, C., "Mobile Enabled Large Scale Wireless Sensor Networks
          Advanced Communication Technology", ICACT  , March 2006.










Chen & Sun               Expires April 21, 2011                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                    rd-mg                     October 2010


Authors' Addresses

   Gang Chen
   China Mobile
   53A,Xibianmennei Ave.,
   Xuanwu District,
   Beijing  100053
   China

   Email: chengang@chinamobile.com


   Tao Sun
   China Mobile
   53A,Xibianmennei Ave.,
   Xuanwu District,
   Beijing  100053
   China

   Email: suntao@chinamobile.com































Chen & Sun               Expires April 21, 2011                 [Page 6]


