


Internet Engineering Task Force                                  G. Chen
Internet-Draft                                              China Mobile
Intended status: Informational                               C. Williams
Expires: January 12, 2012                                     Consultant
                                                           July 11, 2011


            Happy Eyeballs Extension for Multiple Interfaces
               draft-chen-mif-happy-eyeballs-extension-02

Abstract

   The memo has been proposed to extend happy eyeballs algorithm to fit
   into multiple interfaces environment.  Based on this extended
   heuristic algorithm, a client with multiple interface could determine
   the optimal flow path in which specific interface has been chosen.
   Furthermore, an appropriate IP address family for each interface can
   be also identified to guarantee user experiences during IPv6
   transition period.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 12, 2012.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must



Chen & Williams         Expires January 12, 2012                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft          happy-eyeballs-extension               July 2011


   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

   This document may contain material from IETF Documents or IETF
   Contributions published or made publicly available before November
   10, 2008.  The person(s) controlling the copyright in some of this
   material may not have granted the IETF Trust the right to allow
   modifications of such material outside the IETF Standards Process.
   Without obtaining an adequate license from the person(s) controlling
   the copyright in such materials, this document may not be modified
   outside the IETF Standards Process, and derivative works of it may
   not be created outside the IETF Standards Process, except to format
   it for publication as an RFC or to translate it into languages other
   than English.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Heuristic Happy Eyeballs Extension Algorithm  . . . . . . . . . 3
     2.1.  The Framework for Extended Algorithm  . . . . . . . . . . . 3
     2.2.  Interface Weighting Consideration . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
     2.3.  Interface Selection Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
     2.4.  IPv4/IPv6 Selection Algorithm for Individual Interface  . . 6
   3.  Additional Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
     3.1.  Usage Scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
     3.2.  Flow Continuity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
     3.3.  Default Address Selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   4.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   5.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   6.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7


















Chen & Williams         Expires January 12, 2012                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft          happy-eyeballs-extension               July 2011


1.  Introduction

   In multiple interface context, the problems raised by hosts with
   multiple interfaces have been discussed.  The MIF problem
   statement[MIF-PS] has described the various issues when using a MIF
   node on which multiple interfaces are used and results in wrong
   domain selection.  Happy Eyeballs [HAPPY-EYEBALLS] has described how
   a dual-stack client can determine the functioning path to a dual-
   stack server.  It's using heuristic algorithm help applications to
   quickly determine if IPv6 or IPv4 is the most optimal to connect to a
   server.  That is a good method to achieve intelligent path selection.
   However, the assumption here is single-homed host.  The interaction
   with multiple interfaces is still waiting for further study.

   This memo has been proposed to extend happy eyeballs algorithm to fit
   into multiple interfaces environment.  That could achieve win-win
   situation.  Based on this extended heuristic algorithm, a client with
   multiple interface could determine the optimal flow path in which
   specific interface has been chosen.  Furthermore, an appropriate IP
   address family for each interface can be also identified to guarantee
   user experiences during IPv6 transition period.


2.  Heuristic Happy Eyeballs Extension Algorithm

   The section details extended Happy Eyeballs algorithm, including
   defined framework, interface weighting consideration and and
   computation process.

2.1.  The Framework for Extended Algorithm

   The Figure 1 shows the proposed framework for extended algorithm.



               +-------------------------------------------+
               | Host with multiple interfaces             |
               |                                           |
               |                                           |
               |                                           |
               |   P1,I1    P2,I2    P3,I3    ...  Pn,In   |
               |   +---+    +---+    +---+    ...  +---+   |
               |   |   |    |   |    |   |    ...  |   |   |
               +-----+--------+--------+-------------+-----+
                     |        |        |      ...    |
                    3G       Wifi    WiMAX    ...   ...





Chen & Williams         Expires January 12, 2012                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft          happy-eyeballs-extension               July 2011


   Figure 1: Multiple Interface Mode for Extended Algorithm

   Each interface will be configured with weighting coefficient, which
   is composed of pair values.  Apart from value P, which is following
   current definition in [HAPPY-EYEBALLS], value I is defined to
   indicate preference of interfaces selection.  In general, value I is
   responsible for interface selection; value P is a indication to
   identify IPv4 or IPv6 family has been preferred.

2.2.  Interface Weighting Consideration

   According to the definition, applications will take account of value
   I to identify which interface has been chosen before sending out data
   packages .

   Each interface is configured with one value, I. I is served as an
   indication to identify which interface is preferred for a specific
   destination or hostname.  A positive value indicates preference of
   specific interface compared to others.  The value is justified by
   taking various factors into account.  The impact factors could be
   categorized in two groups.

   o  Hard preconditions: It's mandatory indications that interface
      behaviour should comply with such preconditions guidance.  The
      following factors belong to hard preconditions.

  

      *  Operator policies: operators would deliver the customized
         policies in particular network environments due to charging or
         area regulation considerations.

      *  User preferences: Users might configure to enable a specific
         interface to access network. for example, user may choose wifi
         interface to surf Internet considering low cost.

   o  Soft preconditions: It's optimal choice for transmitting data
      packages through a specific interface compared to others.  The
      following factors would contribute soft preconditions
      justification.

   

      *  Routing policies: DHCPv6 Route
         Option[draft-ietf-mif-dhcpv6-route-option-01] and
         RFC4191[RFC4191] allow configuration of specific routes and
         influence a nodes' ability to pick an appropriate route to a
         destination.  A weighting for an interface headed to



Chen & Williams         Expires January 12, 2012                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft          happy-eyeballs-extension               July 2011


         destination address that matches a specific route would be
         increased.

      *  DNS selection: if improved DNS server selection
         [draft-ietf-mif-dns-server-selection-03] takes effects, the
         weighting for those interfaces over which DNS suffix matching
         the requested name should also be increased.

      *  Other factors: There are many other factors could contribute
         optimal interface selection.  This documents would like to
         focus on the main ones and treat others in a best effort
         manner.  The key factors are expected to be added in future
         discussion.

2.3.  Interface Selection Process

   The selection of a particular interface from the viable set implies a
   selection of one particular network path in preference to other
   viable paths.  Interface weighting must be computed in advance but
   also be recomputed during session.  The whole process for interface
   selection could be divided into two stages.

   At stage I, upon the connection attempt, interface set should be
   filtered through the hard preconditions, and then aggregate the
   results within that kind of "policy group".

   At stage II, the soft preconditions should be applied to the resulted
   inteface set.  According to particular soft preconditions, the
   preferred interface would be chosen by increasing I and delaying the
   connection attempts on the "undesirable" interfaces.  This would
   allow to dial the preference between the different interfaces.  The
   less desirable interface would get penalised a-priori.

   To be specific,when one interface defeats others, the corresponding
   value I will be set to positive value.  Other interfaces will be set
   negative value.  A value of 0 indicates equal weight for multiple
   interfaces.

   When interface values I have been configured, the traffic flow
   targeted to specific destination address or hostname will follow this
   guidance to choose proper interface.  Hence, initial connection
   attempt would be sent over the interface that has matching particular
   rules and other interfaces would be tried only if no reply on the
   preferred one.  Network condition may change during the session,
   interface reselection should be triggered.  When connection problems
   are occurred to preferred connection, the value I need to be
   adjusted.  The adjustment of value I will do polling-based scheme.
   The value I corresponding to suboptimal interface will be configured



Chen & Williams         Expires January 12, 2012                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft          happy-eyeballs-extension               July 2011


   as positive.  And previously optimal value I will be set to most-
   negative.

2.4.  IPv4/IPv6 Selection Algorithm for Individual Interface

   For a specific interface in a dual-stack single interface node, the
   choice of IP address family relies on Happy Eyeballs algorithm, which
   is defined in [HAPPY-EYEBALLS].


3.  Additional Considerations

3.1.  Usage Scope

   Happy Eyeballs is trageting to HTTP context, but it is useful and
   applicable to other time-sensitive applications.

3.2.  Flow Continuity

   Usually, interface changing happens at the beginning of new session.
   So, there is no flow continuity issues for ongoing TCP sesson.
   Dynamic movement of traffic flows are addressed by other IETF
   protocols as well.

3.3.  Default Address Selection

   If more than one IPv6 address is assigned to the interface, the
   native IPv6 address is given preference.


4.  IANA Considerations

   This memo includes no request to IANA.


5.  Security Considerations

   TBD


6.  Normative References

   [HAPPY-EYEBALLS]
              Wing, D., "Happy Eyeballs: Success with Dual-Stack Hosts",
              draft-ietf-v6ops-happy-eyeballs-03.txt (work in progress),
              July 2011.

   [MIF-PS]   Blanchet, M., "Multiple Interfaces and Provisioning



Chen & Williams         Expires January 12, 2012                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft          happy-eyeballs-extension               July 2011


              Domains Problem Statement",
              draft-ietf-mif-problem-statement-15.txt (work in
              progress), May 2011.

   [RFC4191]  Draves, R. and D. Thaler, "Default Router Preferences and
              More-Specific Routes", RFC 4191, November 2005.

   [draft-ietf-mif-dhcpv6-route-option-01]
              Dec , W., "DHCPv6 Route Option",
              draft-ietf-mif-dhcpv6-route-option-01 (work in progress),
              March 2011.

   [draft-ietf-mif-dns-server-selection-03]
              Savolainen, T., "Improved DNS Server Selection for Multi-
              Homed Nodes", draft-ietf-mif-dns-server-selection-03.txt
              (work in progress), June 2011.


Authors' Addresses

   Gang Chen
   China Mobile
   53A,Xibianmennei Ave.,
   Xuanwu District,
   Beijing  100053
   China

   Email: chengang@chinamobile.com


   Carl Williams
   Consultant
   El Camino Real
   Palo Alto, CA  94306
   USA

   Email: carlw@mcsr-labs.org














Chen & Williams         Expires January 12, 2012                [Page 7]

