PPSP                                                              Y.Chen
Internet Draft                               Beijing Jiaotong University
Intended status: Informational                                  Y. Zhang
                                                            China Mobile
Expires: April 2010                                     October 18, 2009



         Evaluation of DHT-based Chunk Discovery for P2P Streaming
           draft-chen-ppsp-dht-chunk-discovery-evaluation-00.txt


Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 18, 2010.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2009 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.
   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal Provisions
   Relating to IETF Documents (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info)
   in effect on the date of publication of this document.  Please
   review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights and
   restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Simplified BSD License
   text as described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and
   are provided without warranty as described in the BSD License.







Chen                  Expires April 18, 2010                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft Evaluation of DHT-based Chunk Discovery for P2P Streaming
October 2009


Abstract

   Recently, some researchers have suggested that DHT should be applied
   to the P2P streaming system to do the media block search. This draft
   evaluates this proposal by simulation and modeling analysis, and
   discloses that it is inappropriate for P2P live streaming system.









































Chen                   Expires April 18, 2010                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft Evaluation of DHT-based Chunk Discovery for P2P Streaming
October 2009


Table of Contents


   1. Introduction.................................................4
      1.1. The basic idea..........................................4
      1.2. The extension...........................................4
   2. Basic assessment.............................................5
      2.1. Characteristics of P2P Live Streaming System............5
      2.2. Basic evaluation of the proposal........................5
      2.3. Performance Evaluation of the basic program.............6
   3. The extended method.........................................10
   4. References..................................................11
      4.1. Normative References...................................11
      4.2. Informative References.................................11

































Chen                   Expires April 18, 2010                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft Evaluation of DHT-based Chunk Discovery for P2P Streaming
October 2009


1. Introduction

   DHT is a distributed resource discovery algorithm which is widely
   used in miscellaneous P2P-based application systems.  Recently, some
   researchers have suggested that DHT should be applied to the P2P
   streaming system to do the media block search[Ning]. We evaluate this
   proposal by simulation and modeling analysis, and disclose that it is
   inappropriate for P2P live streaming system. Our results show that: 1)
   the delay for a peer to publish the chunk availability information to
   a DHT node hurdles the quick propagation of chunk in the network, and
   therefore has a negative impact on the real-time performance of
   system. 2) The registration of the chunk availability information
   brings huge load on the DHT node and network, which makes the method
   not scalable. We final conclude the proposed method will face serious
   challenges in the actual deployment.

1.1. The basic idea

   The proposed method is based on another IETF Draft: REsource LOcation
   And Discovery (RELOAD) [ID.ietf-p2psip-base]. It uses RELOAD where
   the resources is stored and retrieved by DHT to register chunk
   availability information and search it. Specifically, the method is:
   the DHT network stores the key-value pair as below: the key is the
   chunk id which is identified by (Video ID, Chunk-ID), and the value
   is the list of peer who have already owned the chunk, denoted by
   "Peer List". When a peer gets a chunk, it sends registration message
   to the corresponding DHT node to add itself into the peer list; while
   others want to get the chunk, they will query the DHT node in order
   to obtain the Peer List, and then request chunks from the peers in
   the Peer List.

   We call the above method as basic method.

1.2. The extension

   To optimize performance, the proposal[Ning] extends the above-mentioned
   "Peer List" to include the Chunk Lists of peers who are included in
   the Peer List. As a result, the contents stored in the key-value pair
   on the DHT node become the chunk lists of peers who have already
   obtained the chunk, which is denoted by "Peer List with Chunk List".

   We call this method as extended method.






Chen                   Expires April 18, 2010                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft Evaluation of DHT-based Chunk Discovery for P2P Streaming
October 2009


2. Basic assessment

   In this section, we give a simple overall assessment on the proposed
   method mentioned above. We then evaluate its performance based on
   simulation and modeling in the following section.

   Before we start our discussion of the design, let us first look at
   the characteristics of P2P Live Streaming System.

2.1. Characteristics of P2P Live Streaming System

   An important feature of the P2P live streaming system is that its
   users watch the program nearly real-time, which is what we call the
   real-time requirements. In other words, after the media server
   broadcasts a chunk, all users should be able to obtain it within the
   shortest possible time. In the current commercial P2P live streaming
   system, the delay is kept at about 20s in a network with size > 10k.

   Because the chunk propagation is in such a short time constraints,
   when the media server upload a new chunk to the network, peer should
   detect the emergence of this new chunk quickly, find the peers who
   have already get the chunk and therefore are able to act as the
   source of this chunk, and then request to peer for the chunk.
   Moreover, because it is a distributed system, the request may fail
   because the source node leaves, or the ability of the source node can
   not meet the needs of all incoming chunk fetching requests and
   therefore have to ignore partial incoming requests. In this case, the
   peer need retry the above procedure to get the chunk.

   Therefore, after a peer obtains a new Chunk, it must quickly register
   that it has got this chunk, and then other peers can find this
   information, and then request to download from it.

2.2. Basic evaluation of the proposal

   We above present the piece propagation in P2P live streaming system
   as a snowball process.  We now turn to evaluate the proposed DHT-
   based approach in general.

   First, denote the number of valid pieces in the P2P network by X.
   With the proposed method, there are at most X chord nodes storing the
   peer list information. For a large-scale network, it is not
   reasonable for only X nodes to take this responsibility. In practice,
   the X is generally 1k-2k. The number of peers in the network, however,
   can be very large, e.g. it can be 1M at the Olympic Game Opening Play.



Chen                   Expires April 18, 2010                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft Evaluation of DHT-based Chunk Discovery for P2P Streaming
October 2009


   We second look at the basic method.  The essence of this approach is
   using the DHT node to act as a centralized tracker of the chunk,
   because all the peer information of a chunk is stored in a single DHT
   node. Therefore, the approach faces the same scalability problem of
   traditional C/S structure when the chunk requests surge.

   The proposal is aware of this scalability problem, and therefore,
   goes forward to propose its extended method.

   The essence of the extended method is that the DHT node for a chunk
   stores more content about peers' piece availability information, with
   the expectations that it can reduce the number of requests to the DHT
   node, and alleviates the scalability issues. The intent of this
   extension is right. The contents it proposes to store, however, are
   too excessive.

   Let us clarify this problem by using the traditional Data-Driven
   method as example. In this method, a peer only gets the chunk list of
   their neighbors. For example, in a 10k network, a peer only gets
   about 30 peers' chunk list information. In the proposed extended
   method, the DHT node will return the querying peer the chunk list of
   all 10k peers, which does not make sense.

   Even if the proposed extension is revised to let the DHT node only
   return chunk lists of limited number of peers, it is still to be
   difficult to design an efficient and scalable peer selection
   algorithm.

   The final implementation of the problem is it did not give a suitable
   solution to achieve this functionality, especially the method to
   update these chunk lists. The implementation effort is undoubtedly
   considerable.

2.3. Performance Evaluation of the basic program

   To evaluate the performance of system, we first introduce the
   exponential backoff algorithm for the piece scheduling of P2P live
   streaming system [Yishuai].

   The proposed method does not take into account an important question,
   i.e., how quickly a peer will retry to look up the peer list of a
   chunk when it fails to get a chunk. [Yishuai] proposes applying the
   well-known exponential backoff algorithm. This method means that,
   when the request is rejected, a peer retreats an exponentially
   distributed time delay, and then restart the look up.



Chen                   Expires April 18, 2010                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft Evaluation of DHT-based Chunk Discovery for P2P Streaming
October 2009




   We now model and simulate to evaluate the system performance with the
   proposed method.

   We first discuss the basic method. In this method, the peer list of a
   certain chunk is stored in a single DHT node.

   We simulate the following procedure: after the media server uploads a
   new chunk, all peer exponential back off and then look up the peer
   list of the chunk. After a peer gets the peer list, it requests the
   chunk from these peers. If the source peer is spare, it will get the
   piece. The peer who has just obtained a new chunk will immediately
   send its registration request to the corresponding DHT Node to
   register itself. If the source peer is not spare, the peer will not
   get the piece and will retry after an exponential back off.

   The procedure can be modeled as below. Assume it takes a peer b
   seconds to upload a chunk to another. Assume a source peer uploads to
   one other peer at a time. Denote the mean number of hops of the
   registration message by H, and denote the mean network transmission
   time for it to reach the corresponding DHT node by c.

   Therefore, the chunk propagation process is as follows:

   o t = 0s, Peer 1 starts the download from the Media Server for the
      first chunk.

   o t = b seconds, Peer 1 gets the chunk, and send the registration
      message to the DHT node.  At the same time, Peer 2 begins to start
      the download from the Media Server for the 2nd chunk.

   o t = b + c seconds, Peer 1 completes its registration, and is
      immediately found by Peer 3. Peer 3 begins downloading from Peer 1
      at that time.

   o t = 2b seconds, Peer 2 gets the chunk, and sends the registration
      message to the DHT node.  At the same time, Peer 4 begins to start
      the download from the Media Server for the fourth chunk.

   o . . .







Chen                   Expires April 18, 2010                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft Evaluation of DHT-based Chunk Discovery for P2P Streaming
October 2009


   We use discrete event simulation to simulate the effect of
   registration delay c on the piece propagation procedure. We first
   estimate the c as below.

   Consider an N-node Chord network. Assuming the N nodes distributed on
   the Chord rings uniformly randomly. [Stoica] proposed a model to
   estimate the average path length of a query in the Chord network,
   i.e., L = (1/2)log2(N). Denoting the network transmission delay of
   one hop is T, we have c = (1/2)log2(N)T

   For each simulation configuration, we have carried out 20 times
   discrete-time simulations. Each simulation has different random
   number seed.

   1.  Piece Propagation Delay

   We use 99% Piece Propagation Delay (99% PDD) as the main metric to
   evaluate the piece propagation delay, which means the time required
   for 99% of peers to obtain the chunk after it is uploaded by the
   media server. We simulate two T: one is 200ms and the other is 400ms.
   Our simulation network consists of N=10k nodes. Therefore, the
   corresponding register and lookup latencies for them are
   (1/2)log2(N)T = 1.3288s and 2.6575s.  The exponential backoff rate
   lamda is 1.

   We compare the simulation results with those of the traditional data-
   driven method [Coolstreaming]. [Yong] and [GridMedia] have proven
   that the traditional data-driven approach can obtain nearly-optimal
   piece propagation delay which is close to the result we obtain by
   setting c=0 in simulation.

   Our results obtained as follows:

   Data-Driven Methods:

   99% PDD mean: 26.2524; standard deviation of 6.8494

   DHT-based Method - T = 200ms:

   99% PDD mean: 34.1400; standard deviation of 6.8627

   DHT-based Method - T = 400ms:

   99% PDD mean: 41.1365; standard deviation of 5.9998




Chen                   Expires April 18, 2010                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft Evaluation of DHT-based Chunk Discovery for P2P Streaming
October 2009


   By comparison, when the single-hop delay is 200ms, the 99% PDD
   increases by (34.1400-26.2524) / 26.2524 = 30%; When the single-hop
   delay is 400ms, the 99% PDD increases by (41.1365-26.2524) / 26.2524
   = 56.7%, which is a consideration deterioration.

   2.  Nodes and network load

   With the basic method, a DHT Node will receive two kinds of signaling
   messages: a) Register; b) Look up.

   For the Register message, the evaluation is relatively simple, that
   is, for each chunk, each peer will register once.  As a result, the
   DHT node will get N messages. Because each message will traverse mean
   (1/2)log2(N) hops, the total number of registration message in the
   network is (N/2)log2(N).

   For the Look up message, the situation is more complex because the
   failed peers will look up again. We recorded the number of lookup the
   DHT node received during the simulation. The results are: with
   T=200ms, the mean number of look up messages is 210,048 with standard
   deviation 67,544; With T=400ms, the mean number of look up messages
   is 263,320 with standard deviation 59,755. The load on DHT node and
   network is quite large.

   By comparison, in the Data-Driven approach, the chunk list is
   exchanged between neighbors, and therefore, the above centralized
   messages handling is avoided.




















Chen                   Expires April 18, 2010                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft Evaluation of DHT-based Chunk Discovery for P2P Streaming
October 2009


3. The extended method

   We now assess the extended method. We focus on the evaluation of the
   node and network load.

   First, as we explained before, there are at most X chord nodes
   storing the peer list information.  Assuming a peer owns X/2 chunks
   on average, it appears in the peer list of X/2 chunks. Therefore,
   when it gets a new chunk, it should update its chunk lists stored in
   the X/2 chunks, which requires X/2 registration messages. As a result,
   for a chunk, N peers generate NX/2 registration messages. Because
   each registration message traverse (1/2)log2(N) hops, the total
   number of registration messages in the network is (NX/4)log2(N). To
   demonstrate the problem, considering the following example: when X=1k,
   N=1M, each node need process or routing (X/4)log2(N)= 4.9829e+003
   message for a chunk, which is considerable.

   Assuming we duplicate the peer list of a Chord Node to other nodes
   for load balance in practice. The duplication, however, increases the
   number of registration messages in the network. For instance, if
   there are Y nodes to duplicate the peer list of a Chord node, then
   the total number of registration messages in the network becomes
   (NXY/4)log2(N). To demonstrate the problem, considering the following
   example: when X=1k, Y=100, N=1M, each node need process or routing
   (XY/4)log2(N)= 4.9829e+005 message for a chunk, which is unacceptable.






















Chen                   Expires April 18, 2010                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft Evaluation of DHT-based Chunk Discovery for P2P Streaming
October 2009


4. References

4.1. Normative References

   [1]  [ID.ietf-p2psip-base] Jennings, C., Lowekamp, B., Rescorla, E., 
        Baset, S., and H. Schulzrinne, "REsource LOcation And Discovery
        (RELOAD)Base Protocol", draft-ietf-p2psip-base-02.

4.2. Informative References
  
   [2]  [Ning] N. Zong, Chunk Discovery for P2P Streaming, draft-zong-ppsp
        -chunk-discovery-00.

   [3]  [Coolstreaming] X.Zhang, J.Liu, B. Li, and T.P. Yum.
         "Coolstreaming / donet: a data-driven overlay network for peer-
         to-peer live media streaming". In Proceedings of IEEE / INFOCOM,
         Miami, March 2005.

   [4]  [GridMedia] M. Zhang, Q. Zhang, L. Sun, and S. Yang,
         "Understanding the power of pull-based streaming protocol: can
         we do better?" IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications,
         2007.

   [5]  [Yong] C. Liang, Y. Guo, and Y. Liu. Is Random Scheduling
         Sufficient in P2P Video Streaming? In Proc. Of ICDCS, 2008

   [6]  [Yishuai] Y. Chen, C. Chen, Y. Zhao, C. Li, Blind Random
         Scheduling for P2P Live Streaming, Submitted, 2008


Author's Addresses

   Yichuai Chen
   Beijing Jiaotong University

   Phone: 86 10 51684757
   Email: chenyishuai@gmail.com


   Yunfei Zhang
   China Mobile

   Phone: 86 13601032119
   Email: zhangyunfei@chinamobile.com











Chen                   Expires April 18, 2010                [Page 11]

