


Internet Engineering Task Force                                  G. Chen
Internet-Draft                                              China Mobile
Intended status: Informational                              July 4, 2011
Expires: January 5, 2012


           XMPP Pubsub Extenstion for Long-lived TCP Services
                  draft-chen-xmpp-pubsub-extension-00

Abstract

   This memo defines extensions to pubsub features of the Extensible
   Messaging and Presence Protocol (XMPP) that will address issues
   encountered by a long-lived TCP connection in mobile environments.
   Network resources consumption issues are happenned when there are
   frequent notification messages have been transmitted periodically.
   Depending on raised issues, the extension for XMPP pubsub protocol
   could be considered to optimize network quality.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 5, 2012.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of



Chen                     Expires January 5, 2012                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft              Pubsub-Extention                   July 2011


   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

   This document may contain material from IETF Documents or IETF
   Contributions published or made publicly available before November
   10, 2008.  The person(s) controlling the copyright in some of this
   material may not have granted the IETF Trust the right to allow
   modifications of such material outside the IETF Standards Process.
   Without obtaining an adequate license from the person(s) controlling
   the copyright in such materials, this document may not be modified
   outside the IETF Standards Process, and derivative works of it may
   not be created outside the IETF Standards Process, except to format
   it for publication as an RFC or to translate it into languages other
   than English.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   3.  Requirements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   4.  Functional Summary  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   5.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   6.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   7.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5

























Chen                     Expires January 5, 2012                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft              Pubsub-Extention                   July 2011


1.  Introduction

   The Extensible Messaging and Presence Protocol (XMPP) is an open and
   XML-based protocol, which has evolved through an open development
   within the Jabber open-source community.  It provides a solid,
   flexible foundation which enables the near-real-time exchange for a
   wide variety of applications between any two or more network
   entities.  With the advancement of XMPP Core [RFC6120] within the
   Internet standards process, interest in building XMPP-based
   applications and extensions has accelerated even further.  Various
   applications can be layered on top of the core by sending
   application-specific data qualified by particular XML namespaces.

   XMPP Pubsub[XEP-0060]defines an XMPP protocol extension for generic
   publish-subscribe functionality.  The protocol enables XMPP entities
   to create topics at a pubsub service and publish information at those
   nodes; an event notification is then broadcasted to all entities that
   have subscribed to the node.  Pubsub therefore adheres to the classic
   observer design pattern and can serve as the foundation for a wide
   variety of applications that requires event notifications.

   This memo defines extensions to pubsub features of the Extensible
   Messaging and Presence Protocol(XMPP) that will address issues
   encountered by a long-lived TCP connection in mobile environments.  A
   message synchronization feature has been proposed to add into XMPP
   Pubsub in order to reduce frequency of sending notification.
   Depending on that, resources consumption and network congestion
   issues are likely reduced by unified push mechanism.


2.  Terminology

   Node: A virtual location to which information can be published and
   from which event notifications and/or payloads can be received.

   Owner: The manager of a node, of which there may be more than one;
   often but not necessarily the node creator.

   Publisher: An entity that is allowed to publish items to a node and
   that is automatically subscribed to the node.

   Subscriber/User: An entity that is subscribed to a node.


3.  Requirements

   Originally,XMPP Pubsub has proposed basic requirements, which can be
   driven by end-user needs as well as the needs of other components and



Chen                     Expires January 5, 2012                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft              Pubsub-Extention                   July 2011


   services which can use the service.  In general, it describes two
   fundamental aspects:

   o  An entity publishes information to a node at a publish-subscribe
      service.

   o  The pubsub service pushes an event notification to all entities
      that are authorized to learn about the published information.

   Regarding to XMPP Pubsub extension in wireless environments, new
   requirements have been generated in term of reducing frequent
   notifications.  The applications based on long-lived TCP are
   prevalent in mobile network, such as Instant Message.  Mobile
   terminals are often "sleep" to extend battery life and save air
   resources.During this time, the terminal will release air interface
   resource and terminal status will be changed to idle.  Notification
   messages need always to wake-up mobile terminals by assigning
   dedicated air resource.  A number of notification will occupy
   significant part of air resources.  Since all applications have their
   own notification mechanism and none of them care about what happens
   to large-scale link layers.  There is periodic congestion in the
   wireless environments.

   According to the timing behavior, messages could be categorized as
   time-sensitive and time-insensitive messages. for the time-sensitive
   parts, online chatting message, friends information update and
   keepalive message require near-real-time exchanges. for the time-
   insensitive part, news,offline posted comments, photo tag and email
   have relatively delay tolerant.

   In order to reduce notifications frequency, XMPP Pubsub should be
   extended to synchronize several notification coming from different
   publisher-owners.  A unified scheduling should be set acoording to
   the different timing behavior.  Based on new extended features, it
   will greatly decrease frequency of waking up terminals.


4.  Functional Summary

   This non-normative section provides a developer-friendly, functional
   summary of XMPP-Pubsub extension.

   Upon fulfillment of the preconditions specified in XMPP-CORE
   [RFC6120], an XMPP client has a long-lived XML stream with an XMPP
   server, which enables users to subscribe/create a node.  Also, the
   publisher could also can broadcast notification to the users.  Such a
   stream can be used to exchange time-sensitive or time-insensitive
   messages.  Different schduling rules could apply to these message



Chen                     Expires January 5, 2012                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft              Pubsub-Extention                   July 2011


   delivery.  After negotiation of the XML stream, the typical flow for
   XMPP-pubsub extension is as follows:

   o  Owners create/configure a node with attributes of timing
      character.

   o  Users subscribe to a node, it sends a subscription request to the
      pubsub service.

   o  Publishers push subsribed items to users.  According to timing
      features of message, publisher batchs multiple notifications in a
      single transmission to deliver message to users.


5.  IANA Considerations

   This memo includes no request to IANA.


6.  Security Considerations

   TBD


7.  Normative References

   [RFC6120]  Saint-Andre, P., "Extensible Messaging and Presence
              Protocol (XMPP): Core", RFC 6120, March 2011.

   [XEP-0060]
              Millard, P. and Saint-Andre, P., "Publish-Subscribe", 
              XSF XEP-0060, July 2010.


Author's Address

   Gang Chen
   China Mobile
   53A,Xibianmennei Ave.,
   Xuanwu District,
   Beijing  100053
   China

   Email: chengang@chinamobile.com








Chen                     Expires January 5, 2012                [Page 5]

