


Network Working Group                                          M. Bhatia
Internet-Draft                                            Alcatel-Lucent
Intended status: Standards Track                          April 16, 2011
Expires: October 18, 2011


          Using short-lived traffic keys for Routing Protocols
                 draft-bhatia-karp-short-lived-keys-00

Abstract

   This draft proposes a generic mechanism for deriving short-lived
   traffic keys from the longed-lived keys.  The long-lived key could be
   a preshared secret or a key obtained from some key management
   protocol.  The mechanism described in this draft can be used to
   implement key rollovers without requiring the participating routers
   to exchange any additional information.

Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on October 18, 2011.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents



Bhatia                  Expires October 18, 2011                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft   Short-lived Keys for Routing Protocols       April 2011


   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Design Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   3.  Session Specific Value fed into the KDF . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   4.  Exchanging the Nonce  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
     4.1.  Generating a Key based on Peer's Nonce  . . . . . . . . . . 5
     4.2.  Generating a Key based on your own Nonce  . . . . . . . . . 5
   5.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   6.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   7.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   8.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
     8.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
     8.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7



























Bhatia                  Expires October 18, 2011                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft   Short-lived Keys for Routing Protocols       April 2011


1.  Introduction

   [I-D.ietf-karp-design-guide] describes why the cryptographic keys
   must be periodically changed for greater security.  These should be
   changed when an operator who had access to them leaves.  It is known
   that using the key chains also does not help as one still has to
   change all the keys in the key chain when an operator having access
   to all those keys leaves the company.  Another threat against the
   long-lived key is that one of the systems storing the key, or one of
   the users entrusted with the key, will be subverted.  So, while there
   may not be cryptographic motivations for changing the keys, there
   could be systems security motivations for doing the same.

   On the other hand, where manual key distribution methods are subject
   to human error and frailty, more frequent key changes might actually
   increase the risk of exposure as it is during the time that the keys
   are being changed that they are likely to get disclosed.  In these
   cases, especially when very strong cryptography is employed, it may
   be more prudent to have fewer, well controlled manual key
   distributions rather than more frequent, poorly controlled manual key
   distributions.  In general, where strong cryptography is employed,
   physical, procedural, and logical access protection considerations
   often have more impact on the key life than do algorithm and key size
   factors.

   For incremental deployments [I-D.ietf-karp-design-guide] suggests
   associating life times with the send and the receive keys in the key
   chain for the long-lived keys.  This is an incremental approach that
   we could use till the cryptographic keying material for individual
   sessions is derived from the keying material stored in the database
   of long-lived cryptographic keys as described in
   [I-D.ietf-karp-crypto-key-table].  A key derivation function (KDF)
   and its inputs are specified in the database of long-lived
   cryptographic keys and session specific values based on the routing
   protocol are input to the KDF.  This document describes how the
   routing protocols can use session specific values that can be fed
   into the KDF to derive a short-lived traffic key that the routing
   protocols can use.


2.  Design Considerations

   It is desired that the algorithm be such that if even if an attacker
   is aware of the long-lived key, guessing the short-lived traffic key
   that will be generated next should not be possible.  This directly
   implies that the session specific values used by the routing
   protocols should not be deterministic and predictible.




Bhatia                  Expires October 18, 2011                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft   Short-lived Keys for Routing Protocols       April 2011


   Thus for instance choosing the Router ID is a bad example of a
   session specific value as this is deterministic and will not change
   with time and upon router cold restarts.  Ideally, it should be a
   value that can be easily changed whenever the operators requires and
   must never be the same upon successive cold restarts.

   Changing the session specific value would lead to a change in the
   short-lived key as its this thats fed into the KDF along with the
   long-lived key.  Thus traffic key rollover can be easily implemented
   by passing the new session specific values.  This means that changing
   the traffic keys is directly dependent upon the ease with which the
   session specific parameters can be generated, changed and exchanged.

   There are two ways to exchange the session specific values between
   the peers.  One is to use a new key management protocol that does
   this.  The other is to keep this control with the routing protocols
   that want to use these short-lived keys.  This document goes with the
   second approach as it is belived that the key management protocol
   will be used for exchanging the long-lived keys and the onus lies on
   the routing protocols or some other entity to provide the material
   that will be fed to the KDF to generate the short-lived traffic keys.


3.  Session Specific Value fed into the KDF

   This document proposes a simple extension to the routing protocols
   where a Nonce (really nothing more than a random number) is mixed
   with the longed-lived key, fed into the KDF to derive a short-lived
   key.  Since the Nonce is a random, unsigned 32 - 64 bits number, it
   can be easily generated and exchanged between the peers.  Its
   unpredictible and will never be the same upon router cold restarts.
   It thus fullfills all the requirements listed in the preceeding
   section.


4.  Exchanging the Nonce

   There are two ways to generate the short-lived traffic key that will
   be used to authenticate the protocol packets.  It is assumed that the
   routers have a long-lived cryptographic key that was either exchanged
   manually or was exchanged using an automated key management protocol.

   This document uses OSPF [RFC2328] as an example to illustrate how the
   mechanism will work.  This however, is a generic mechanism and will
   work for other protocols as well.  It might require a few tweaks here
   and there, but the overall mechanism will remain the same.





Bhatia                  Expires October 18, 2011                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft   Short-lived Keys for Routing Protocols       April 2011


4.1.  Generating a Key based on Peer's Nonce

   In this approach a router generates a short-lived traffic key based
   on the Nonce that its peer router sends.

   Each router generates a Nonce that is sent with the OSPF Hello
   packets.  Initially, each router uses the long-lived key to
   authenticate the packet.  It also uses a new Authentication Type that
   will indicate that the packet is using a long-lived key to secure the
   packet.  The reciever, upon successfully authenticating the packet,
   will use the Nonce thats carried in the packet to derive a short-
   lived traffic key.  It will use this traffic key to secure all
   subsequent OSPF protocol packets.  Since the Nonces generated by each
   router would be different, the traffic keys derived would also be
   different.  Thus asymmetrical keys will be used for transmitting and
   receiving the packets.  Whenever a router uses the short-lived key,
   it will indicate so in the protocol packets so that the reciever
   knows what key to use when authenticating the incoming protocol
   packets.  Since the sender has derived the traffic key based on the
   Nonce that the reciever had sent, the reciever can trivially
   authenticate the packet.

   While this scheme works very well when there are two routers speaking
   to each other, it becomes slightly convoluted when you try to
   implement this on a shared medium (local area network) where one
   router could be speaking to multiple routers.  Since this scheme
   relies on generating the short-lived key based on what you recieve,
   how would a router decide what traffic key to use when it recieves a
   Nonce for multiple routers.  We could decide on some complex
   algorithm based on what the designated router (DR) on the LAN
   announces, but that in my opinion will become needlessly complex as
   we will have to keep the failure scenarios in mind when the DR goes
   down and the backup designated router (BDR) takes over.  Instead, we
   can use the other approach that is described in the following
   section.

4.2.  Generating a Key based on your own Nonce

   In this approach a router generates a short-lived traffic key based
   on the Nonce that it generates.

   Each router generates a Nonce that is sent in the OSPF Hello packets.
   Initially, routers use a long-lived key to secure the packet.  They
   also use a new Authentication Type that indicates that the packet is
   using a long-lived key to secure the packet.  The reciever has to use
   the challenge and response mechanism described in
   [I-D.bhatia-karp-ospf-ip-layer-protection] to be really sure that its
   speaking to a live router and not someone who is replaying the



Bhatia                  Expires October 18, 2011                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft   Short-lived Keys for Routing Protocols       April 2011


   packets from an earlier stale session.

   Once the routers have verified that they are speaking to live,
   legitimate peers they can each switch to using the short-lived key
   derived from the Nonce that they have generated.  The sender will
   indicate in the protocol packet that it is using a traffic key
   generated from the Nonce thats carried there.  Since the Nonce is
   carried in clear in the protocol packet, the reciever, is able to
   constuct the traffic key as its also aware of the KDF and the long
   lived key.  The receiver thus uses the short-lived key for
   authenticating the packets.

   To generate a new short-lived traffic key the router has to generate
   a new Nonce.  Once thats verified using the mechanisms defined in
   [I-D.bhatia-karp-ospf-ip-layer-protection] all routers will use the
   new traffic key to authenticate the packets coming from this peer.
   Thus session key rollover can be easily implemented.


5.  Security Considerations

   This document enhances the security of the routing protocols by
   describing a mechanism that can be used to implement short-lived key
   rollovers.


6.  IANA Considerations

   This draft places no request to IANA.


7.  Acknowledgements

   TBD


8.  References

8.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC2328]  Moy, J., "OSPF Version 2", STD 54, RFC 2328, April 1998.







Bhatia                  Expires October 18, 2011                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft   Short-lived Keys for Routing Protocols       April 2011


8.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.bhatia-karp-ospf-ip-layer-protection]
              Bhatia, M., Hartman, S., and D. Zhang, "Security Extension
              for OSPFv2 when using Manual Key Management",
              draft-bhatia-karp-ospf-ip-layer-protection-03 (work in
              progress), February 2011.

   [I-D.ietf-karp-crypto-key-table]
              Housley, R. and T. Polk, "Database of Long-Lived Symmetric
              Cryptographic Keys", draft-ietf-karp-crypto-key-table-00
              (work in progress), November 2010.

   [I-D.ietf-karp-design-guide]
              Lebovitz, G. and M. Bhatia, "Keying and Authentication for
              Routing Protocols (KARP) Design Guidelines",
              draft-ietf-karp-design-guide-02 (work in progress),
              March 2011.


Author's Address

   Manav Bhatia
   Alcatel-Lucent
   India

   Email: manav.bhatia@alcatel-lucent.com
























Bhatia                  Expires October 18, 2011                [Page 7]

