


Network Working Group                                          M. Bhatia
Internet-Draft                                            Alcatel-Lucent
Intended status: Informational                         December 30, 2011
Expires: July 2, 2012


             Moving Authentication Header (AH) to Historic
                 draft-bhatia-moving-ah-to-historic-00

Abstract

   This document recommends retiring Authentication Header (AH) and
   discusses the reasons for doing so.  It recommends moving RFC 4302 to
   Historic status.

Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on July 2, 2012.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect



Bhatia                    Expires July 2, 2012                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft            Moving AH to Historic            December 2011


   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


1.  Introduction

   IPsec uses two protocols to provide traffic security services --
   Authentication Header (AH) and Encapsulating Security Payload (ESP).
   Both protocols are described in detail in their respective RFCs
   [RFC4302] [RFC4303]

   [RFC4301] recommends IPsec implementations to MUST support ESP and
   MAY support AH.  Support for AH was downgraded to MAY because
   experience has shown that there are very few contexts in which ESP
   cannot provide the requisite security services.  Note that ESP can be
   used to provide only integrity, without confidentiality, making it
   comparable to AH in most contexts.

   AH offers integrity and data origin authentication, with optional (at
   the discretion of the receiver) anti-replay features.  ESP, on the
   other hand, offers the same set of services, and also additionally
   offers confidentiality.

   These protocols may be applied individually or in combination with
   each other to provide IPv4 and IPv6 security services.  However, most
   security requirements can be met through the use of ESP by itself.
   Each protocol supports two modes of use: transport mode and tunnel
   mode.  In transport mode, AH and ESP provide protection primarily for
   next layer protocols; in tunnel mode, AH and ESP are applied to
   tunneled IP packets.  [RFC4301] describes detailed differences
   between these two modes.

   There is no particular security problem with using AH.  It lives up
   to its security claims.  Its just that its completely redundant with
   ESP, since ESP will NULL encryption (ESP-NULL) [RFC2410] can provide
   the same functionality and the world can do with one less protocol.

   Moving AH to historic doesn't mean that people have to stop using AH
   right now.  It only means that in the opinion of the community there
   are now better alternatives.  Moving AH to historic will discourage
   new protocols to mandate the use of AH.  It however, does not
   preclude the possibility of new work to IETF that will require or
   enhance AH.  It just means that the authors will have to explain why
   that solution is really needed and why ESP-NULL cant be used instead.





Bhatia                    Expires July 2, 2012                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft            Moving AH to Historic            December 2011


2.  AH and ESP

   It is alleged that AH provides more security than ESP in the
   transport mode as AH also authenticates the IP header fields.  This
   argument is however moot as ESP in the tunnel mode can provide the
   same level of security since the payload now includes the original IP
   header.  It is also believed by many that securing the IP header isnt
   really very important [Schneier].

   It is commonly believed that AH is quite useful in securing the IPv6
   extension headers.  AH protects most of the basic IPv6 header, the
   non-mutable extension headers after the AH, and the IP payload.
   Protection for the IPv6 header excludes the mutable fields: DSCP,
   ECN, Flow Label, and Hop Limit.  ESP, on the other hand, doesn't
   protect the immutable parts of the IPv6 header nor those of any
   extension header.  This can however be fixed by putting the IPv6
   extension headers that are required to be protected after the ESP
   header.  Hop-by-Hop options are not an issue, as the intermediate
   hops do not have keys to verify the message authentication code so
   they cannot really be protected anyways.

   AH breaks Network Address Translators (NATs).  This is because AH
   relies on the sanctity of the IP header so that any tamperings, even
   by a NAT, get detected and packets get discarded.  Solving this issue
   requires another device that fixes the NAT translation back to the
   original one (a specific case of Double NAT).  ESP, on the other
   hand, fixes this problem by encapsulating ESP packets inside UDP
   packets for traversing NATs [RFC3948].

   Firewalls in the enterprise environments often require visibility
   into packets, ranging from simple packet header inspection to deeper
   payload examination.  Routers also often need to deep inspect control
   traffic to prioritize certain protocol packets over the others.  This
   was initially difficult with ESP since was impossible to know whether
   an ESP packet was integrity protected or encrypted by merely
   inspecting the packet.  This was easy with AH since the payload was
   transmitted in clear.  This problem however has been solved by
   introducing WESP [RFC5840] which defines a mechanism to provide
   additional information in relevant IPsec packets so intermediate
   devices can efficiently differentiate between encrypted and
   integrity-only ESP packets.

   ESP-NULL seems to do everything useful that can be done with AH.
   Given this, it makes sense to move AH to Historic status so that
   newer protocols dont mandate or propose extensions that rely on AH to
   be supported.





Bhatia                    Expires July 2, 2012                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft            Moving AH to Historic            December 2011


3.  Security Considerations

   Its argued that ESP in the tunnel mode is equivalent to the AH in the
   transport mode.  It should however be noted that ESP tunnel mode SA
   applied to an IPv6 flow results in at least 50 bytes of additional
   overhead per packet.  This additional overhead may be undesirable for
   many bandwidth-constrained wireless and/or satellite communications
   networks, as these types of infrastructure are not overprovisioned.

   Packet overhead is particularly significant for traffic profiles
   characterized by small packet payloads (e.g., various voice codecs).
   If these small packets are afforded the security services of an IPsec
   tunnel mode SA, the amount of per-packet overhead is increased.

   This issue will perhaps be alleviated by header compression schemes
   defined in [RFC5856] [RFC5857] and [RFC5858].


4.  IANA Considerations

   None


5.  References

5.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC2410]  Glenn, R. and S. Kent, "The NULL Encryption Algorithm and
              Its Use With IPsec", RFC 2410, November 1998.

   [RFC4301]  Kent, S. and K. Seo, "Security Architecture for the
              Internet Protocol", RFC 4301, December 2005.

   [RFC4302]  Kent, S., "IP Authentication Header", RFC 4302,
              December 2005.

   [RFC4303]  Kent, S., "IP Encapsulating Security Payload (ESP)",
              RFC 4303, December 2005.

5.2.  Informative References

   [RFC3948]  Huttunen, A., Swander, B., Volpe, V., DiBurro, L., and M.
              Stenberg, "UDP Encapsulation of IPsec ESP Packets",
              RFC 3948, January 2005.




Bhatia                    Expires July 2, 2012                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft            Moving AH to Historic            December 2011


   [RFC5840]  Grewal, K., Montenegro, G., and M. Bhatia, "Wrapped
              Encapsulating Security Payload (ESP) for Traffic
              Visibility", RFC 5840, April 2010.

   [RFC5856]  Ertekin, E., Jasani, R., Christou, C., and C. Bormann,
              "Integration of Robust Header Compression over IPsec
              Security Associations", RFC 5856, May 2010.

   [RFC5857]  Ertekin, E., Christou, C., Jasani, R., Kivinen, T., and C.
              Bormann, "IKEv2 Extensions to Support Robust Header
              Compression over IPsec", RFC 5857, May 2010.

   [RFC5858]  Ertekin, E., Christou, C., and C. Bormann, "IPsec
              Extensions to Support Robust Header Compression over
              IPsec", RFC 5858, May 2010.

   [Schneier]
              Ferguson, N. and B. Schneier, "A Cryptographic Evaluation
              of IPsec", December  2003,
              <http://www.schneier.com/paper-ipsec.pdf>.


Author's Address

   Manav Bhatia
   Alcatel-Lucent

   Email: manav.bhatia@alcatel-lucent.com























Bhatia                    Expires July 2, 2012                  [Page 5]

