


Internet Engineering Task Force                             D. Zhou, Ed.
Internet-Draft                              Hangzhou H3C Tech. Co., Ltd.
Intended status: Informational                                   H. Deng
Expires: April 22, 2011                  China Mobile Research Institute
                                                                  Y. Shi
                                            Hangzhou H3C Tech. Co., Ltd.
                                                                  H. Liu
                                           Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd.
                                                         I. Bhattacharya
                                                           Cisco Systems
                                                        October 19, 2010


            Unnecessary Multicast Flooding Problem Statement
               draft-dizhou-pim-umf-problem-statement-01

Abstract

   This document describes the unnecessary multicast stream flooding
   problem in the link layer switches between multicast source and PIM
   First Hop Router (FHR).  The IGMP-Snooping Switch will forward
   multicast streams to router ports, and the PIM FHR must receive all
   multicast streams even if there is no request from receiver.  This
   often leads to waste of switchs' cache and link bandwidth when the
   multicast streams are not actually required.  This document details
   the problem and defines design goals for a generic mechanism to
   restrain the unnecessary multicast stream flooding.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 22, 2011.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the



Zhou, et al.             Expires April 22, 2011                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft       Unnecessary Multicast Flooding         October 2010


   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.








































Zhou, et al.             Expires April 22, 2011                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft       Unnecessary Multicast Flooding         October 2010


1.  Introduction

   The Protocol Independent Multicast (PIM) is now the most popular
   multicast routing protocol in the world.  The router on the edge of
   PIM routing domain is called PIM First Hop Router (FHR).  PIM has
   four modes: Sparse Mode (SM), Dense Mode (DM), Bidirectional PIM
   (Bidir-PIM), Source-Specific Multicast (SSM).  DM and Bidir-PIM
   suppose that the receivers are always existing.  SM and SSM are
   designed for multicast streams to be transferred on demand.

   The IGMP-Snooping, specified in RFC 4541 [RFC4541], is a link layer
   multicast streams forwarding control mechanism.  It forwards all
   multicast streams to the router ports and selected multicast stream
   to membership ports.  It also forwards IGMP Membership report
   messages to router ports and IGMP Query messages to all ports except
   the incoming port.

   The PIM-Snooping is another link layer multicast streams forwarding
   control mechanism.  It forwards the selected multicast streams to the
   requested router ports.  But it can not run on the path between
   multicast source and PIM FHR because there is no PIM Join and PIM
   Prune messages.

   In many typical deployment scenarios, some link layer switches are
   existing between multicast sources and PIM FHR.  The receivers may be
   only exist between the source and PIM FHR, maybe exist in the network
   behind the PIM FHR, maybe even not exist temporarily.  But if only
   the PIM FHR exists, the multicast streams are always transferred
   through these switches to PIM FHR, even if no receivers exist.

   These unnecessary multicast streams will lead to waste of the
   switches' cache and link bandwidth.  And the cache and link bandwidth
   are essential for application streams to transfer with less packet
   loss, latency, and jitter.

   There are some attempts made to solve the problem of unnecessary
   multicast streams flooding on switches between the sources and PIM
   FHR in various ways.  However, those solutions are either scenario-
   limited or deployment-limited.

   This document provides a detailed description of protocol design
   goals for efficient PIM and PIM-Snooping based mechanism to solve
   this problem.








Zhou, et al.             Expires April 22, 2011                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft       Unnecessary Multicast Flooding         October 2010


2.  Terminology

   In this document, several words are used to signify the requirements
   of the specification.  These words are often capitalized.  The key
   words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD",
   "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document
   are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119]

   With respect to PIM, this document follows the terminology that has
   been defined in RFC 4601 [RFC4601].









































Zhou, et al.             Expires April 22, 2011                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft       Unnecessary Multicast Flooding         October 2010


3.  Problem Statement

   Under the existing model, the PIM FHR sends out PIM hello messages,
   as well as IGMP query messages if it is an IGMP querier in the
   network segment.  The IGMP-Snooping switches between the sources and
   PIM FHR receive multicast streams from the sources and forward them
   to PIM FHR, even there is no request from receivers.  If there are
   many sources, the multicast streams will flood to all PIM FHRs.

   This will bring about some serious problems.

   Firstly, the unnecessary multicast streams will seriously consume
   link bandwidth .

   If there are many sources and PIM FHRs, the bandwidth between the
   source and PIM FHR will be seriously wasted.  This problem will be
   more serious especially in such a type of application:

   o  The sources are much more than receivers.

   o  Each source may be requested simultaneously by some receivers.

   o  Most sources are NOT requested at most time.

   o  Receivers may be only exist between the source and PIM FHR, maybe
      exist in the network behind the PIM FHR, maybe even not exist
      temporarily.

   In the application mentioned above, it is not acceptable to afford
   plenty of bandwidth to forward all multicast streams from the
   sources.

   Secondly, the unnecessary multicast streams will consume outgress
   cache of switches.

   In any network deployment, the switch between the sources and PIM FHR
   forwarding unnecessary multicast streams will also consume the
   outgress cache of switch including out-port specified cache and the
   cache shared by all ports.  The cache is the key resource of switch
   to reduce streams' packet loss ratio, latency, and jitter.

   Finally, the unnecessary multicast streams forwarding will increase
   the power consumption.

   In summary, it is desirable to afford a mechanism to prohibit the
   switches between the source and PIM FHR from forwarding unnecessary
   multicast stream when it is not requested, and drive the switches to
   forward multicast stream in time when it is required.



Zhou, et al.             Expires April 22, 2011                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft       Unnecessary Multicast Flooding         October 2010


4.  Design Goals

   The following are the goals and constraints in designing the
   mechanism for switch to restrain unnecessary multicast streams
   flooding:

   o  Switch SHALL forward the requested streams and SHALL NOT forward
      unrequired streams.

   o  Streams SHALL just be terminated at the exact switch.

   o  If a receiver appears, it MUST receive multicast streams in time.

   o  Deployment SHALL be flexible.  The number and topology of switches
      between source and PIM FHR SHALL NOT be limited.  The ip address
      deployment of multicast sources and receivers SHALL NOT be limited
      either.  Sources and receivers may be in the same ip address
      segment, for example.

   o  The CPUs of switches SHALL receive no multicast stream data, but
      only protocol messages.






























Zhou, et al.             Expires April 22, 2011                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft       Unnecessary Multicast Flooding         October 2010


5.  Use Cases and Related Work

   In order to further clarify the items listed in scope of the proposed
   work, this section provides some background on related work and the
   use cases envisioned for the proposed work.

5.1.  Source sending stream on demand

   By adding a central controlling server, the multicast sources may be
   controlled to send streams on demand.

   Note that once a receiver sends a request, the multicast stream will
   flow down toward switch's router ports, even if there is no other
   receivers behind the router ports.

5.2.  Host simulation of PIM FHR

   PIM FHR may be prohibited to send PIM hello messages and IGMP Query
   messages toward multicast sources.  Instead, it can simulate host to
   send IGMP Membership Report and Leave messages if it receives PIM
   Join and Prune messages.  So the switches between the sources and PIM
   FHRs would have no router ports.

   But for PIM SM, the PIM FHR does not know at which port to send out
   IGMP messages, unless configured some information at the requested
   ports by network manager.

   On the other hand, the switch will not forward IGMP Membership Report
   and Leave messages towards sources.  It will only forward IGMP
   Membership Report and Leave messages to router ports.

5.3.  IGMP Querier simulation of first-hop switch

   For the second problem of PIM FHR host simulation, the switch
   directly connected to source can simulate IGMP Querier.

   But when there are two or more switches simulating IGMP Queriers, the
   phenomenon of unnecessary multicast streams flooding still exists.

5.4.  Replacing link layer switches with Routers

   Replacing link layer switches directly connected to sources with
   Routers is not a perfect solution either.  It will limit the
   flexibility of networking, and will further lead to waste of ip
   address and many ip address segments seriously if there are many
   sources.  It will also bring about many ip address segments and then
   complicate network management.




Zhou, et al.             Expires April 22, 2011                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft       Unnecessary Multicast Flooding         October 2010


6.  some potential solutions

6.1.  solution based on PIM and PIM-Snooping

   The key points of it are as follows:

   o  When the PIM FHR receives a multicast stream, it creates an entry
      of (S,G) if the entry did not exist.  And it judges whether the
      (S,G) entry has out interfaces.  If the (S,G) has no out
      interface, the PIM router sends out an unicast PIM prune message
      towards the multicast source.  The upstream neighbor address in
      the message is the source address.

   o  The switch between multicast sources and PIM FHR runs PIM snooping
      and IGMP snooping.  When it intercepts the unicast PIM prune
      message by ip protocol field identification and finds out that the
      upstream neighbor address of the message is not in its PIM
      neighbor lists, it creates a (S,G) entry with a pruned port and an
      upstream port if not created before.  The upstream port is found
      by looking up the unicast mac table.  That (S,G) entry is punched
      with a specific sign which means that entry is different from
      traditional PIM-Snooping entry.  The pruned port SHALL NOT forward
      multicast stream and has a lifetime which is 1/3 of that of PIM
      FHR's (S,G) entry, then converted to be a downstream port, so that
      the multicast stream will arrive at PIM FHR to refresh the (S,G)
      entry.

   o  Looking up IGMP-snooping entry and PIM-snooping entry, if the
      switch find there is no need to forward the multicast stream, it
      SHALL forward the unicast PIM prune message towards multicast
      source.

   o  When the switch receives an IGMP membership report, it shall
      forward the message through its router ports and upstream port.

   o  When PIM FHR creates an out interface for a (S,G) entry that had
      no out interface before, it shall send unicast PIM join message
      towards multicast source.  The upstream neighbor address of the
      message is the source address.

   o  When the switch receives the unicast PIM join message and finds
      out that the upstream neighbor address of the message is not in
      its PIM neighbor lists, it will convert the pruned port to be
      downstream port.  When the (S,G) entry with specific sign has no
      pruned ports, it should be deleted in order to save the entry
      space.





Zhou, et al.             Expires April 22, 2011                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft       Unnecessary Multicast Flooding         October 2010


   o  By the information from IGMP-snooping entry and PIM-snooping
      entry, the switch can decide whether it shall forward the unicast
      PIM join message towards multicast source.

   o  The role of membership port is prior than that of pruned port, and
      the role of pruned port is prior than that of router port or
      downstream port.

   o  If two or more switches or PIM FHRs are connected by one port
      directly, or through HUB or normal switch, some query mechanism
      shall be implemented.

6.2.  solution based on IGMP and IGMP-Snooping

   The key points of it are as follows:

   o  When the PIM FHR receives a multicast stream, it creates an entry
      of (S,G) if the entry did not exist.  And it judges whether the
      (S,G) entry has out interfaces.  If the (S,G) has no out
      interface, the PIM router sends out an unicast IGMP prune message
      towards multicast source.

   o  The switch between multicast sources and PIM FHR runs IGMP
      snooping.  When it intercepts the unicast IGMP prune message by ip
      protocol field identification, it creates a IGMP-Snooping entry
      with a pruned port and an source port.  The source port is found
      by looking up the unicast mac table.  The pruned port has a
      lifetime which is 1/3 of the lifetime of PIM FHR's (S,G) entry, so
      that the multicast stream will arrive at PIM FHR before its (S,G)
      entry dies out.

   o  By the information from IGMP-snooping entry, the switch can decide
      whether it shall forward the unicast IGMP prune message towards
      multicast source.

   o  When the switch receives an IGMP membership report, it shall
      forward the message through its router ports and source port.

   o  When PIM FHR creates an out interface for a (S,G) entry that had
      no out interface before, it shall send unicast IGMP graft message
      towards multicast source.

   o  When the switch receives the unicast IGMP graft message, it will
      change the pruned port to be router port.  When the IGMP-Snooping
      entry has only router ports and source ports, it should be deleted
      in order to save the entry space.





Zhou, et al.             Expires April 22, 2011                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft       Unnecessary Multicast Flooding         October 2010


   o  By the information from IGMP-snooping entry, the switch can decide
      whether it shall forward the unicast IGMP graft message towards
      multicast source.

   o  The role of membership port is prior than that of pruned port, and
      the role of pruned port is prior than that of router port.

   o  If two or more switches or PIM FHRs are connected by one port
      directly, or through HUB or normal switch, some query mechanism
      shall be implemented.

   The first solution is more simple than the second one because the
   PIM-snooping has afforded some essential information and there is no
   need to add some new messages.  In the first solution the switches
   must run PIM-snooping besides IGMP-snooping.

   Any advice is welcome.


































Zhou, et al.             Expires April 22, 2011                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft       Unnecessary Multicast Flooding         October 2010


7.  Security Considerations


















































Zhou, et al.             Expires April 22, 2011                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft       Unnecessary Multicast Flooding         October 2010


8.  Contributors


















































Zhou, et al.             Expires April 22, 2011                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft       Unnecessary Multicast Flooding         October 2010


9.  Acknowledgements


















































Zhou, et al.             Expires April 22, 2011                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft       Unnecessary Multicast Flooding         October 2010


10.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC4541]  Christensen, M., Kimball, K., and F. Solensky,
              "Considerations for Internet Group Management Protocol
              (IGMP) and Multicast Listener Discovery (MLD) Snooping
              Switches", RFC 4541, May 2006.

   [RFC4601]  Fenner, B., Handley, M., Holbrook, H., and I. Kouvelas,
              "Protocol Independent Multicast - Sparse Mode (PIM-SM):
              Protocol Specification (Revised)", RFC 4601, August 2006.






































Zhou, et al.             Expires April 22, 2011                [Page 14]

Internet-Draft       Unnecessary Multicast Flooding         October 2010


Authors' Addresses

   Di Zhou (editor)
   Hangzhou H3C Tech. Co., Ltd.
   310 Liuhe Road
   Hangzhou, Zhejiang
   China(310053)

   Phone: +86-571-86761327
   Email: zhoudi@h3c.com


   Hui Deng
   China Mobile Research Institute
   Unit2,28 Xuanwumenxi Ave,Xuanwu District
   Beijing, Beijing
   China(100053)

   Phone: +86-010-15801696688-3314
   Email: denghui@chinamobile.com


   Yang Shi
   Hangzhou H3C Tech. Co., Ltd.
   Beijing R&D Center of H3C, Digital Technology Plaza,
   NO.9 Shangdi 9th Street,Haidian District,
   Beijing
   China(100085)

   Phone: +86 010 82775276
   Email: young@h3c.com


   Hui Liu
   Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd.
   Huawei Bld., No.3 Xinxi Rd.
   Shang-Di Information Industry Base, Hai-Dian Distinct,
   Beijing
   China(100085)

   Email: Liuhui47967@huawei.com










Zhou, et al.             Expires April 22, 2011                [Page 15]

Internet-Draft       Unnecessary Multicast Flooding         October 2010


   Indranil Bhattacharya
   Cisco Systems
   India(560037)

   Email: myselfindranil@gmail.com














































Zhou, et al.             Expires April 22, 2011                [Page 16]


