


PPSP                                                        N. Zong, Ed.
Internet-Draft                                       Huawei Technologies
Intended status: Standards Track                                Y. Zhang
Expires: April 25, 2010                       China Mobile Communication
                                                             Corporation
                                                              V. Pascual
                                                                 Tekelec
                                                             C. Williams
                                                              Consultant
                                                        October 22, 2009


               P2P Streaming Protocol (PPSP) Requirements
                        draft-zong-ppsp-reqs-02

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.  This document may contain material
   from IETF Documents or IETF Contributions published or made publicly
   available before November 10, 2008.  The person(s) controlling the
   copyright in some of this material may not have granted the IETF
   Trust the right to allow modifications of such material outside the
   IETF Standards Process.  Without obtaining an adequate license from
   the person(s) controlling the copyright in such materials, this
   document may not be modified outside the IETF Standards Process, and
   derivative works of it may not be created outside the IETF Standards
   Process, except to format it for publication as an RFC or to
   translate it into languages other than English.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 25, 2010.




Zong, et al.             Expires April 25, 2010                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft              PPSP Requirements               October 2009


Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2009 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents in effect on the date of
   publication of this document (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info).
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.

Abstract

   The objective of the PPSP work is to standardize the key signaling
   protocols that apply to tracker and peers in a Peer-to-Peer (P2P)
   streaming system.  These protocols are called PPSP.  This document
   enumerates the requirements for the PPSP, which should be considered
   when designing PPSP.

































Zong, et al.             Expires April 25, 2010                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft              PPSP Requirements               October 2009


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Overview of PPSP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   4.  PPSP Requirements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     4.1.  PPSP Tracker Protocol Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     4.2.  PPSP Peer Protocol Requirements  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     4.3.  PPSP Error Handling and Overload Protection
           Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   5.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   6.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   7.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   8.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     8.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     8.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11


































Zong, et al.             Expires April 25, 2010                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft              PPSP Requirements               October 2009


1.  Introduction

   Peer to Peer (P2P) computing has been successfully used in many
   fields, from one to one communication like Voice over IP (VoIP) and
   Instance Messaging (IM), to one to many communication like streaming,
   file sharing and gaming.  In the streaming area, the popularity of
   P2P real-time and video on demand (VoD) streaming technology has been
   demonstrated by PPlive [WWW.PPLive], PPStream [WWW.PPStream], UUSee
   [WWW.UUSee], Pando [WWW.Pando] etc.  Take PPLive for example, it has
   over 5 million online users at the same time for real-time streaming.
   Also some web2.0 streaming applications such as Youtube
   [WWW.YouTube], Tudou [WWW.Tudou] are reported to use or are preparing
   to use P2P engine to accelerate its downloading rate and cut down the
   transmission cost.  P2P streaming applications account for more and
   more Internet traffic.  According to statistics in a major Chinese
   Internet Service Provider (ISP), the traffic generated by P2P
   streaming applications exceeded 50% of the total backbone traffic
   during peak time in 2008.[PPSPPS]

   Given the increasing integration of P2P streaming into the global
   content delivery infrastructure, the lack of an open, standard P2P
   streaming protocol has become a major missing component in the
   Internet protocol stack.  Multiple similar but proprietary P2P
   streaming protocols result in repetitious development efforts and
   lock-in effects.  More importantly, it leads to substantial
   difficulties when integrating P2P streaming as a component of a
   global content delivery infrastructure.  For example, proprietary P2P
   streaming protocols do not integrate well with infrastructure devices
   such as caches and other edge devices.[PPSPPS]

   The objective of the PPSP work is to standardize the key signaling
   protocols that apply to tracker and peers in a P2P streaming system.
   These protocols are called PPSP.  PPSP will serve as an enabling
   technology, building on the development experiences of existing P2P
   streaming systems.  Its design will allow it to integrate with IETF
   efforts on distributed resource location, traffic localization, and
   streaming control mechanisms.  It allows effective integration with
   edge infrastructures such as cache and mobile edge equipment.[PPSPPS]

   This document enumerates the requirements for the PPSP, which should
   be considered when designing PPSP.


2.  Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119] and



Zong, et al.             Expires April 25, 2010                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft              PPSP Requirements               October 2009


   indicate requirement levels for compliant implementations.

   This document uses the terms defined in [PPSPPS], including:

   Chunk: A chunk is a basic unit of partitioned streaming, which is
   used by a peer for the purpose of storage, advertisement and exchange
   among peers.

   Live streaming: The scenario where all clients receive streaming
   content for the same ongoing event.  The lags between the play points
   of the clients and that of the streaming source are small.

   Peer/PPSP peer: A peer/PPSP peer refers to a participant in a P2P
   streaming system.  The participant not only receives streaming
   content, but also stores and uploads streaming content to other
   participants.

   PPSP: PPSP refer to the key signaling protocols among various P2P
   streaming system components including the tracker and peer.  PPSP are
   a part of P2P streaming protocols.

   Swarm: A swarm refers to a group of clients (i.e. peers) sharing the
   same content (e.g. video/audio program, digital file, etc) at a given
   time.

   Tracker/PPSP tracker: A tracker/PPSP tracker refers to a directory
   service which maintains lists of peers/PPSP peers storing chunks for
   a specific channel or streaming file and answers queries from peers/
   PPSP peers for peer lists.

   Video-on-demand (VoD): The scenario where different clients watch
   different parts of the media recorded and stored during past events.


3.  Overview of PPSP

   As described in [PPSPPS], the following components are considered in
   the scope of PPSP:

   1) Tracker communication.  Tracker communication is a component that
   enables each peer to get peer list from the tracker and/or provide
   content availability to the tracker.

   2) Peer communication.  Peer communication is a component that
   enables each peer to exchange content availability and request other
   peers for content.

   3) Report.  Report is a component that enables peers to report



Zong, et al.             Expires April 25, 2010                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft              PPSP Requirements               October 2009


   streaming status to the tracker.  The information may include peer
   inbound/outbound traffic, amount of neighbor peers, peer health
   degree and other streaming parameters.

   Therefore, PPSP includes the PPSP tracker protocol - a signaling
   protocol between PPSP trackers and PPSP peers, and the PPSP peer
   protocol - a signaling protocol among PPSP peers.

   PPSP tracker protocol will define:

   1) Standard format/encoding of information between PPSP peers and
   PPSP trackers, such as peer list, content availability, streaming
   status including online time, link status, node capability and other
   streaming parameters.

   2) Standard messages between PPSP peers and PPSP trackers defining
   how PPSP peers report streaming status and request to PPSP trackers,
   as well as how PPSP trackers reply to the requests.

   PPSP peer protocol will define:

   1) Standard format/encoding of information among PPSP peers, such as
   chunk description.

   2) Standard messages among PPSP peers defining how PPSP peers
   advertise chunk availability to each other, as well as the signaling
   for requesting the chunks among PPSP peers.

   This document itemizes requirements for the following aspects of
   PPSP:

   1) General functionalities of PPSP tracker protocol and basic types
   of information communicated by PPSP tracker protocol.

   2) General functionalities of PPSP peer protocol and basic types of
   information communicated by PPSP peer protocol.

   3) Error handling and overload protection requirements.

   4) Security requirements.


4.  PPSP Requirements

4.1.  PPSP Tracker Protocol Requirements

   PPSP.TP.REQ-1: PPSP tracker protocol MUST be able to carry peer list
   information, such that each peer can get the list of peers which



Zong, et al.             Expires April 25, 2010                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft              PPSP Requirements               October 2009


   could provide the content.

   PPSP.TP.REQ-2: PPSP tracker protocol MUST be able to carry swarm ID
   (e.g. channel ID, streaming file ID).

   The swarm ID can be used in two cases: 1) a peer requests the tracker
   for the peer list indexed by a swarm ID; 2) a peer tells the tracker
   about the swarms it belongs to.

   PPSP.TP.REQ-3: PPSP tracker protocol MAY carry content availability
   of the peers.

   In some cases tracker may maintain the information of which pieces of
   content reside in which peers, such that the tracker can assign the
   appropriate peers for the requesting peer.

   For example, a common expression of content availability is called
   buffer map, indicating which chunks a peer currently has buffered and
   can share with other peers.  The buffer map can include the offset
   (the ID of the first chunk stored by the peer), the length of the
   buffer map, and a string of zeroes and ones indicating which chunks
   are available (starting with the chunk designated by the offset).

              <------- Buffer Map Length ------------->
              +---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+
  <---------->| 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 0 | 1 | 1 | 0 | 0 | 1 |
     offset   +---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+
  |-------------------------------------------------------------------->
                                                          Content Length

                      Figure 1: Buffer Map

   PPSP.TP.REQ-4: PPSP tracker protocol MAY carry streaming status of
   the peers.  Streaming status of the peer include online time, link
   status, peer capability and other streaming parameters of the peer.
   Therefore, the tracker is able to select better candidate peers for
   streaming based on the streaming status of the peers.

   PPSP.TP.REQ-5: PPSP tracker protocol MAY be able to carry the service
   status of the tracker, e.g. work load, capacity, etc.

4.2.  PPSP Peer Protocol Requirements

   PPSP.PP.REQ-1: PPSP peer protocol MUST be able to carry content
   availability of the peers.

   In order to share content among peers, peers must be able to tell
   each other which pieces of content reside in which peers.  After a



Zong, et al.             Expires April 25, 2010                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft              PPSP Requirements               October 2009


   peer receives content availability from other peers, the peer can
   request content with other peers.

   PPSP.PP.REQ-2: PPSP peer protocol May exchange additional peer list
   in the communication after the first hand-shake between peers.

   Note that tracker may only return an initial list of peers to the
   requesting peer.  A peer may need additional peers to connect with
   and share content.  Therefore, it is allowed that the peer
   communicates with the peers in the current peer list to obtain
   additional peer lists with which it aggregates the current peer list.

   PPSP.PP.REQ-3: PPSP peer protocol May carry streaming status of the
   peers.  Streaming status information should be related to the content
   delivery, including online time, link status, peer capability and
   other streaming parameters of the peer.  With this information, a
   peer can select more appropriate peers for content sharing based on
   some content sharing strategies and/or application requirements.

4.3.  PPSP Error Handling and Overload Protection Requirements

   PPSP.ERR.REQ-1: A peer MUST be able to respond with error information
   to the peers sending PPSP messages, when some information (e.g. peer
   list, chunk expression) cannot be understood in the message.

     Local Peer                                         Peers/Tracker
         |                                                |
         |                  PPSP Message                  |
         |<-----------------------------------------------|
         |                                                |
         |               Error Information                |
         |----------------------------------------------->|
         |                                                |
         |                                                |

                        Figure 2: Error Handling

   PPSP.ERR.REQ-2: A tracker, when is operating close to its capacity
   limit, MUST be able to inform the peers about its overload status,
   and reject the following PPSP messages from the peers or redirect the
   following PPSP message to other trackers.


5.  IANA Considerations

   This document presently raises no IANA considerations.





Zong, et al.             Expires April 25, 2010                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft              PPSP Requirements               October 2009


6.  Security Considerations

   The scope of this section is to analyze the security threats and
   provide the requirements for PPSP.  While P2P streaming system
   prevails in recent years, an important but less studied problem is
   security.

   PPSP.SEC.REQ-1: PPSP must ensure that only authorized users can
   access the original media in the P2P streaming system.  This can be
   achieved by defining or adopting such mechanisms as user
   authentication and/or key management scheme.

   PPSP.SEC.REQ-2: Confidentiality of the streaming data should be
   supported and the corresponding key management scheme must scale well
   without degrading the system performance.

   PPSP.SEC.REQ-3: PPSP must provide an option to encrypt data exchange
   among PPSP entities.

   PPSP.SEC.REQ-4: PPSP must prevent stream pollution attacks.  In the
   stream pollution attack, the attacker mixes into the stream bogus
   chunks, or declare the chunks it doesn't have.

   Such an attack will degrade the quality of the rendered media at the
   receiver.  For example, in a P2P live video streaming system a
   polluter can introduce corrupted chunks.  Each receiver integrates
   into its playback stream the polluted chunks it receives from its
   other neighbors.  Since the peers forwards chunks to other peers, the
   polluted content can potentially spread through much of the P2P
   streaming network.

   PPSP.SEC.REQ-5: PPSP must have mechanisms to limit potential damage
   caused by malfunctioning and badly behaving peers in the P2P
   streaming system.  In addition there must be a way to identify badly
   behaving peers, and exclude or reject them from the P2P streaming
   system.

   PPSP.SEC.REQ-6: PPSP must prevent peers from exhausting the P2P
   streaming system's available resource, e.g. processing capacity,
   bandwidth, etc.

   Given the prevalence of DoS attacks in the Internet, it is important
   to realize that a similar threat could exist in a large-scale
   streaming system where attackers are capable of consuming a lot of
   resources with just a small amount of effort.

   PPSP.SEC.REQ-7: PPSP should minimize the dependency on reachability
   of centralized servers.



Zong, et al.             Expires April 25, 2010                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft              PPSP Requirements               October 2009


   PPSP.SEC.REQ-8: PPSP Peers must be able to participate in the
   streaming network in private manner without any aspect of the peers
   privacy violated.

   PPSP.SEC.REQ-9: Existing security mechanisms should be re-used as
   much as possible in PPSP, to avoid developing new security
   mechanisms.

   PPSP.SEC.REQ-10: Security mechanisms of PPSP should not limit the
   scalability, performance and reliability of the P2P streaming system.


7.  Acknowledgements

   The authors would like to thank many people for discussing P2P
   streaming.  We would particularly like to thank: Haibin Song,
   Xingfeng Jiang from Huawei Technologies, Hui Zhang from NEC Labs, Jun
   Lei from University of Goettingen, James Seng from PPLive, Das
   Saumitra from Qualcomm, Lin Xiao and Christian Schmidt.


8.  References

8.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

8.2.  Informative References

   [WWW.PPLive]
              "www.pplive.com".

   [WWW.PPStream]
              "www.ppstream.com".

   [WWW.UUSee]
              "www.uusee.com".

   [WWW.Pando]
              "www.pando.com".

   [WWW.YouTube]
              "www.youtube.com".

   [WWW.Tudou]
              "www.tudou.com".




Zong, et al.             Expires April 25, 2010                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft              PPSP Requirements               October 2009


   [Survey]   Zong, N. and X. Jiang, "Survey of P2P Streaming",
              IETF PPSP BoF, November 2008.

   [ProbSta]  Zhang, Y., "Problem Statement of P2P Streaming Protocol
              (PPSP)", IETF PPSP BoF, November 2008.

   [P2PLive]  Guo, Y., Liang, C., and Y. Liu, "Adaptive Queue-based
              Chunk Scheduling for P2P Live Streaming", IFIP
              Networking Proceedings, May 2008.

   [LiveStream]
              Pascual, V., "Live Streaming over P2PSIP", International
              SIP Conference 10th Edition, January 2009.

   [I-D.ietf-p2psip-base]
              Jennings, C., Lowekamp, B., Rescorla, E., Baset, S., and
              H. Schulzrinne, "REsource LOcation And Discovery (RELOAD)
              Base Protocol", draft-ietf-p2psip-base-01 (work in
              progress), December 2008.

   [PPSPPS]   Zhang, Y., Zong, N., Camarillo, G., Seng, J., and R. Yang,
              "PPSP Problem Statement",
              draft-zhang-ppsp-problem-statement-05 (work in progress).


Authors' Addresses

   Ning Zong (editor)
   Huawei Technologies

   Phone: +86 25 84565866
   Email: zongning@huawei.com


   Yunfei Zhang
   China Mobile Communication Corporation

   Phone: +86 13601032119
   Email: zhangyunfei@chinamobile.com


   Victor Pascual
   Tekelec

   Email: victor@iptel.org






Zong, et al.             Expires April 25, 2010                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft              PPSP Requirements               October 2009


   Carl Williams
   Consultant
   Palo Alto, California 94306

   Email: carlw@mcsr-labs.org














































Zong, et al.             Expires April 25, 2010                [Page 12]


