                                                                       Y. Yu 
     IRCAT Working Group                                             T. Tsou 
     Internet Draft                                                     R.Li 
     Intended status: Standard Track                                  Huawei 
     Expires: December 2011                                    June 11, 2011 
                                           
            Inter-router Cooperative and Teaming for massive scalability  
                      draft-yu-ircat-problem-statement-02.txt 


     Status of this Memo 

        This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the 
        provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.  

        Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
        Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
        other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
        Drafts. 

        Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
        and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
        time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
        material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 

        The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 

        The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html 

        This Internet-Draft will expire on December 11, 2011. 

     Copyright Notice 

        Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the 
        document authors. All rights reserved. 

        This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal 
        Provisions Relating to IETF Documents 
        (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of 
        publication of this document. Please review these documents 
        carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect 
        to this document. Code Components extracted from this document must 
        include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of 
        the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as 
        described in the Simplified BSD License. 

         

      
      
      
     Yu&Tsou&Li            Expires December 11, 2011                [Page 1] 

     Internet-Draft         IRCAT Problem Statement                June 2011 
         

     Abstract 

        To achieve the extremely high scalability, Cooperative router group 
        is a reasonable approach. Problems are stated in this document 
        regarding cooperative router group. New mechanisms are needed to be 
        developed and to be standardized. 

     Table of Contents 

         
        1. Introduction...................................................2 
        2. Terminology....................................................3 
        3. Inter Cooperative Router Group.................................3 
        4. Problem Statement..............................................4 
           4.1. Router Group Membership...................................4 
           4.2. Router Capability Exchange................................4 
           4.3. Cooperative Router Group Topology.........................4 
              4.3.1. An Example of Interior Router Group Network..........5 
           4.4. Cooperative Router Group Working Load Collaboration.......6 
              4.4.1. Local Resources Monitoring...........................6 
              4.4.2. Router Working Load Migration........................6 
           4.5. Unified Router Group Control Plane........................7 
           4.6. Router Control Plane and Forwarding Plane Separation......7 
        5. Conclusions and Recommendations................................7 
        6. Security Considerations........................................8 
        7. IANA Considerations............................................8 
        8. Acknowledgments................................................8 
        9. Reference:.....................................................8 
         
     1. Introduction 

        To achieve scalability, routers are replaced and are becoming larger 
        and larger. One way to achieve such a very high scalability is to 
        design and deploy tightly-coupled homogeneous hardware cluster 
        router.  

        Currently, the tightly-coupled homogeneous hardware cluster router 
        requests the same type of router from same vendor, which means they 
        are identical. 

        There could be another possibility of using different routers (maybe 
        from different vendors) to construct a loosely-coupled heterogeneous 
        cluster router by running one or more protocols to be standardized.  

        The key point of such a technology is about Cooperation and Teaming 
        among routers.  

      
      
     Yu&Tsou&Li            Expires December 11, 2011                [Page 2] 

     Internet-Draft         IRCAT Problem Statement                June 2011 
         

        The cooperation includes, but not limited to, such scenario in which 
        one router may handle some control plane work on behalf of another 
        router. From the outside, the cooperative router group is required to 
        meet the following minimal requirements: 

        - They are viewed as a single router with its own router ID and is 
        operated as a single network node. 

        - They are always available and some redundancy and backups are built 
        between routers joining the same router group. 

        - They are extremely highly scalable as a new router can be inserted 
        to join such a group when needed. 

         

     2. Terminology 

        IRCAT: Inter Router Cooperative and Teaming 

        VRF:  Virtual Routing and Forwarding 

         

     3. Inter Cooperative Router Group 

        To meet the massive scalability from the newer emerging application, 
        single chassis router or single entity router faces tough time. Even 
        though CPU and memory speed grow very fast, building a giant router 
        is still expensive. Single giant router loses the flexibility of 
        seamlessly scales from low to high. So unite a group of routers as a 
        single router is reasonable approach --- inter router cooperative 
        group. In the cooperative router group, routers have same router ID 
        and collaborate like single router to network. It is not required 
        that routers are the same type. They can be heterogeneous or 
        homogeneous routers in the cooperative router group. 

        Cooperative router group is cooperative. Routers in group are 
        collaborative to working on same tasks. For example, in cooperative 
        router group, BGP is not running on single router. It is running on 
        multiple routers in the router group. All BGP instances are load 
        balanced the whole BGP load. They have same router ID and same IP 
        addresses. The external BGP peers all connect to those common IP 
        addresses. 

        Cooperative router group can be seamlessly scale up and down without 
        disruption of services. New routers can be added into or remove from 
      
      
     Yu&Tsou&Li            Expires December 11, 2011                [Page 3] 

     Internet-Draft         IRCAT Problem Statement                June 2011 
         

        cooperative router group corresponding to the load of router group 
        goes up and down. 

        To make routers to be cooperative, cooperative router group is facing 
        a series of problems. Some of problems can be solved by some existed 
        mechanisms. But for some problems, new mechanisms are necessary to be 
        developed and further study is needed. 

     4. Problem Statement 

     4.1. Router Group Membership 

        When a new router is added into the router group, it won't be member 
        of router group automatically. Automatic discovery, negotiation, 
        authentication etc. are the necessary procedures. After newly added 
        router becomes member of router group, its resources are added into 
        router group global resources. If a router leaves the router group, 
        router group must be able to detect this leave and remove this slice 
        of resources from global resources. 

        Router group membership mechanism may borrow some existing ideas, but 
        it still has some uniqueness under the circumstance of cooperative 
        router group. 

     4.2. Router Capability Exchange 

        With the join of new group member, how much new resources are added 
        in? Router capability is advertised out. Capability here refers the 
        router's used and available CPU and memory capacities etc. 

        Cooperative router group needs to know the whole resources, so 
        capability database of all members should be kept in router group. 
        Because capability of each member can be changed, capability database 
        is updated from time to time. 

     4.3. Cooperative Router Group Topology 

       Router group is cooperative and collaborative; this means members of 
       router group have interior interconnections and internal 
       communication. Interior network of router group can either be layer 2 
       or layer 3. Layer 2 interior network is simple and easy. Layer 3 
       interior network is better scaled and has some advances in multicast. 
       Each member of router group has private addresses for internal 
       communication. Those addresses are concealed to the outside of the 
       cooperative router group. 


      
      
     Yu&Tsou&Li            Expires December 11, 2011                [Page 4] 

     Internet-Draft         IRCAT Problem Statement                June 2011 
         

       Meanwhile, cooperative router group keeps its router ID and a set of 
       public addresses. The outside of router group only knows the above 
       public information. In section 4.3.1, an example explains more about 
       private and public addresses of interior router group network. 

       Router group topology has to be obtained if router members need 
       internal unicast and multicast communication. Mac learning in layer 2 
       network or slightly changed IGP routing protocol in layer 3 networks 
       can do this job well. 

       But in cooperative router group, it needs more. 

        - Router group only has topology information for private addresses. 
       But it dose not have public address locations. 

        - In router group circumstance, same public IP addresses are 
       possible on multiple member routers because multiple instances of 
       application are running on different routers. For example, BGP in 
       router group may not be running on single member routers. It has 
       multiple instances which are running on multiple routers. Those BGP 
       instances have same router ID and common address to outside peers. If 
       BGP peer packet which has destination to the common address, are punt 
       into router group, but faces multiple places with same address, where 
       should this packet be forwarded? 

     4.3.1. An Example of Interior Router Group Network 

                     10.1.1.1           10.1.1.2               10.1.1.3 
                   +-----------+       +-----------+         +-----------+ 
                   | router A  |       | router B  |         | router C  | 
                   |  (BGP 1)  | ----- |  (BGP 2)  | ------- |  (OSPF)   | 
                   | (1.1.1.1) |       | (1.1.1.1) |         |           | 
                   +-----------+       +-----------+         +-----------+ 
                   |   LC      |       |   LC      |         |   LC      | 
                   +-----------+       +-----------+         +-----------+ 
                      |  |  |            |  |  |                 |  |  |   
                  Figure 1 Interior Router Group Network example 

        As Figure 1, 3 routers A, B and C are in cooperative router group. 
        Their private IP addresses are 10.1.1.1, 10.1.1.2, 10.1.1.3 
        respectly. Router group has public address 1.1.1.1. There are 2 BGP 
        instances which are running on router A and B. OSPF instance is 
        running on router C. BGP is load balanced, half of BGP peers are 
        handled by router A and second half peers are handled by router B. 
        BGP peers are all connect to IP address 1.1.1.1. 

        In this example, the following scenarios are needed to be addressed. 
      
      
     Yu&Tsou&Li            Expires December 11, 2011                [Page 5] 

     Internet-Draft         IRCAT Problem Statement                June 2011 
         

         - If a BGP packet is punt up, its destination IP address is 1.1.1.1 
        and the sent peer is supposed to be handled by BGP instance on router 
        A, forward this packet to router A. 

         - If a BGP packet is punt up, its destination IP address is 1.1.1.1 
        and the sent peer is supposed to be handled by BGP instance on router 
        B, forward this packet to router B. 

         - If an OSPF packet is punt up, forward this packet to router C. 

        It shows a new mechanism needed to be developed in interior router 
        group network. 

     4.4. Cooperative Router Group Working Load Collaboration 

        Router group is cooperative. It is not right if some member routers 
        are extremely busy or incur to almost memory panic, in the meantime 
        some other member router have plenty resource but have nothing to do. 
        Under this circumstance, cooperative router group should have a 
        mechanism to move a part of working load from resource exhausted 
        routers to some others which have enough resources. Otherwise 
        cooperative router group is not "cooperative". 

        Ideally this working load collaboration is automatic and dynamic. 
        Working load move should be happened before router's resources are 
        really exhausted. 

     4.4.1. Local Resources Monitoring 

        It is too late if router completely run out of resource and then 
        remembers it can move some working load out. Router monitors its 
        local resource status from time to time. If it goes to alarm stage, 
        working load migration triggers. 

     4.4.2. Router Working Load Migration 

        If a router needs to off load some working load. It always it handles 
        this with 2 different manners. The first one is, this router does not 
        have other group member's capability information. It just asks for 
        help loudly (broadcast) and then waits for helper's responses. After 
        getting almost all helper's responses, now the router knows the 
        targets of load migration. Then it negotiates with target routers and 
        load migration starts if negotiation success. The second manner, this 
        router always collects group member's capability information, i.e. 
        capability database. So when the router needs to offload its working 
        load, it already has enough knowledge to know the helpers (migration 
        targets). This router can directly negotiates with migration target 
      
      
     Yu&Tsou&Li            Expires December 11, 2011                [Page 6] 

     Internet-Draft         IRCAT Problem Statement                June 2011 
         

        routers and load migration starts if the negotiation success. The 
        optimal migration targets selection is a complex process, how to 
        simplify and compromise is another problem. 

     4.5. Unified Router Group Control Plane 

        Each router has its own control plane, so there are quite a few 
        control planes in a cooperative router group. On the other hand, 
        routers can be added into and remove from router group dynamically 
        and seamlessly. How to effectively utilize the control planes' 
        resource is very tough problem. Control plane virtualization becomes 
        the reasonable approach. A unified router group control plane becomes 
        necessary. By virtualization, the unified router group control plane 
        has global control plane resources pool and each router's control 
        plane becomes a slice of resources in global control plane resource 
        pool. When a new router joins into the router group, a new slice of 
        router control plane resources is added into global resource pool and 
        vice versa. 

     4.6. Router Control Plane and Forwarding Plane Separation 

        This problem is related to the router group control plane 
        virtualization. It is natural in single router that control plane 
        only manages the local chassis forwarding hardware. In cooperative 
        router group circumstance, especially with the unified router group 
        control plane, control plane on other remote router can manages local 
        forwarding hardware on behalf of local router control plane. So one 
        forwarding hardware and one control plane mapping is not true under 
        cooperative router group circumstance. Forwarding hardware can no 
        longer find out its specific control plane, but to face the unified 
        router group control plane. 

     5. Conclusions and Recommendations 

       To meet the extremely high scaling requirements from service 
       provider, we have concluded and recommend that: 

          - Cooperative router group is practical and effective approach to 
           meet the extremely high scaling requirement. 

          - Cooperative router group addressed new mechanisms needed to be 
           developed and further study and to be standardized. 

          - Inter Router Cooperative and Teaming (IRCAT) is to standardize 
           the protocols which are running on heterogeneous routers to let 
           them construct as cooperative router group. 

      
      
     Yu&Tsou&Li            Expires December 11, 2011                [Page 7] 

     Internet-Draft         IRCAT Problem Statement                June 2011 
         

           

     6. Security Considerations 

        In cooperative router group, member routers are cooperative and 
        trusted. A malicious group member can easily down the entire router 
        group. So the sophisticated authentication is important when member 
        joins the router group. 

        Routers in router group still may be attacked from outside network. 

     7. IANA Considerations 

        This document does not add additional Security Considerations. 

         

     8. Acknowledgments 

        Cathy Wu helped to translate the format of this document. She is 
        gratefully acknowledged. 

        This document was prepared using 2-Word-v2.0.template.dot. 

        

     9. Reference: 

        [1]   [CloudNET] T. Wood, "The Case for Enterprise-ready Virtual 
              Private Clouds" 

        [2]  [RFC4271] Y. Rekhter, T. Li, S. Hares, "A Border Gateway 
             Protocol 4 (BGP-4)", RFC4271, 2006 

         

         

         

         

         

     Author's Addresses 

      
      
      
     Yu&Tsou&Li            Expires December 11, 2011                [Page 8] 

     Internet-Draft         IRCAT Problem Statement                June 2011 
         

        Yang Yu 

        Huawei Technologies 

        2300 Central Expressway, 

        Santa Clara, CA 95050, USA
 

        Email: yyu@huawei.com 

         

        Tina Tsou 

        Huawei Technologies 

        2300 Central Expressway, 

        Santa Clara, CA 95050, USA
 

        Email: tena@huawei.com 

         

        Renwei Li 

        Huawei Technologies 

        2300 Central Expressway, 

        Santa Clara, CA 95050, USA
 

        Email: renwei.li@huawei.com 

         

        Copyright (c) 2011IETF Trust and the persons identified as authors of 
        the code. All rights reserved. 

        Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without 
        modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions 
        are met: 

        o  Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright 
           notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.  


      
      
     Yu&Tsou&Li            Expires December 11, 2011                [Page 9] 

     Internet-Draft         IRCAT Problem Statement                June 2011 
         

        o  Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright 
           notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in 
           the documentation and/or other materials provided with the 
           distribution.  

        o  Neither the name of Internet Society, IETF or IETF Trust, nor the 
           names of specific contributors, may be used to endorse or promote 
           products derived from this software without specific prior written 
           permission. 

        THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS 
        "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT 
        LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR 
        A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT 
        OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, 
        SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT 
        LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, 
        DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY 
        THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT 
        (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE 
        OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE. 


























      
      
     Yu&Tsou&Li            Expires December 11, 2011               [Page 10] 

