
A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3040

        Title:      Internet Web Replication and Caching Taxonomy
        Author(s):  I. Cooper, I. Melve, G. Tomlinson
        Status:     Informational
        Date:       January 2001
        Mailbox:    icooper@equinix.com, Ingrid.Melve@uninett.no,
                    gary.tomlinson@cacheflow.com 
        Pages:      32
        Characters: 63257
        Updates/Obsoletes/SeeAlso:  None

        I-D Tag:    draft-ietf-wrec-taxonomy-06.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3040.txt


This memo specifies standard terminology and the taxonomy of web
replication and caching infrastructure as deployed today.  It
introduces standard concepts, and protocols used today within this
application domain.  Currently deployed solutions employing these
technologies are presented to establish a standard taxonomy.  Known
problems with caching proxies are covered in the document titled
"Known HTTP Proxy/Caching Problems", and are not part of this
document.  This document presents open protocols and points to
published material for each protocol.

This document is a product of the Web Replication and Caching Working
Group of the IETF.

This memo provides information for the Internet community.  It does
not specify an Internet standard of any kind.  Distribution of this
memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.
