


Network Working Group                                           K. Shima
Internet-Draft                             IIJ Innovation Institute Inc.
Intended status: Informational                                 Y. Sekiya
Expires: April 19, 2012                          The University of Tokyo
                                                               K. Horiba
                                                         Keio University
                                                        October 17, 2011


   Network Portability Requirements and Models for Cloud Environment
         draft-shima-clouds-net-portability-reqs-and-models-01

Abstract

   Recent progress of virtual machine technology made it possible to
   host various Internet service nodes in a so called cloud environment.
   The virtual machine hosting technology provides a method to migrate a
   virtual machine from one hypervisor to another.  However, such a
   technology is mainly focusing on a migration between hypervisors
   attached to the same link, and tend not to consider migration over
   the Internet.  This document mentions the purpose of that type of
   operation and describe several possible operation methods to provide
   network portability in cloud systems.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 19, 2012.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents



Shima, et al.            Expires April 19, 2012                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft             Network Portability              October 2011


   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Network Portability Requirements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   3.  Network Portability Models  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
     3.1.  Host-oriented Portability Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
     3.2.  Network-oriented Portability Model  . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   4.  Implementation Examples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
     4.1.  Wide area VLAN-based Network Porability . . . . . . . . . . 5
     4.2.  NEMO-based Network Porability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
     4.3.  Mobile IPv6-based Network Porability  . . . . . . . . . . . 7
     4.4.  Routing-based Network Portability . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
     4.5.  LISP-based Network Portability  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   5.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   6.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   7.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
   8.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
























Shima, et al.            Expires April 19, 2012                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft             Network Portability              October 2011


1.  Introduction

   This document describes requirements and methodology of network
   migration for inter-datacenter and inter-clouds.  The progress of
   virtualization technology changed the way to build Internet services
   completely.  For example, the PaaS (Platform as a Services) is one of
   the innovative concept of computing service utilizing virtualization
   technology.  It provides network-oriented service APIs to software
   layer which scales out by increasing the number of virtual nodes and
   scales in by decreasing the number of virtual nodes based on the load
   of the software requests.

   A PaaS is built and provided in single datacenter by single
   organization nowadays, however, the needs of building distributed,
   inter-datacenter PaaS, and inter-connecting existing PaaS(es) are
   growing.  Recently people expect sustainable service much more
   seriously than ever before.  If a datacenter is encountered network
   circuit or power troubles, administrators or users of PaaS want to
   move the virtual nodes in a datacenter to other datacenters or other
   PaaS(es) without service interruption.

   In order to migrate virtual nodes between inter-datacenter and inter-
   clouds without service interruptions and changes, network portability
   technologies are required between the datacenters and clouds.


2.  Network Portability Requirements

   The requirements of network portability for migrating vitrual nodes
   between datacenters and between clouds are below.

   o  Providing the same user service networks between each datacenter
      and cloud

      Each user has different service networks and it should be possible
      for users to use their networks on any datacenters or clouds.  If
      the service infrastructure is operated by a single administrative
      organization, it is possible to use VLAN and VPN technologies to
      achieve this property, however, building user networks using such
      technologies is difficult in inter-datacenters or inter-clouds
      cases where administrative organizations differ.  Since VLAN is a
      layer-2 technology and it requires direct circuit between
      datacenters, it is difficult considering the cost to keep the
      direct line.  VPN is a cost-effective technology and it is
      possible to provide user networks on each datacenters and clouds,
      however, if the clouds are administrated by different
      organizations, it is difficult and costly for administrators to
      build a lot of VPN connection for all user networks.



Shima, et al.            Expires April 19, 2012                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft             Network Portability              October 2011


   o  Movement policy management mechanism

      When a network is moved from one datacenter or cloud system to
      another, it must be permitted and authorized by the destination
      system in some way.

   o  High-Availability of user networks

      Even if using VLAN and VPN technologies, each user network has a
      single connecting point to the Internet.  It may be a single point
      of failure of inter-datacenter and inter-clouds PaaS service.
      Network potability in inter-datacenters and inter-clouds should
      provide High-Availability capability.


3.  Network Portability Models

   We consider two kinds of network portability models in this draft.
   One is the host-oriented portability model, and the other is the
   network-oriented portability model.

3.1.  Host-oriented Portability Model

   In this model, each host (virtual machine) manages the network
   portability.  To adpot this model, each host must be equipped with
   some kinds of host mobility support.  Every time a host migrates from
   one hypervisor to another hypervisor and the attached network
   environment of the migrated host changes, the host must be trigger
   mobility function to adapt the current attached network environment.
   Examples implementation of this model are using host mobility
   protocols such as Mobile IP [RFC5944], Mobile IPv6 [RFC6275], HIP
   [RFC5201], or LISP [I-D.ietf-lisp] and advertising host route entry
   from the moving node.

3.2.  Network-oriented Portability Model

   In this model, the network resource to which the host is attached
   before migration and after migration does not change.  Since the
   migrated host doesn't notice the network environment change, it can
   continue to work after the migration.  To provide the same network
   environment, the cloud system must support network resource migration
   between the previous location and current location of the host.
   Examples of this model is using VLAN, and using VPN connection.


4.  Implementation Examples

   In this section, we show some of the implementation example of



Shima, et al.            Expires April 19, 2012                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft             Network Portability              October 2011


   network portability in cloud system.  Section 4.1 describes an
   example of the network-based network portability implementation using
   wide area VLAN configuration.  Section 4.2 describes another example
   of the network-based network portability implementation using NEMO
   BS.  [RFC3963] Section 4.3 describes an example of the host-based
   network portability implementation using Mobile IPv6.  Section 4.4
   describes another example of the host-based network portability
   implementation using host route technology.  Section 4.5 shows yet
   another example of host-based approach.

4.1.  Wide area VLAN-based Network Porability

   One possible solution to provide network portability in a cloud
   system is that to provide a seamless layer 2 network to the entire
   cloud system.  Recently, since the wide area connectivity is getting
   faster and faster, so it becomes realistic to extend a layer 2
   network from one site to other site where is geographically far.

   In this case, the hypervisor and host configuration become simple.
   All the hypervisors are attached to the same layer 2 link which is
   widely extended to every sites which consist the entire cloud system.
   A host is configured with the network which is bridged to the wide
   area layer 2 network.

   The migration procedure does not require any additional configuration
   or operation.  Since all the hypervisors share the same layer 2
   network, hosts can migrate to any one of the hypervisors attached to
   the layer 2 network.

   The policy management of the network resource mobility is performed
   as a part of the VLAN management.  Whether the destination service
   provider accept network resource migration or not is same as whether
   they accept to offer their VLAN resource to the source service
   provider.

   For the redundancy, the same technologies for VLAN can be used.

4.2.  NEMO-based Network Porability

   Another way to provide network portability is to use network mobility
   technology such as NEMO BS [RFC3963].  In this model, the cloud
   operator puts several mobile routers (MRs) in the cloud and assigns
   mobile network prefixes (MNPs) to each of the MR.  The MRs are
   basically hidden to the users of the cloud system.  Users do not need
   to know what is happning when the network migration occurs.

   The MRs are prepared as virtual machines in the cloud system as same
   as other normal host machines.  Since the MNP bound to each MR moves



Shima, et al.            Expires April 19, 2012                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft             Network Portability              October 2011


   with the MR, all the hosts attached to the MNP must also move with
   the MR.  Below is an example operation of the migration procedure
   performed in this case.

   The cloud system first prepares a home network prefix used as a base
   network of all the MRs in the cloud system, and prepares a home agent
   (HA) to serve the network mobility function.  Each MR has two network
   interfaces; one is for the local attachment point to get a care-of
   address, the other is for the presistent network to host other
   virtual machines which move with the MR.

   As many virtual machies as possible can be put on the persistent
   network of the MR, however, when network migration is performed, all
   the machines inside the persistent network must be moved altogether.
   So, if we want to move a virtual machine one by one, we must put only
   one virtual machine in the persistent segment.  It depends on the
   configuration of the service system.  For example, if we design a
   kind of web service system that consists of a web server and a
   backend database server, then we may put these two into the one
   persistent network.  Because those two servers must be on the same
   segment anyway, simultaneous migration will not be a limitation in
   this scenario.

   The persistent networks that are bound to MNPs are virtual networks
   defined in hypervisors.  The requirement to the virtual network is
   that the network must be identified by a virtual machine with a
   static identifier (e.g. the name of the virtual network) independent
   of the hypervisors on which the virtual machine runs.  For example,
   if a virtual machine attaches to a virtual network whose name is
   'mobile-net-1' on hypervisor A and migrates to hypervisor B, then the
   hypervisor B must be able to provide a virtual network which is
   identified by the name 'mobile-net-1'.

   Whem a network is migrated, all the related virtual machines must be
   moved to the same destination hypervisor.  That includes a MR, all
   the hosts attached to the MNP of the MR.  Once a MR migrates to other
   hypervisor, it will detect the external interface status and find
   that the network is changed.  The MR then initiates the procedure of
   NEMO BS, acquires a new care-of address, and registers its new
   location to the HA.  For the hosts inside the MNP, no additional
   action is required, since the network environment of the MNP is
   maintained by the MR and no change happens to that network.

   The policy management of the network resource mobility is performed
   as a part of mobility management policy of NEMO BS.  For example,
   some kind of roaming mechanism between the source and destination
   service providers and service level agreement are used to implement
   the policy management.



Shima, et al.            Expires April 19, 2012                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft             Network Portability              October 2011


   Similar to Mobile IPv6, the system may need to deploy some mechanisms
   to add high availability function to the home agent, since it is a
   single point of failure of Mobile IPv6-based mechanism.  The
   mechanism for high availability of home agents is out of scope of
   this document.

4.3.  Mobile IPv6-based Network Porability

   In this case, all the hosts (which are virtual machines in a cloud
   system) are assumed to have Mobile IP function.  A home agent must
   also exist as a part of the cloud system to serve home network of the
   mobile hosts.

   Each host attaches to any one of the virtual or bridged networks that
   hypervisors provide.  Based on the procedure of the Mobile IPv6, the
   host configures its care-of address using some kinds of address
   configuration mechanisms provided at the attached network, and
   register it with its home address to the home agent.  The detailed
   Mobile IPv6 operation procedure and configuration procedures is not
   described here.

   When a host is migrated from one hypervisor to another hypervisor,
   the network to which the migrated host attached changes, if the
   hypervisors are not attached to the same network segment.  The
   migrated host detects the new network environment using the Mobile
   IPv6 function, and acquire a new care-of address of the network under
   the new hypervisor.

   As same as the NEMO BS case, the policy management of the network
   resource mobility is performed as a part of mobility management
   policy of Mobile IPv6.  For example, some kind of roaming mechanism
   between the source and destination service providers and service
   level agreement are used to implement the policy management.

   Similar to Mobile IPv6, the system may need to deploy some mechanisms
   to add high availability function to the home agent, since it is a
   single point of failure of Mobile IPv6-based mechanism.  The
   mechanism for high availability of home agents is out of scope of
   this document.

4.4.  Routing-based Network Portability

   Using host route entry is another way to implement host-based network
   portability.  In order to use this mothod, every host which is moving
   between different networks must run routing daemon program on it.
   The node advertises its host route entry to the upstream router of
   the attached segment periodically.




Shima, et al.            Expires April 19, 2012                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft             Network Portability              October 2011


   As you can see, this method needs access right to the routing
   repository of the attached cloud system.  Also, distributing host
   route entry is impossible from different AS domain.  So this method
   is usually limited to one administrative domain.

   The policy management of the network resource mobility is performed
   as a part of route filtering mechanism.  The destination service
   provider has to configure their routers to accept routing information
   sent from legitimate moving virtual machines.

   To achieve redundancy, any kind of redundancy mechanisms of routing
   layer can be used.

4.5.  LISP-based Network Portability

   LISP is a two layer communication protocol that aims to separate
   locator layer and identifier layer.  Applying this technology to a
   host enables the host to move everywhere in the Internet.

   In this scenario, every network segments where virtual machines are
   supposed to be migrated must have LISP capability, that is, every
   network must have at least one XTR node to intercept traffic from the
   LISP-based virtual machines and tunnel it to the other end of XTR or
   ITR which is the tunnel end node of the destination identifier of the
   traffic.  Also, because this mechanism is using LISP, the entire
   system must have some kind of locator-identifier mapping system which
   is being discussed in the LISP Working Group.

   The policy management of the network resource mobility is performed
   as a part of the LISP operation.  The XTR node of the destination
   service provider must be configured to accept the legitimate LISP-
   based virtual machines.

   The redundancy will be provided as a part of the LISP operation too.


5.  Acknowledgements

   We thank the members of the WIDE project for discussion on this
   network migration technologies, and their bravery to use the
   experimental cloud system we constructed.


6.  IANA Considerations

   This memo includes no request to IANA.





Shima, et al.            Expires April 19, 2012                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft             Network Portability              October 2011


7.  Security Considerations

   The management NEMO HA shuld be secure and the tunnels between NEMO
   nodes should use secure transportation, such as SSL or IPsec.


8.  Normative References

   [I-D.ietf-lisp]
              Farinacci, D., Fuller, V., Meyer, D., and D. Lewis,
              "Locator/ID Separation Protocol (LISP)",
              draft-ietf-lisp-15 (work in progress), July 2011.

   [RFC3963]  Devarapalli, V., Wakikawa, R., Petrescu, A., and P.
              Thubert, "Network Mobility (NEMO) Basic Support Protocol",
              RFC 3963, January 2005.

   [RFC5201]  Moskowitz, R., Nikander, P., Jokela, P., and T. Henderson,
              "Host Identity Protocol", RFC 5201, April 2008.

   [RFC5944]  Perkins, C., "IP Mobility Support for IPv4, Revised",
              RFC 5944, November 2010.

   [RFC6275]  Perkins, C., Johnson, D., and J. Arkko, "Mobility Support
              in IPv6", RFC 6275, July 2011.


Authors' Addresses

   Keiichi Shima
   IIJ Innovation Institute Inc.
   1-105 Kanda-Jinbocho
   Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo  101-0051
   Japan

   Email: keiichi@iijlab.net


   Yuji Sekiya
   The University of Tokyo
   2-11-16 Yayoi
   Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo  113-8658
   Japan

   Email: sekiya@wide.ad.jp






Shima, et al.            Expires April 19, 2012                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft             Network Portability              October 2011


   Katsuhiro Horiba
   Keio University
   5322 Endo
   Fujisawa, Kanagawa  252-0882
   Japan

   Email: qoo@sfc.wide.ad.jp












































Shima, et al.            Expires April 19, 2012                [Page 10]

