A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3351

        Title:      User Requirements for the Session Initiation
                    Protocol (SIP) in Support of Deaf, Hard of Hearing
                    and Speech-impaired Individuals
        Author(s):  N. Charlton, M. Gasson, G. Gybels, M. Spanner,
                    A. van Wijk
        Status:     Informational
        Date:       August 2002
        Mailbox:    nathan@millpark.com,
                    michael.gasson@korusolutions.com, 
                    Guido.Gybels@rnid.org.uk,
                    mike.spanner@rnid.org.uk,
                    Arnoud.van.Wijk@eln.ericsson.se 
        Pages:      17
        Characters: 33894
        Updates/Obsoletes/SeeAlso:    None

        I-D Tag:    draft-ietf-sipping-deaf-req-03.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3351.txt


This document presents a set of Session Initiation Protocol
(SIP) user requirements that support communications for deaf, hard of
hearing and speech-impaired individuals.  These user requirements
address the current difficulties of deaf, hard of hearing and
speech-impaired individuals in using communications facilities, while
acknowledging the multi-functional potential of SIP-based
communications.

A number of issues related to these user requirements are further
raised in this document.

Also included are some real world scenarios and some technical
requirements to show the robustness of these requirements on a
concept-level.

This document is a product of the Session Initiation Proposal
Investigation Working Group of the IETF.

This memo provides information for the Internet community.  It does
not specify an Internet standard of any kind.  Distribution of this
memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.

