A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3324
                            
        Title:      Short Term Requirements for Network Asserted
                    Identity
        Author(s):  M. Watson
        Status:     Informational
        Date:       November 2002
        Mailbox:    mwatson@nortelnetworks.com
        Pages:      11
        Characters: 21964
        Updates/Obsoletes/SeeAlso:   None
                            
        I-D Tag:    draft-ietf-sipping-nai-reqs-02.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3324.txt


A Network Asserted Identity is an identity initially derived by
a Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) network intermediary as a result
of an authentication process.  This document describes short term
requirements for the exchange of Network Asserted Identities within
networks of securely interconnected trusted nodes and to User Agents
securely connected to such networks.

There is no requirement for identities asserted by a UA in a SIP
message to be anything other than the user's desired alias.

This document is a product of the Session Initiation Proposal
Investigation Working Group of the IETF.

This memo provides information for the Internet community.  It does
not specify an Internet standard of any kind.  Distribution of this
memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.


