Network                                                     N. So
Internet Draft                                         D. McDysan
Intended status: Informational                       Verizon, Inc
Expires: April 2012                                          H.Yu
                                                       TW Telecom
                                                         J. Heinz
                                                     Century Link

                                 October 26, 2011October 25, 2011



            Requirements for VPN-Oriented Data Center Services
                           draft-so-vdcs-02.txt


Status of this Memo

This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79. This document may not be modified, 
and derivative works of it may not be created, and it may not be 
published except as an Internet-Draft.

This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79. This document may not be modified,
and derivative works of it may not be created, except to publish it
 as an RFC and to translate it into languages other than English.

Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
Drafts.

Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents
at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as
reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html

This Internet-Draft will expire on April 26,25, 2012.



So                     Expires December 8,2011                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft    VPN-oriented Data Center Services        October 2011


Copyright Notice

Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
document authors. All rights reserved.

This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
(http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
publication of this document. Please review these documents
carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with
respect to this document. Code Components extracted from this
document must include Simplified BSD License text as described in
Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without
warranty as described in the Simplified BSD License.

Abstract

This contribution addresses the service providers' requirements to
support VPN-Oriented data center services. It describes the
characteristics and the framework of VPN-oriented data center
services and specifies the requirements on how to maintain and
manage the virtual resources within data center resources and the
supporting network infrastructures for those services.



Table of Contents


1. Introduction....................................................3
2. Conventions used in this document...............................4
3. Service defination and requirements.............................4
3.1. VPN-oriented data center computing services...................4
3.1.1. VPN-oriented data center computer service requirements......4
3.2. VPN-oriented data center storage services.....................5
3.2.1. VPN-oriented data center storage services requirments.......5
4. Requirments for data center networks in supporting VDCS.........6
4.1. Requirments for extending VPNs into data center using VPN
gateways...........................................................6
4.2. Requirments for extending VPNs into data center using intra-
data center VPN....................................................8
5. Data center resource management requirments for VDCS............8
6. Security requirements...........................................9
7. Other requirements..............................................9
8. References.....................................................10


So                   Expires December 26,25,2011               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft    VPN-oriented Data Center Services        October 2011


9. Acknowledgements...............................................13



1. Introduction

Layer 2 and 3 VPN services offer secure and logically dedicated
reachability among multiple sites for enterprises. VPN-oriented data
center service is for those VPN customers who want to offload some
dedicated user data center operations such as software, compute, and
storage, to the shared carrier data centers.  Those customers often
do not want to use public Internet as the primary network accessing
and handling the traffic between the customer (user and user data
centers) and the carrier data centers.  Instead, they would prefer
to use the carrier data center as a natural extension of the VPN
they are already using, realizing the benefits of a multi-tenant
data center while retaining as much control as possible.  For
example, they want to maintain the restrictive control on what and
how the virtualized data center resources, e.g., computing power,
disk space, and/or application licenses, can be shared.

VPN-Oriented Data center Services allow the VPN services to be
extended into carrier data centers and to control the virtual
resource sharing functions. As a carrier, a VPN-Oriented data center
service product may be offered globally across multiple data
centers. Some of the data centers may be owned by the cloud service
provider, while others may be owned by a partner of the service
provider and/or an enterprise user.  In addition, multiple VPN-
oriented data center Service products (e.g. SaaS and PaaS) can be
offered from the same data center.

VPN-Oriented data center services differentiate it from other
carrier data center services in the following aspects:

   o  Strictly maintaining the secure, reliable, and logical isolation
      characteristics of VPN for the end-to-end services provided.

   o  Making the traditional data center services (like computing,
      storage space, or application licenses) as additional attributes
      attached to VPNs.

   o  VPN is aware of how and what data center resources are associated
      with the VPN.





So                   Expires December 26,25,2011               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft    VPN-oriented Data Center Services        October 2011


   This draft describes the characteristics of those services, the
   service requirements, and the corresponding requirements to data
   center networks. It also describes a list of the problems that this
   service is causing to the network provider/operator, especially for
   the existing VPN customers. These issues must be addressed in order
   for service providers to facilitate the addition of virtualized
   services to the VPNs of existing customers.

2. Conventions used in this document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [RFC2119].

   In this document, these words will appear with that interpretation
   only when in ALL CAPS. Lower case uses of these words are not to be
   interpreted as carrying RFC-2119 significance.

3. Service definitions and requirements

   3.1. Virtual Private Computing Service (VPCS)

   This refers to Virtual Machines (VMs) and/or physical servers in a
   virtualized carrier data center being attached to a customer VPN. It
   is also known as National Institute of Science and Technology
   (NIST)'s Infrastructure-as-a-Service (IssS) being attached to a
   customer VPN. The customer can choose different properties on the
   computing power, preference on which data center to host those
   servers, and etc.

3.1.1. Virtual private computing services requirements

These requirements apply to all VPN-oriented data center services
defined in this draft unless specified otherwise.

   o  Any virtualized carrier data center providing VPCS SHALL be able
      to automatically provision and/or change the resources associated
      with the VM/Servers based on the signaled messages through the
      VPN. For example, the resources CAN be bandwidth, amount of
      memory, and/or CPU cycles associated with the VMs.

   o  VPN customers SHALL be able to automatically instantiate or
      remove Virtual Machines (VMs) inside the provider's DC using
      inband signaling requests sent by the user's host (VM/server).




So                   Expires December 26,25,2011               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft    VPN-oriented Data Center Services        October 2011


   o  VPN customers SHOULD be able to move VMs among customer private
      data centers and carrier data centers based on their own load
      balancing criteria and algorithm.

   o  VPN customers SHALL be able to monitor, log, and track all
      VM/server related usage information on per VPN basis.

   o  VPN customers SHALL be able to control if and how VM mobility can
      occur.

   3.2. Virtual private storage service (VPSS)

   This refers to disk space, either virtual or actual blocks of hard
   drives in data centers, being added to a customer's VPN

3.2.1. VPN-oriented data center storage service requirements

   o  The VPN customer SHOULD be able to choose different content
      replication properties.  For example, the customer can control if
      the content has to be replicated locally or has to be replicated
      at a geographically different location (identifiable by the
      customer if needed and subject to latency constraint); if the
      storage has to be co-located with certain VMs/hosts; or which
      VMs/hosts have access to the content, and etc.

   o  These storage properties SHOULD be associated with the VPN. Any
      data center providing the storage space for a VPN SHOULD be able
      to automatically provision or change the required storage space
      based on the properties associated with the VPN.

   o  The VPN customer SHOULD be able to automatically add disc space
      or remove disc space to the VPN's associated storage through the
      changing of the VPN properties.

   o  The VPN customer SHOULD have the ability to specify the stored
      content life cycle management properties.  Those properties
      include but not limited to how long the stored content shall be
      stored and how it should be erased/deleted.

   o  Control of whether data is encrypted.

   o  Specify required access speed for a storage hierarchy.







So                   Expires December 26,25,2011               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft    VPN-oriented Data Center Services        October 2011


4. Requirements for Data Center networks in support of VPN-Oriented
   Data center Services

   The success of VPN services in the enterprise and the government
   world is largely due to its ability to virtually segregate the
   customer traffic at layer 2 and layer 3. The lower the layer that
   segregation can be maintained, the safer it is for the customers
   from security and privacy perspectives. Today's Data Centers use
   VLANs to segregate servers and traffic from different customers.
   Since each customer usually needs multiple service zones to place
   different applications, each customer usually needs multiple VLANs.
   Even small data centers today can have thousands of VLANs.
   Therefore, pure VLAN segregation is not enough for large data
   centers. In addition, since carrier data center resources can be
   viewed as added attributes to VPNs, traffic segregation per VPN
   becomes an essential requirement to VPN-oriented data center
   services because of its ability to control the data center virtual
   resources' assignments, thus ensuring end-to-end resource allocation
   for service level performance insurance as well as manageability.

   4.1. Requirement for extending VPNs into data center networks using
      VPN gateways

   When a data center does not use L2VPN or L3VPN as the intra-data
   center network, but still wants to provide the VPN-oriented data
   center services for external VPN customers, a VPN gateway function
   can be added to the data center networks to extend the external VPNs
   into the data center networks and to connect with the VMs and
   virtual storage.  (Note that L2/3 data center network technology
   used can include TRILL, PBB, SPB, OpenFlow, STP, etc.) The VPN
   gateway function has to meet the following requirements:

       o Each external L2/L3VPN SHALL be given a unique Identification
          (ID), and the traffic separation within the data center SHALL
          be maintained per ID.
       o Each data center Service associated with a VPN SHALL be
          transmitted over an unique set of intra-data center network
          connections (logical or physical).
       o The VPN gateway SHOULD maintain a record and the mapping of
          virtual and physical data center resources to
          physical/logical connections associated with each specific
          VPN running the VPN-oriented data center services.
       o The carrier and the customer SHALL be able to monitor the
          resource assignment and usage per VPN per service.



So                   Expires December 26,25,2011               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft    VPN-oriented Data Center Services        October 2011


       o The customer SHOULD be able to dynamically re-configure the
          data center resources assignment and allocation per services
          and/or per VM through the re-configuration of its VPN
          properties.
       o Beyond L2/L3 reachability, VPN gateway SHALL support multiple
          services per VPN.
       o VPN gateway SHOULD have the capability to differentiate QoS
          within the VPN on per service basis.  For example, storage
          service may have higher QoS requirement than computing
          service.
       o VPN gateway SHOULD support multiple external VPN instances
          and SHOULD be able to map them to the associated services.
       o  VPN gateway SHALL maintain the reportable record of how
          traffic separation per VPN is achieved through the data
          center network.
       o Each external VPN SHALL be given a unique Identification
          (ID), and the traffic separation within the data center SHALL
          be maintained per ID.
       o The VPN gateway SHOULD maintain a record and the mapping of
          virtual and physical data center resources to
          physical/logical connections associated with each specific
          VPN running the VPN-oriented data center services.
       o The VPN gateway SHOULD be able to control the traffic flow
          and assign the dedicated virtual resources accordingly.
       o The carrier and the customer SHALL be able to monitor the
          resource assignment and usage per VPN per service.
       o The customer SHOULD be able to dynamically re-configure the
          data center resources assignment and allocation per services
          and/or per VM through the re-configuration of its VPN
          properties.
       o VPN gateway SHALL support multiple services per VPN.
       o VPN gateway SHOULD have the capability to differentiate QoS
          within the VPN on per service basis.  For example, storage
          service may have higher QoS requirement than computing
          service.
       o VPN gateway SHOULD support multiple external VPN instances
          and SHOULD be able to map them to the associated services.
       o  VPN gateway SHALL maintain the reportable record of how
          traffic separation per VPN is achieved through the data
          center network.  VPN Gateway SHOULD be able to allocated
          intra-data center network resources according to external VPN


So                   Expires December 26,25,2011               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft    VPN-oriented Data Center Services        October 2011


          network's requirements dynamically for bandwidth, QoS and
          traffic engineering purpose.

   4.2. Requirement for extending VPNs into data center networks using
      intra-data center VPN

   When a L2/3 VPN is used as the network technology inside the data
   center, each external VPN SHALL be mapped to a unique internal VPN.


5. Data Center Resource Management Requirements for VPN-oriented Data
   center Services

   Today, data center server resources are managed by data center
   servers' administrators or management systems, and supported by
   hypervisors on the servers. This process is invisible to the
   underlying networks. The data center management functions include
   managing servers, instantiating hosts to VMs, managing disk space,
   and etc.

   Traffic loading and balancing and QoS assignments for data center
   networks are not easily considered by some Data Center server
   administration systems. Therefore, there is an interworking gap
   between the networks and the Data Center's server administration
   systems.  This gap needs to be filled in order for the VPN-oriented
   data center service to operate.

   o  The resources in data center MUST be partitioned per VPN.

   o  The data center service orchestration system SHALL have the
      ability to dedicate a specific block of disk space per services
      per VPN. The dedicated block of disk space CAN be maintained
      permanently or temporarily per VPN requirement, controlled by the
      associated properties of VPN.

   o  The carrier and the VPN customer SHALL be able to monitor the
      dedicated block of disk space per VPN per services.

   o  If a VPN specifies its associated storage space to be accessible
      only by certain hosts, the VPN customer SHALL have the ability to
      indicate the mechanism used to prevent the unwanted data
      retrieval for the block of disk space after it is no longer used
      by the VPN, before it can be re-used by other parties.





So                   Expires December 26,25,2011               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft    VPN-oriented Data Center Services        October 2011


   o  The VPN SHALL have the ability to request dedicated network
      resources within the data center such as bandwidth and QoS
      settings.

   o  The VPN SHALL have the ability to hold the requested resources
      without sharing with any other parties.

   o  The external VPN's QoS assignments SHOULD be able to synchronize
      with the data center virtual resources' QoS assignments.


6. Security Requirements

   o  VPN-Oriented Data center Service SHOULD support a variety of
      security measures in securing tenancy of virtual resources such
      as resource locking, containment, authentication, access control,
      encryption, integrity measure, and etc.

   o  The VPN-Oriented Data center Service SHOULD allow the security to
      be configured end-to-end on a per-VPN/per-service/per-user basis.
      For example, the Data center Systems SHOULD be able to resource-
      lock resources such as memory, and also SHOULD be able provide a
      cleaning function to insure confidentiality before being
      reallocated.

   o  VPN-Oriented Data center Service SHOULD be able to specify an
      authentication mechanism based for both header and payload.
      Encryption algorithm CAN also be specified to provide additional
      security.

   o  Security boundaries CAN be specified and created per VPN to
      maintain domains of TRUSTED, UNTRUSTED, and Hybrid. Within each
      domain access control, additional techniques MAY be specified to
      secure resources and administrative domains.


7. Other Requirements

   o  The VPN-Oriented Data center Service SHALL support host-to-host
      configuration exchanges via inband signaling.







So                   Expires December 26,25,2011               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft    VPN-oriented Data Center Services        October 2011


   o  The VPN-Oriented data center service solution MUST have
      sufficient OAM mechanisms in place to allow consistent end-to-end
      management of the solution in existing deployed networks. The
      solution SHOULD use existing protocols (e.g., IEEE 802.1ag, ITU-T
      Y.1731, BFD) wherever possible to facilitate interoperability
      with existing OAM deployments.

8. References

Thanks to Paul Unbehagen, Linda Dunbar, Bhumip Khasnabish, LiZhong Jin, 
Norival Figueira, and Zhengping You for review this draft and providing
valuble inputs.

Authors' Addresses

     Ning So
     Verizon Inc.
     2400 N. Glenville Ave.,
     Richardson, TX75082
     ning.so@verizon.com

     Dave McDysan
     Verizon Inc.
     22001 Loudoun County PKWY.
     Ashburn, VA 20147
     Dave.mcdysan@verizon.com

     Henry Yu
     TW Telecom
     10475 Park Meadows Dr.
     Littleton, CO 80124
     Henry.yu@twtelecom.com


     John M. Heinz
     CenturyLink
     600 New Century PKWY
     KSNCAA0420-4B116
     New Century, KS 66031
     john.m.heinz@centurylink.com


9. Acknowledgments

   This document was prepared using 2-Word-v2.0.template.dot.




So                   Expires December 26,25,2011              [Page 10]

