







     
     
    Operations and Management Area Working Group                      N. So 
    Internet Draft                                             Verizon, Inc 
    Intended status: Informational                             P. Unbehagen 
    Expires: December 2011                                            Avaya 
                                                                  L. Dunbar 
                                                        Huawei Technologies 
                                                                       H.Yu 
                                                                 TW Telecom    
                                                          Bhumip Khasnabish 
                                                                LiZhong Jin 
                                                                        ZTE    
                                                                   J. Heinz 
                                                                CenturyLink 
                                                                 N.Figueira  
                                                                    Brocade 
                                                              Zhengping You 
                                                            AFORE Solutions 
                                                              July 11, 2011   
                                       
     
                                          
          Requirement and Framework for VPN-Oriented Data Center Services 
                               draft-so-vdcs-01.txt 


    Status of this Memo 

       This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the 
       provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.  

       This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the 
       provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79. This document may not be modified, 
       and derivative works of it may not be created, and it may not be 
       published except as an Internet-Draft. 

       This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the 
       provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79. This document may not be modified, 
       and derivative works of it may not be created, except to publish it 
       as an RFC and to translate it into languages other than English. 

       Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
       Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
       other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
       Drafts. 

       Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
       months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents 

     
     
     
    So                    Expires December 8,2011                [Page 1] 
     
    Internet-Draft    VPN-oriented Data Center Services          July 2011 
        

       at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as 
       reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 

       The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
       http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 

       The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
       http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html 

       This Internet-Draft will expire on January 11, 2012. 

    Copyright Notice 

       Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the 
       document authors. All rights reserved. 

       This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal 
       Provisions Relating to IETF Documents 
       (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of 
       publication of this document. Please review these documents 
       carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with 
       respect to this document. Code Components extracted from this 
       document must include Simplified BSD License text as described in 
       Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without 
       warranty as described in the Simplified BSD License. 

    Abstract 

       This contribution addresses the service providers' requirements to 
       support VPN-Oriented data center services. It describes the 
       characteristics and the framework of VPN-oriented data center 
       services and specifies the requirements on how to maintain and 
       manage the virtual resources within data center resources and the 
       supporting network infrastructures for those services.   

     

    Table of Contents 

     
    1. Introduction.......................................................3 
    2. Conventions used in this document..................................4 
    3. Service defination and requirements................................4 
      3.1. VPN-oriented data center computing services....................4 
        3.1.1. VPN-oriented data center computer service requirements.....4
      3.2. VPN-oriented data center storage services......................5  
     
     
    So                    Expires December 11,2011                [Page 2] 
        
    Internet-Draft    VPN-oriented Data Center Services          July 2011 
        

        3.2.1. VPN-oriented data center storage services requirments......5  
    4. Requirments for data center networks in supporting VDCS............6  
      4.1. Requirments for extending VPNs into data center using VPN 
           gateways.......................................................6 
      4.2. Requirments for extending VPNs into data center using 
           intra-data center VPN..........................................8   
    5. Data center resource management requirments for VDCS...............8 
    6. Security requirements..............................................9  
    7. Other requirements................................................10 
    8. VDCS framework....................................................10 
    9. References........................................................13 
    10. Acknowledgements.................................................14 
     
        

    1. Introduction 

       Layer 2 and 3 VPN services offer secure and logically dedicated 
       connectivity among multiple sites for enterprises. VPN-oriented data 
       center service is for those VPN customers who want to offload some 
       dedicated user data center operations such as software, compute, and 
       storage, to the shared carrier data centers.  Those customers often 
       do not want to use public Internet as the primary network accessing 
       and handling the traffic between the customer (user and user data 
       centers) and the carrier data centers.  Instead, they would prefer 
       to use the carrier data center as an nature extension of the VPN 
       they are already using, realizing the benefits of a multi-tenant 
       data center while retaining as much control as possible.  For 
       example, they want to maintain the restrictive control on what and 
       how the virtualized data center resources, e.g., computing power, 
       disk spaces, and/or application licenses, can be shared.  

       VPN-Oriented Data center Services allow the VPN services to be 
       extended into carrier data centers and to control the virtual 
       resources sharing functions. As a carrier, a VPN-Oriented data 
       center service product may be offered globally across multiple data 
       centers. Some of the data centers may be owned by the carrier, while 
       others may be owned by a user/partner/vendor.  In addition, multiple 
       VPN-oriented data center Service products can be offered from the 
       same data center.  

       VPN-Oriented data center services differentiate it from other 
       carrier services in the following aspects: 

       o Strictly maintaining the secure, reliable, and logical isolation 
          characteristics of VPN for the end-to-end services provided.  
     
     
    So                    Expires December 11,2011                [Page 3] 
        
    Internet-Draft    VPN-oriented Data Center Services          July 2011 
        

       o Making the traditional data center services (like computing, 
          storage space, or application licenses) as additional attributes 
          to VPNs.  

       o VPN having the control on how and what data center resources to 
          be associated with the VPN.  

       This draft describes the characteristics of those services, the 
       service requirements, and the corresponding requirements to data 
       center networks. It also describes a list of the problems that this 
       service is causing to the network provider/operator, especially for 
       the existing VPN customers. These issues must be addressed in order 
       for service providers to facilitate the addition of virtualized 
       services to the VPNs of existing customers. 

    2. Conventions used in this document 

       The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
       "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
       document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [RFC2119].  

       In this document, these words will appear with that interpretation   
       only when in ALL CAPS. Lower case uses of these words are not to be    
       interpreted as carrying RFC-2119 significance. 

    3. Service definitions and requirements  

        3.1. VPN-oriented data center computing service 

       This refers to Virtual Machines (VMs) and/or physical servers in a 
       virtualized carrier data center being attached to a customer VPN. 
       The customer can choose different properties on the computing power, 
       such as dedicated servers, preference on which data center to host 
       those servers, or special VMs which are shared with a group of other 
       VPN customers, and etc.  

    3.1.1. VPN-oriented data center computing services requirements 

    These requirements apply to all VPN-oriented data center services 
    described in this draft unless specified otherwise.  

       o Any virtualized carrier data center providing the VPN-oriented 
          computing services SHOULD be able to automatically provision 
          and/or change the required resources based on the specified 
          properties associated with a VPN.  

     
     
    So                    Expires December 11,2011                [Page 4] 
        
    Internet-Draft    VPN-oriented Data Center Services          July 2011 
        

       o VPN customers SHALL be able to automatically instantiate or 
          remove Virtual Machines (VMs) to/from the VPN's associated hosts 
          or dedicated servers through the changing of the customer's VPN 
          properties. 

       o VPN customers SHOULD be able to move VMs among customer private 
          data centers and carrier data centers based on their own load 
          balancing criteria and algorithm.  

       o VPN customers SHALL be able to monitor, log, and track all VM 
          usage information on per user, per resource pool, and per 
          application basis. 

       o VPN customers and the service provider SHALL be able to monitor, 
          log, and track all VM user information. 

       o VPN customers SHALL be able to automatically add/remove physical 
          servers associated with the VPN through the changing of the 
          customer's VPN properties. 

       o VPN customers SHOULD be able to provision a new VPN and new 
          service based on the properties associated with an existing VPN 
          and service using the same set (or sub set) of existing physical 
          infrastructure.   

       o VPN customers SHALL be able to control if and how VM mobility can 
          occur. 

        3.2. VPN-oriented data center storage service 

       This refers to disk space, either virtual or actual blocks of hard 
       drives in data centers, being added to a customer's VPN 

    3.2.1. VPN-oriented data center storage service requirements 

       o The VPN customer SHOULD be able to choose different content 
          replication properties.  For example, the customer can control if 
          the content has to be replicated locally or has to be replicated 
          at a geographically different location (identifiable by the 
          customer if needed); if the storage has to be co-located with 
          certain VMs/hosts; or which VMs/hosts have access to the content, 
          and etc.   

       o These storage properties SHOULD be associated with the VPN. Any 
          data center providing the storage space for a VPN SHOULD be able 
          to automatically provision or change the required storage space 
          based on the properties associated with the VPN.  
     
     
    So                    Expires December 11,2011                [Page 5] 
        
    Internet-Draft    VPN-oriented Data Center Services          July 2011 
        

       o The VPN customer SHOULD be able to automatically add disc space 
          or remove disc space to the VPN's associated storage through the 
          changing of the VPN properties. 

       o The VPN customer SHALL have the ability to limit the mobility of 
          the stored data based on the VPN's reachability.  

       o The VPN customer SHOULD have the ability to specify the stored 
          content life cycle management properties.  Those properties 
          include but not limited to how long the stored content shall be 
          stored and how it should be erased/deleted.  

    4. Requirements for Data Center networks in support of VPN-Oriented 
       Data center Services 

       The success of VPN services in the enterprise and the government 
       world is largely due to its ability to virtually segregate the 
       customer traffic at layer 2 and layer 3. The lower the layer that 
       segregation can be maintained, the safer it is for the customers 
       from security and privacy perspectives. Today's Data Centers use 
       VLANs to segregate servers and traffic from different customers. 
       Since each customer usually needs multiple service zones to place 
       different applications, each customer usually needs multiple VLANs. 
       Even small data centers today can have thousands of VLANs.  
       Therefore, pure VLAN segregation is not enough for large data 
       centers. In addition, since carrier data center resources can be 
       viewed as added attributes to VPNs, traffic segregation per VPN 
       becomes an essential requirement to VPN-oriented data center 
       services because of its ability to control the data center virtual 
       resources' assignments, thus ensuring end-to-end resource allocation 
       for service level performance insurance as well as manageability.    

        4.1. Requirement for extending VPNs into data center networks using 
           VPN gateways 

       When a data center does not use L2VPN or L3VPN as the intra-data 
       center network, but still wants to provide the VPN-oriented data 
       center services for external VPN customers, a VPN gateway function 
       can be added to the data center networks to extend the external VPNs 
       into the data center networks and to connect with the VMs and 
       virtual storages.  (None L2/3 data center network technology used 
       can include TRILL, PBB, SPB, OpenFlow, STP, and etc.) The VPN 
       gateway function has to meet the following requirements:  



     
     
    So                    Expires December 11,2011                [Page 6] 
        
    Internet-Draft    VPN-oriented Data Center Services          July 2011 
        

            o Each external VPN SHALL be given a unique Identification 
              (ID), and the traffic separation within the data center SHALL 
              be maintained per ID. 
            o Each data center Service associated with a VPN SHALL be 
              transmitted over an unique set of intra-data center network 
              connections (logical or physical). 
            o The VPN gateway SHOULD maintain a record and the mapping of 
              virtual and physical data center resources to 
              physical/logical connections associated with each specific 
              VPN running the VPN-oriented data center services.  
            o The VPN gateway SHOULD be able to control the traffic flow 
              and assign the dedicated virtual resources accordingly. 
            o The carrier and the customer SHALL be able to monitor the 
              resource assignment and usage per VPN per service. 
            o The customer SHOULD be able to dynamically re-configure the 
              data center resources assignment and allocation per services 
              and/or per VM through the re-configuration of its VPN 
              properties. 
            o VPN gateway SHALL support multiple services per VPN. 
            o VPN gateway SHOULD have the capability to differentiate QoS 
              within the VPN on per service basis.  For example, storage 
              service may have higher QoS requirement than computing 
              service. 
            o VPN gateway SHOULD support multiple external VPN instances 
              and SHOULD be able to map them to the associated services.  
            o  VPN gateway SHALL maintain the reportable record of how 
              traffic separation per VPN is achieved through the data 
              center network.   

            o Each external VPN SHALL be given a unique Identification 
              (ID), and the traffic separation within the data center SHALL 
              be maintained per ID. 
            o Each data center Service associated with a VPN SHALL be 
              transmitted over an unique set of intra-data center network 
              connections (logical or physical). 
            o The VPN gateway SHOULD maintain a record and the mapping of 
              virtual and physical data center resources to 
              physical/logical connections associated with each specific 
              VPN running the VPN-oriented data center services.  
            o The VPN gateway SHOULD be able to control the traffic flow 
              and assign the dedicated virtual resources accordingly. 

     
     
    So                    Expires December 11,2011                [Page 7] 
        
    Internet-Draft    VPN-oriented Data Center Services          July 2011 
        

            o The carrier and the customer SHALL be able to monitor the 
              resource assignment and usage per VPN per service. 
            o The customer SHOULD be able to dynamically re-configure the 
              data center resources assignment and allocation per services 
              and/or per VM through the re-configuration of its VPN 
              properties. 
            o VPN gateway SHALL support multiple services per VPN. 
            o VPN gateway SHOULD have the capability to differentiate QoS 
              within the VPN on per service basis.  For example, storage 
              service may have higher QoS requirement than computing 
              service. 
            o VPN gateway SHOULD support multiple external VPN instances 
              and SHOULD be able to map them to the associated services.  
            o  VPN gateway SHALL maintain the reportable record of how 
              traffic separation per VPN is achieved through the data 
              center network.  VPN Gateway SHOULD be able to allocated 
              intra-data center network resources according to external VPN 
              network's requirements dynamically for bandwidth, QoS and 
              traffic engineering purpose.  

        4.2. Requirement for extending VPNs into data center networks using 
           intra-data center VPN 

       When a L2/3 VPN is used as the network technology inside the data 
       center, each external VPN SHALL be mapped to a unique internal VPN. 

        

    5. Data Center Resource Management Requirements for VPN-oriented Data 
       center Services 

       Today, data center server resources are managed by data center 
       servers' administrators or management systems, and supported by 
       hypervisors on the servers. This process is invisible to the 
       underlying networks. The data center management functions include 
       managing servers, instantiating hosts to VMs, managing disk space, 
       and etc.   

       Traffic loading and balancing and QoS assignments for data center 
       networks are not considered by Data Center's server administration 
       systems. Therefore, there is an interworking gap between the 
       networks and the Data Center's server administration systems.  This 
       gap needs to be filled in order for the VPN-oriented data center 
       service to operate. 

     
     
    So                    Expires December 11,2011                [Page 8] 
        
    Internet-Draft    VPN-oriented Data Center Services          July 2011 
        

       o The resources in data center MUST be partitioned per VPN instead 
          of per customer. 

       o The data center service orchestration system SHALL have the 
          ability to dedicate a specific block of disk space per services 
          per VPN. The dedicated block of disk space CAN be maintained 
          permanently or temporarily per VPN requirement, controlled by the 
          associated properties of VPN. 

       o The carrier and the VPN customer SHALL be able to monitor the 
          dedicated block of disk space per VPN per services.  

       o If a VPN specifies its associated storage space to be accessible 
          only by certain hosts, the VPN customer SHALL have the ability to 
          indicate the mechanism used to prevent the unwanted data 
          retrieval for the block of disk space after it is no longer used 
          by the VPN, before it can be re-used by other parties. 

       o The VPN SHALL have the ability to request dedicated network 
          resources within the data center such as bandwidth and QoS 
          settings. 

       o The VPN SHALL have the ability to hold the requested resources 
          without sharing with any other parties. 

       o The external VPN's QoS assignments SHOULD be able to synchronize 
          with the data center virtual resources' QoS assignments.   

        

    6. Security Requirements 

       o VPN-Oriented Data center Service SHOULD support a variety of 
          security measures in securing tenancy of virtual resources such 
          as resource locking, containment, authentication, access control, 
          encryption, integrity measure, and etc.  

       o The VPN-Oriented Data center Service SHOULD allow the security to 
          be configured end-to-end on a per-VPN/per-service/per-user basis. 
          For example, the Data center Systems SHOULD be able to resource-
          lock resources such as memory, and also SHOULD be able provide a 
          cleaning function to insure confidentiality before being 
          reallocated. 




     
     
    So                    Expires December 11,2011                [Page 9] 
        
    Internet-Draft    VPN-oriented Data Center Services          July 2011 
        

       o VPN-Oriented Data center Service SHOULD be able to specify an 
          authentication mechanism based for both header and payload. 
          Encryption algorithm CAN also be specified to provide additional 
          security. 

       o Security boundaries CAN be specified and created per VPN to 
          maintain domains of TRUSTED, UNTRUSTED, and Hybrid. Within each 
          domain access control, additional techniques MAY be specified to 
          secure resources and administrative domains.  

        

    7. Other Requirements 

       o The VPN-Oriented Data center Service SHALL support automatic end-
          to-end network configuration. 

       o The VPN-Oriented data center service solution MUST have 
          sufficient OAM mechanisms in place to allow consistent end-to-end 
          management of the solution in existing deployed networks. The 
          solution SHOULD use existing protocols (e.g., IEEE 802.1ag, ITU-T 
          Y.1731, BFD) wherever possible to facilitate interoperability 
          with existing OAM deployments.  

        

    8. VPN-oriented Data center Service Framework 

       VPN-oriented data center services do not alter the physical 
       connectivity of the service supporting infrastructure. Instead, the 
       framework augments the VPN associated properties on the carrier's 
       VPN PE router.  In addition, it provides a generic interworking 
       framework between the VPN and the data center network, exposing the 
       IP/MAC address of the VMs directly to the VPN.   

       The VPN-oriented data center services are flexible on the identities 
       of service end points, covering all VPN use cases in existence 
       today. It can be point-to-point and/or multi-point-to-multi-point, 
       and everything in between.  The service can be between carrier data 
       center and enterprise private data center, or between carrier data 
       center and a remote VPN user.   

       Below are three framework diagrams illustrating L3VPN-oriented data 
       center services.  The frameworks for L2VPN-oriented data center 
       services would be very similar to the ones shown here, using MAC 
       addresses instead of IP addresses. 

     
     
    So                    Expires December 11,2011               [Page 10] 
        
    Internet-Draft    VPN-oriented Data Center Services          July 2011 
        

       Figure 1 shows an exemplary framework where 4 unique VPNs (customer 
       LAN) accessing a carrier multi-tenant data center.   

       Figure 2 shows the logical view of the framework from the vantage 
       point of the data center PE router. 

       Figure 3 shows the logical view of the service from the vantage 
       point of the individual VM and/or VPN customer.  Please note that 
       VM/customer belong to each VPN can only see everything within its 
       own VPN, although all 4 VPNs are shown on the drawing. 

        
       VPN1[10.1.X.X]-SW-CE-PE----          ----PE-CE-SW-VPN2[10.130.X.X] 
                                  \        /                     
                                   \      /               
                                   BACKBONE                       
                                   /  |   \               
                                  /   |    \                  
       VPN3[100.12.X.X]-SW-CE-PE--    |     --PE-CE-SW-VPN4[170.4.X.X] 
                                      |                      
                                      |                       
                                    DC PE                         
                                      |                     
                                      |                  
                                    DC CE                   
                                      |                
                                      |                  
                                VPN1[10.2.X.X]                         
                               VPN2[10.120.X.X] 
                               VPN3[101.30.X.X] 
                               VPN4[170.10.X.X]      
            
        
            Figure 1 Physical View of L3VPN-oriented Data Center Services 

        










     
     
    So                    Expires December 11,2011               [Page 11] 
        
    Internet-Draft    VPN-oriented Data Center Services          July 2011 
        

       VPN1[10.1.X.X]-PE{VPN GATEWAY}      PE{VPN GATEWAY}-VPN2[10.130.X.X] 
                                    \        /                     
                                     \      /               
                                     BACKBONE                       
                                     /  |   \               
                                    /   |    \                  
       VPN3[100.12.X.X]-PE{VPN GATEWAY} |   PE{VPN GATEWAY}-VPN4[170.4.X.X] 
                                        |                      
                                        |                       
                                 PE{VPN GATEWAY} 
                                        |                     
                                        |                  
                                 VPN1[10.2.X.X]                         
                                VPN2[10.120.X.X] 
                                VPN3[101.30.X.X] 
                                VPN4[170.10.X.X]      
            
          

         Figure 2.  Logical View at Data Center VPN PE Router 

        

       VPN1[10.1.X.X]                                     VPN2[10.130.X.X] 
                     -PE{VPN GATEWAY}     PE{VPN GATEWAY}-             
       VPN1[10.2.X.X]             \          /             VPN2[10.120.X.X] 
                                   \        /                     
                                    \      /               
                                    BACKBONE                       
                                    /      \               
                                   /        \                  
       VPN3[100.12.X.X]           /          \             VPN4[170.4.X.X] 
                       -PE{VPN GATEWAY}    PE{VPN GATEWAY}-                         
       VPN3[101.30.X.X]                                    VPN4[170.10.X.X]         
           
        
         Figure 3.  Logical View of L3VPN-ORIENTED Data Center Services 

        

        






     
     
    So                    Expires December 11,2011               [Page 12] 
        
    Internet-Draft    VPN-oriented Data Center Services          July 2011 
        

    9. References 

    Authors' Addresses 

         Ning So 
         Verizon Inc. 
         2400 N. Glenville Ave., 
         Richardson, TX75082 
         ning.so@verizonbusiness.com 
             
         Paul Unbehagen 
         Avaya 
         unbehagen@avaya.com 
        
         Linda Dunbar  
         Huawei Technologies  
         5340 Legacy Drive, Suite 175  
         Plano, TX 75024, USA   
         Linda.dunbar@huawei.com  
        
         Henry Yu 
         TW Telecom 
         10475 Park Meadows Dr. 
         Littleton, CO 80124 
         Henry.yu@twtelecom.com 
        
         Bhumip Khasnabish 
         ZTE 
         vumip1@gmail.com 
          
         LiZhong Jin 
         ZTE 
         889 Bibo Road 
         Shanghai, 201203, China 
         lizhong.jin@zte.com.cn 
          
         John M. Heinz 
         CenturyLink 
         600 New Century PKWY 
         KSNCAA0420-4B116 
         New Century, KS 66031 
         john.m.heinz@centurylink.com 

     
     
    So                    Expires December 11,2011               [Page 13] 
        
    Internet-Draft    VPN-oriented Data Center Services          July 2011 
        

          
          Norival Figueira 
         Brocade Networks 
         130 Holger Way 
         San Jose, CA 95134 
         nfigueir@brocade.com 
          
         Zhengping You 
         AFORE Solutions 
         2680 Queensview Dr., 
         Ottawa, Ontario Canada K2B819 
         Zhengping.you@aforesolutions.com 
        

    10. Acknowledgments 

       This document was prepared using 2-Word-v2.0.template.dot. 

        


























     
     
    So                    Expires December 11,2011               [Page 14] 
        

