Operations and Management Area Working Group                      N. So
Internet Draft                                                Verizon
Intended status: Standard Track                           P. Unbehagen
Expires: Sept 2011                                         Alcatel-Lu
                                                            L. Dunbar
                                                               Huawei
                                                                 H.Yu
                                                           TW Telecom
                                                             J. Heinz
                                                          CenturyLink
                                                           N.Figueira
                                                              Brocade
                                                         March 7, 2011


         Requirement and Framework for VPN-Oriented Cloud Services

                         draft-so-vpn-o-cs-00.txt


Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 7, 2011.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors. All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents



So                   Expires September 7, 2011               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft       VPN-oriented Cloud Services            March 2011


   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the BSD License.

Abstract

   This contribution addresses the service providers' requirements to
   support VPN-Oriented Cloud services. It describes the characteristics
   of VPN-oriented Cloud Service and specifies the requirement on how to
   maintain and manage the data center resources for those services.

Conventions used in this document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 Error!
   Reference source not found..

Table of Contents


   1. Introduction ................................................ 3
   2. Terminology ................................................. 3
   3. Service definitions and requirements ........................ 4
   4. Requirements of Data Center networks in support of VPN-Oriented
   Cloud Services ................................................. 5
   5. Data Center Resource Management Requirements for VPN-oriented
   Cloud Service .................................................. 6
   6. Security Requirement ........................................ 7
   7. Other Requirements .......................................... 7
   8. IANA Considerations ......................................... 8
   9. Acknowledgments ............................................. 8
   10. References ................................................. 8
   Authors' Addresses ............................................. 8
   Intellectual Property Statement................................. 9
   Disclaimer of Validity ......................................... 9









So                      Expires Sept7, 2011                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft       VPN-oriented Cloud Services            March 2011


1. Introduction

   Layer 2 and 3 VPN services offer secure and logically dedicated
   connectivity among multiple sites for enterprises. VPN-oriented Cloud
   Service is for those VPN customers who want to offload some dedicated
   user data center operations such as software, compute, and storage,
   to the shared cloud centers.  Those customers often do not feel
   comfortable using public Internet as the cloud center access network.
   They also have more restrictive requirements on what and how the
   virtualized cloud center resources, e.g., computing power, disk
   spaces, and/or application licenses, can be shared.

   VPN-Oriented Cloud Services allow the VPN services to be extended
   into cloud data centers and to control the virtual resources sharing
   functions. As a network and cloud service provider, a VPN-Oriented
   Cloud-service product may be offered globally across multiple data
   centers. Some of the data centers may be owned by a network provider,
   while others may be owned by a partner/vendor.  In addition, multiple
   VPN-oriented Cloud-Service products can be offered from the same data
   center.

   VPN-Oriented Cloud Services differentiate itself from other cloud
   services in the following aspects:

     Strictly maintaining the secure, reliable, and logical isolation
     characteristics of VPN;
     Making the traditional data center services (like computing,
     storage space, or application licenses) as additional attributes to
     VPNs.
     VPN having the control on how and what data center resources to be
     associated with the VPN.
   This draft describes the characteristics of those services, their
   service requirements, and the corresponding requirements to data
   center networks. It also describes a list of the problems that this
   service is causing to the network provider/operator, especially for
   the existing VPN customers. These issues must be addressed
   immediately in order for service providers to facilitate the addition
   of Cloud-based services to the VPNs of existing customer.

2. Terminology

   DC:      Data Center


So                      Expires Sept7, 2011                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft       VPN-oriented Cloud Services            March 2011


   VM:     Virtual Machines

   VPN:     Virtual Private Network

3. Service definitions and requirements

   There are various types of VPN-Oriented Cloud Services. Here are just
   some examples:

     VPN-oriented cloud computing service
     This refers to Virtual Machines (VMs) and/or physical servers in a
     cloud data center being added to a VPN customer. The VPN customer
     can choose different properties on the computing power, such as
     dedicated servers, preference on which data center to host those
     servers, or special VMs which are shared with a group of other VPN
     customers, and etc.

     Any cloud data center providing the VPN-oriented computing services
     SHOULD be able to automatically provision and/or change the
     required resources based on the specified properties associated
     with a VPN.

     VPN customers SHALL be able to automatically instantiate or remove
     hosts to/from the VPN's associated Virtual Machines or dedicated
     servers through the changing of the customer's VPN properties.

     VPN-oriented cloud storage service
     This refers to disk space, either virtual or actual blocks of hard
     drives in data centers, being added to a customer's VPN. The VPN
     customer SHOULD be able to choose different properties on the
     storage space, such as: if the content has to replicated locally or
     has to be replicated at geographically different locations; if the
     storage has to be co-located with certain hosts; or which hosts
     have access to the content, and etc.

     These properties are strictly associated with the VPN. Any data
     center providing the storage space for a VPN SHOULD be able to
     automatically provision or change the required storage space based
     on the property associated with the VPN.






So                      Expires Sept7, 2011                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft       VPN-oriented Cloud Services            March 2011


     The VPN customer SHOULD be able to automatically add disc space or
     remove disc space to the VPN's associated storage through the
     changing of the VPN properties.

     Each VPN SHALL have the ability to limit the mobility of the stored
     data to a certain geographic region confinement (country/state).



4. Requirements of Data Center networks in support of VPN-Oriented Cloud
   Services

   The success of VPN services in the enterprise and the government
   world is largely due to its ability to virtually segregate the
   customer traffic at layer 2 and layer 3. The lower the layer that
   segregation can be maintained, the safer it is for the customers from
   security and privacy perspectives. Today's Data Centers use VLANs to
   segregate servers and traffic from different customers. Since each
   customer usually needs multiple zones (e.g., DMZ, Web Server zone,
   and etc) to place different applications, each customer usually needs
   multiple VLANs. Even small data centers today already consume several
   thousands of VLANs.  Therefore, pure VLAN segregation is not enough
   for large data centers.

   Network service providers view data center resources as added
   attributes to VPNs. Therefore, traffic segregation per VPN is an
   essential requirement to the success of VPN-oriented Cloud-Services
   in the enterprises and government markets. Other essential
   requirements include:

     Requirements for extending VPNs into data center networks using VPN
     gateways:
        o The Cloud Service associated with certain VPN(s) SHALL be
          transmitted over a pre-defined set of connections, and each
          VPN utilizing the service SHALL be transmitted over a sub-set
          of logical connections.
        o The VPN gateway should maintain a mapping among Virtual or
          physical Resources, physical/logical connections, with
          specific VPNs.
        o The VPN Gateway SHOULD be able to control the connection
          traffic flow and assign the dedicated virtual resources
          accordingly.




So                      Expires Sept7, 2011                  [Page 5]

Internet-Draft       VPN-oriented Cloud Services            March 2011


     Independent of the L2/3 technology, e.g., TRILL, PBB, SPB,
     OpenFlow, and etc, used for connecting external (customer) VPNs and
     data center virtual resources, e.g., , each VPN SHALL be given a
     unique Service ID, and traffic separation SHALL be maintained per
     Service ID.
     When a L2/3 VPN is used as the network technology connecting the
     external (customer) VPN and the data center virtual resources, each
     external VPN SHALL be mapped to a unique internal VPN.


5. Data Center Resource Management Requirements for VPN-oriented Cloud
   Service

   Today, data center server resources are managed by data center
   servers' administrators or management systems, and supported by
   hypervisors on the servers. The entire process is invisible to the
   underlying networks. The data center management functions today
   include managing servers, instantiating hosts to VMs, managing disk
   space, and etc.

   Traffic loading and balancing and QoS assignments for data center
   networks are usually not considered by Data Center's server
   administration systems. There shall be a way that the VPN can connect
   with the Data Center's server administration systems that are
   important to the concept and spirit of the VPN:

     The resources in data center MUST be partitioned per VPN's
      requirements instead of the traditional partitioning per customer.
     The Cloud orchestration system SHALL have the ability to dedicate
      a specific block of disk space per services per VPN.
     If a VPN requires dedicated access to blocks of disk space, the
      data center disk management system SHALL allocate the required
      disk space per VPN and be able to let VPN automatically retrieve
      the identification of those disk spaces.
     If a VPN specifies its associated storage space to be accessible
      only by certain hosts, the data center disk management system
      SHALL have the ability to indicate the mechanism used to prevent
      the unwanted data retrieval for the block of disk space after it
      is no longer used by the VPN, before it can be re-used by other
      parties.




So                      Expires Sept7, 2011                  [Page 6]

Internet-Draft       VPN-oriented Cloud Services            March 2011


     The VPN SHALL have the ability to request dedicated L2/3 network
      resources within the data center such as bandwidth, priorities,
      and so on.
     The VPN SHALL have the ability to hold the requested resources
      without sharing with any other parties.
     The VPN's QoS assignments SHOULD be able to synchronize with the
      Cloud virtual resources' QoS assignments.


6. Security Requirements

       VPN-Oriented Cloud Service SHOULD support a variety of security
        measures in securing tenancy of virtual resources such as
        resource locking, containment, authentication, access control,
        encryption, integrity measure, and etc.
       The VPN-Oriented Cloud Service SHOULD allow the security to be
        configured end-to-end on a per VPN per-user basis. For example,
        the Virtual Systems MUST resource-lock resources such as memory,
        but must also provide a cleaning function to insure
        confidentiality before being reallocated.
       VPN-Oriented Cloud Service for private Clouds SHOULD specify an
        authentication mechanism based on an authentication algorithm
        (MD5, HMAC-SHA-1) for both header and payload. Encryption MAY
        also be use to provide confidentiality.
       Security boundaries MAY also be create to maintain domains of
        TRUSTED, UNTRUSTED, and Hybrid. Within each domain access
        control, techniques MAY be used to secure resources and
        administrative domains.


7. Other Requirements

       The VPN-Oriented Cloud Service SHALL support automatic end-to-
        end network configuration.
       The VPN-Oriented Cloud Service solution MUST have sufficient OAM
        mechanisms in place to allow consistent end-to-end management of
        the solution in existing deployed networks. The solution SHOULD
        use existing protocols (e.g., IEEE 802.1ag, ITU-T Y.1731, BFD)
        wherever possible to facilitate interoperability with existing
        OAM deployments.



So                      Expires Sept7, 2011                  [Page 7]

Internet-Draft       VPN-oriented Cloud Services            March 2011


8. IANA Considerations

9. Acknowledgments

   This document was prepared using 2-Word-v2.0.template.dot.

10. References

Authors' Addresses

     Ning So
     Verizon Inc.
     2400 N. Glenville Ave.,
     Richardson, TX75082
     ning.so@verizonbusiness.com

     Paul Unbehagen
     Alcatel-Lucent
     8742 Lucent Boulevard
     Highlands Ranch, CO 80129
   paul.unbehagen@alcatel-lucent.com

   Linda Dunbar
   Huawei Technologies
   1700 Alma Drive, Suite 500
   Plano, TX 75075, USA
   Linda.dunbar@huawei.com

   Henry Yu
   TW Telecom
   10475 Park Meadows Dr.
   Littleton, CO 80124
   Henry.yu@twtelecom.com

   John M. Heinz
   CenturyLink
   600 New Century PKWY
   KSNCAA0420-4B116
   New Century, KS 66031
   john.m.heinz@centurylink.com

    Norival Figueira
   Brocade Networks



So                      Expires Sept7, 2011                  [Page 8]

Internet-Draft       VPN-oriented Cloud Services            March 2011


   130 Holger Way
   San Jose, CA 95134
   nfigueir@brocade.com




Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF Trust takes no position regarding the validity or scope of
   any Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be
   claimed to pertain to the implementation or use of the technology
   described in any IETF Document or the extent to which any license
   under such rights might or might not be available; nor does it
   represent that it has made any independent effort to identify any
   such rights.

   Copies of Intellectual Property disclosures made to the IETF
   Secretariat and any assurances of licenses to be made available, or
   the result of an attempt made to obtain a general license or
   permission for the use of such proprietary rights by implementers or
   users of this specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR
   repository at http://www.ietf.org/ipr

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   any standard or specification contained in an IETF Document. Please
   address the information to the IETF at ietf-ipr@ietf.org.

Disclaimer of Validity

   All IETF Documents and the information contained therein are provided
   on an "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE
   REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE
   IETF TRUST AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL
   WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY
   WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION THEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE
   ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS
   FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.



So                      Expires Sept7, 2011                  [Page 9]

Internet-Draft       VPN-oriented Cloud Services            March 2011

















































So                      Expires Sept7, 2011                 [Page 10]

