Network                                                     N. So
Internet Draft                                         D. McDysan
Intended status: Informational                       Verizon, Inc
Expires: April 2012                                          H.Yu
                                                       TW Telecom
                                                         J. Heinz
                                                      CenturyLink
                                                  Maria Napierala
                                                     James Uttaro
                                                             AT&T
                                                 October 24, 2011



Requirements of Layer 3 Virtual Private Network for Data Centers
                          draft-so-vpn4dc-00.txt


Status of this Memo

This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79. This document may not be modified, 
and derivative works of it may not be created, and it may not 
be published except as an Internet-Draft.

This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79. This document may not be modified, 
and derivative works of it may not be created, except to publish 
it as an RFC and to translate it into languages other than English.

Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
Drafts.

Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other 
documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts 
as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html

Copyright Notice
Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the 
document authors. All rights reserved.

This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal 
Provisions Relating to IETF Documents 
(http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date 
of publication of this document. Please review these documents 
carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with 
respect to this document. Code Components extracted from this 
document must include Simplified BSD License text as described 
in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided 
without warranty as described in the Simplified BSD License.


Abstract

This contribution addresses service provider requirements to 
provide host-to-host connectivity through Layer 3 Virtual 
Private Networks (L3VPNs).  It describes the use cases and 
the characteristics of hosts in data centers automatically 
joining the L3VPN.  It specifies the requirements on how to 
maintain and manage such host-to-host connectivity through 
L3VPN, so that automated provisioning, monitoring, and 
reporting of the cloud services can be achieved.


Table of Contents


1. Introduction.................................................3
2. Conventions used in this document............................3
3. Definitions..................................................3
4. Use case utlizing L3VPN for DC   ............................4
5. Connectivity requirments for hosts in DCs joining L3VPN......5
6. Authors' addresses...........................................7
7. Acknowledgement..............................................7










So                      Expires April 24,2011                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft    VPN-oriented Data Center Services        October 2011


1. Introduction

L3VPN services offer secure and logically dedicated connectivity
among multiple sites for enterprises. Capabilities allowing hosts 
in data centers to join L3VPN via inband signaling and/or protocol 
interworking is suited for those VPN customers who want to temporarily 
offload or augment some dedicated user data center
operations such as software, compute, and storage, to the shared
carrier data centers.  These customers often view the public
Internet as less secure than a L3VPN. Therefore, L3VPN is the
primary network accessing and handling the traffic between the
customer (user and user data centers) and the carrier multi-tenant 
data centers.  Furthermore, if technology were developed to make the 
carrier data center a natural extension of the VPN they are already 
using, the benefits of a multi-tenant data center could be achieved 
while retaining as much control, security and isolation as currently 
delivered by the L3VPN service.

The seamless host-to-host connectivity through L3VPN is the
foundation for controlled communication interworking between the
Virtual Machines (VM) hosts and Virtual Network Attached Storage
(vNAS) in a Virtual Data Center (VDC) logically dedicated to an
enterprise spanning provider DCs and enterprise DCs.  For example, 
the L3VPN network can be used as a common control point for 
host-to-host communications as well as access to other virtualized 
data center resources, such as firewalls, security functions and 
load balancers.  Extensions to L3VPN could automate at least the 
following aspects of a VDC: service ordering/provisioning, 
monitoring/troubleshooting, logging and auditing, security 
assurance, and location control of VMs.

2. Conventions used in this document

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
"SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in 
this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [RFC2119].

In this document, these words will appear with that interpretation 
only when in ALL CAPS. Lower case uses of these words are not to be 
interpreted as carrying RFC-2119 significance.

3. Definitions

   DC: Data Center

   VM: Virtual Machine


So                      Expires April 24,2011                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft    VPN-oriented Data Center Services        October 2011


Host: VM or dedicated server in data center

VPN Gateway (VPN GW): a VPN CE router (Data Center gateway
switch/router) function that allows the VPN4DC connectivity to be
established through the CE router.

Virtual Data Center (VDC): a resource pool on top of the virtualized 
data center infrastructures, including hypervisors, VM/servers, 
intra-DC networks, and storage.  A VDC may provide control of 
reachability within the VDC as well as access to the VDC within 
one enterprise or between enterprises.

4. Use Cases Utilizing L3VPN for DCs

   4.1. Automated M-to-M Service Ordering/Provisioning:

   Today's cloud service ordering/provisioning and management are 
often a manual process even for standard services and with physical 
infrastructure already in place.  The ability to automatically 
integrate with the L3VPN and control other aspects are missing, 
such as bandwidth and QoS on access and between VDC sites.

   Many functions performed manually can be automated via 
common/standard protocol exchanges and APIs, thus reducing the
provisioning time as well as providing additionally features, such 
as dynamically allocated bandwidth and QoS.  Standard protocol 
exchange is the preferred method of controlling VPN reachability 
and service parameters versus the alternative of management systems 
(DCs and L3VPN) interworking because of the following reasons:

   . Management systems' interworking is often not practical              
     from the operational perspective.   Data Center management
     systems and L3VPN network management system often have
     different owners and operators, and of course the
     enterprise data center and the service provider owner and
     operators differ. Additionally,  non-standard legacy
     mechanisms make backward compatibility and interworking
     difficult.
   . In-band signaling of data plane between DC gateway
     switch/router (VPN CE) and L3VPN Provider Edge (PE) router
     can be much faster, making just-in-time access to data
     center resource capacity expansion/contraction possible.

   4.2. End-to-end Service Monitoring/Trouble Shooting:

   When carrier DC is used as overflow or augmentation for the
enterprise DCs, the service provider has the responsibility of


So                      Expires April 24,2011                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft    VPN-oriented Data Center Services        October 2011


operating the L3VPN network and the provider DCs.  The customer has 
the responsibility of operating the customer DCs.  A particular set 
of services can be running on both the customer DCs and provider DCs 
simultaneously.   It is important to the customer as well as the 
provider, in real-time or near real-time, to know when, where, and 
how the services are being hosted.  This real-time visibility can be 
particularly important during failure recovery and troubleshooting 
situations where mission critical services are interrupted.

   Today all segments of the host-to-host connection supporting the 
services are managed independently, with no direct visibility beyond 
each segment's management domain. If standard protocols are used for 
hosts in DCs to join L3VPN, the entire path of the connection can be 
known to L3VPN. A standard OAM (e.g. Y.1731 and BFD)can be set up 
between PE router and the CE router (DC gateway switch/router) 
associated with hosts in DCs to monitor that portion of the 
host-to-host connection's condition.  The trouble shooting/congestion 
detection on any segment of the host-to-host connection can happen 
quickly (even automatically) from both ends, so the customer's 
service (hosts) can be moved to the secondary DCs/paths quickly 
with minimal impact to the services.  Furthermore, if a standard 
agent were running on the enterprise hosts (VMs), this monitoring 
and troubleshooting could be extended host-host.

5. Connectivity Requirements for Hosts in DCs Joining L3VPN

   o  Once the hypervisor or Top Of Rack switch is configured to
      connect the host to a DC gateway, the hosts in DC SHALL be   
      able to signal to DC gateway switch/router (L3VPN CE) to   
      join a specific VPN.  The join request CAN include the 
      basic service requirements such as bandwidth and QoS.

   o  The DC gateway switch/router (CE) SHALL be able to signal 
      to L3VPN PE to join a specific VPN for establishing 
      connectivity between the hosts in DC and the PE router.

   o  The DC gateway switch/router (CE) SHALL be able to signal 
      to L3VPN the basic service requirements such as bandwidth 
      and QoS, as aggregated from the host requests.

   o  The DC gateway switch/router SHALL be able to signal to 
      L3VPN PE the host IDs (IP/MAC/VDC addresses) that are 
      joining and/or leaving the VPN.  VDC address space/scheme 
      SHOULD be defined to allow addressing hierarchy and support 
      aggregation and access control within and between the DCs 
      which comprise the VDC.




So                      Expires April 24,2011                  [Page 5]

Internet-Draft    VPN-oriented Data Center Services        October 2011


   o  The DC gateway switch/router SHALL be able to signal to L3VPN 
PE how the connectivity is provisioned within the DC network between 
PE and the hosts. For example, provider multi-tenant DC gateway router 
SHALL be able to indicate to PE the required reachability between 
sets of hosts in the VPN is achieved within its VDC. PE router SHALL 
then be able to signal the required reachability to the other DC 
gateway routers in the same VDC.  This information CAN be used for 
connectivity security verification and auditing/reporting purposes.

   o  DC GW switch/router SHALL be able to signal to PE router whether 
the reachability control capability is supported.

   o  The DC gateway switch/router SHOULD signal to L3VPN PE any host 
and/or connectivity changes within its own VDC.  The changes
SHALL be signaled to all the DC gateway switch/routers associated
with this VDC.

   o  DC gateway switch/router (VPN CE) and VPN PE router SHOULD be 
able to record all the hosts and connectivity information associated 
with the VDC and VPN.

   o  The PE router SHALL be able to signal to the DC GW switch/router 
(e.g. provider DC) how a new logical connectivity should be established 
based the customer DCs' service requirements, such as bandwidth and QoS.

   o  Once host-to-host agent connection has been established through 
L3VPN, additional configuration messages SHALL be allowed to use this 
connection.  For example, additional security configurations can be 
performed from one host to a remote host via the connection.

   o  Once host-to-host agent connection has been established through 
L3VPN, it SHOULD be strictly maintained.  Hosts on both customer and 
provider sides SHOULD be notified and agreed to any
configuration changes prior to the change taking place

   o  The host-to-host agent connection SHOULD support OAM interworking 
mechanisms per DC pair per VPN to allow end-to-end management of the 
service.  For example, upon detection of a segment of the 
infrastructure failure and/or congestion, the user CAN move the host 
to an alternative DC instead of waiting for the repair/relieve.  
The solution SHOULD use existing protocols(e.g., IEEE 802.1ag, ITU-T 
Y.1731, BFD) wherever possible to facilitate interoperability with 
existing OAM deployments.


So                      Expires April 24,2011                  [Page 6]

Internet-Draft    VPN-oriented Data Center Services        October 2011


6. Authors' Addresses

     Ning So
     Verizon Inc.
     2400 N. Glenville Ave.,
     Richardson, TX75082
     ning.so@verizonbusiness.com

     Dave McDysan
     Verizon Inc.
     22001 Loudoun County PKWY.
     Ashburn, VA 20147
     Dave.mcdysan@verizon.com

     Henry Yu
     TW Telecom
     10475 Park Meadows Dr.
     Littleton, CO 80124
     Henry.yu@twtelecom.com

     John M. Heinz
     CenturyLink
     600 New Century PKWY
     KSNCAA0420-4B116
     New Century, KS 66031
     john.m.heinz@centurylink.com


7. Acknowledgments

   This document was prepared using 2-Word-v2.0.template.dot.















So                      Expires April 24,2011                  [Page 7]

