


v6ops WG                                                   S. Gundavelli
Internet-Draft                                               M. Townsley
Intended status: Standards Track                                O. Troan
Expires: August 19, 2010                                          W. Dec
                                                                   Cisco
                                                       February 15, 2010


     Unicast Transmission of IPv6 Multicast Messages on Link-layer
                draft-gundavelli-v6ops-l2-unicast-00.txt

Abstract

   When transmitting an IPv6 packet to a multicast group address, the
   destination address in the link-layer header is typically set to the
   corresponding mapped address of that multicast group address.
   However, it is not mandatory that the destination address in the
   link-layer header is always a mapped multicast equivalent of its IP
   destination address.  There are various deployment scenarios where
   there a need to transmit an IPv6 multicast message as an unicast
   message on the link-layer.  Unfortunately, the IPv6 specifications do
   not clearly state this.  This document explicitly clarifies this
   aspect and makes such packet construct and transmission legal and
   valid.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 19, 2010.




Gundavelli, et al.       Expires August 19, 2010                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft     Unicast Transmission on Link-layer      February 2010


Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3

   2.  Requirements Language  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5

   3.  Sending and Receiving IPv6 Multicast Packets . . . . . . . . .  6

   4.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7

   5.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8

   6.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9

   7.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     7.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     7.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10

   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
















Gundavelli, et al.       Expires August 19, 2010                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft     Unicast Transmission on Link-layer      February 2010


1.  Introduction

   When transmitting an IPv6 packet to a multicast group address, the
   destination address in the link-layer header is typically set to the
   corresponding mapped address of that multicast group address.
   However, it is not mandatory that the destination address in the
   link-layer header is always a mapped multicast equivalent of its IP
   destination address.  There are various deployment scenarios where
   there a need to transmit an IPv6 multicast message as an unicast
   message on the link-layer.  Such a message construct is valid and is
   used in various protocols, such as in ISATAP [RFC5214] for sending a
   unicast Router Advertisement message on ISTAP interfaces.
   Evidentially, some of the IPv6 specifications, such as [RFC4861], or
   [RFC2464] do not make any assumption on such tight relationship and
   it does require the receiving IPv6 node to explicitly apply any such
   checks across protocol layers.  However, it is ambiguous from the
   protocol specification perspective, on the legality of such
   transmission and any discussions on this subject always resulted in
   differing opinions.  Therefore, it is the intent of this document to
   make the specification clear on this aspect.

   There are many deployment scenarios where there is a need to transmit
   IPv6 multicast Neighbor Discovery packets as unicast packets on the
   link-layer.  For example, an 802.11 wireless access point may be
   hosting multiple IPv6 subnets and it would need the ability to
   selectively advertise hosted IPv6 prefixes on a per-node basis.  Such
   segregation can only be possible by ensuring the Router
   Advertisements received by any IPv6 node includes only those prefixes
   that are associated with their respective layer-3 subnet.  This
   essentially requires the ability to transmit multicast messages as
   unicast messages on the link-layer.

   The function of the link-layer is purely for transmitting the frame
   to a peer or to a set of peers on a given media.  It is
   inconsequential for the network layer protocols to go across the
   layers and check the semantics of message delivery in the link-layer
   header.  Any such check is a violation of the principles of protocol
   layering and does not serve any purpose.  Unfortunately, [RFC4861] or
   [RFC2464] does not explicitly state this.  However, we have verified
   this on many open source and commercial IPv6 implementations on the
   behavior of the existing IPv6 stacks, firewalls and we could not find
   any implementation that drops IPv6 packets sent to a multicast IPv6
   destination address, but with a unicast destination address in the
   link-layer header.  Case and Point:

   o  Cisco IOS Operating System





Gundavelli, et al.       Expires August 19, 2010                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft     Unicast Transmission on Link-layer      February 2010


   o  Linux Operating System with 2.6 Kernel

   o  BSD Variants based on IPv6 KAME implementation

   o  Microsoft Windows Vista

   As a result of this analysis, it appears to be quite safe to
   explicitly state that such message construct is valid, so future
   implementations do not drop packets based on these checks.  This
   document updates [RFC4861] for allowing this change.









































Gundavelli, et al.       Expires August 19, 2010                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft     Unicast Transmission on Link-layer      February 2010


2.  Requirements Language

   In this document, the key words "MAY", "MUST, "MUST NOT", "OPTIONAL",
   "RECOMMENDED", "SHOULD", and "SHOULD NOT", are to be interpreted as
   described in [RFC2119].














































Gundavelli, et al.       Expires August 19, 2010                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft     Unicast Transmission on Link-layer      February 2010


3.  Sending and Receiving IPv6 Multicast Packets

   The following considerations MUST be applied by all IPv6 nodes when
   sending and receiving IPv6 multicast messages.

   o  An IPv6 node MAY choose to unicast an IPv6 multicast message on
      the link-layer.  In this case, the destination address in the IPv6
      header will be a multicast group address, but the destination
      address in the link-layer header will be an unicast address.  It
      is up to to the system architecture as when to transmit a IPv6
      multicast message as an link-layer unicast message, as long as
      there is no real impact to the multicast communication.

   o  An IPv6 receiver node SHOULD NOT drop a received IPv6 multicast
      message containing a multicast destination address in the IPv6
      header, but with a unicast destination address in the link-layer
      header, withstanding all other validity considerations as
      specified in the relevant IPv6 standards specifications.

































Gundavelli, et al.       Expires August 19, 2010                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft     Unicast Transmission on Link-layer      February 2010


4.  IANA Considerations

   This specification does not require any IANA actions.
















































Gundavelli, et al.       Expires August 19, 2010                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft     Unicast Transmission on Link-layer      February 2010


5.  Security Considerations

   This document is about a clarification to the construction and
   processing rules of IPv6 multicast messages.  This clarification
   makes it valid for an IPv6 receiver node to consider a received IPv6
   multicast message with a multicast destination address in the IPv6
   header, but containing an unicast destination address in the link-
   layer header, to be valid withstanding all other validity
   considerations specified in the IPv6 standards specifications.  This
   change follows the principles of protocol layer design more tightly
   and does not introduce any security vulnerabilities.

   Network firewalls and Deep Packet inspection tools that perform
   validity checks on link-layer and IP layer headers may have to
   modified to allow such packet transmission.  However, the authors of
   this document could not find a single such implementation that
   rejects packets based on this check.


































Gundavelli, et al.       Expires August 19, 2010                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft     Unicast Transmission on Link-layer      February 2010


6.  Acknowledgements

   The authors would like to acknowledge Hemant Singh, Eric Levy, Pascal
   Thubert and Eric Voit for all the discussions on this topic.















































Gundavelli, et al.       Expires August 19, 2010                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft     Unicast Transmission on Link-layer      February 2010


7.  References

7.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC4861]  Narten, T., Nordmark, E., Simpson, W., and H. Soliman,
              "Neighbor Discovery for IP version 6 (IPv6)", RFC 4861,
              September 2007.

7.2.  Informative References

   [RFC2464]  Crawford, M., "Transmission of IPv6 Packets over Ethernet
              Networks", RFC 2464, December 1998.

   [RFC5214]  Templin, F., Gleeson, T., and D. Thaler, "Intra-Site
              Automatic Tunnel Addressing Protocol (ISATAP)", RFC 5214,
              March 2008.
































Gundavelli, et al.       Expires August 19, 2010               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft     Unicast Transmission on Link-layer      February 2010


Authors' Addresses

   Sri Gundavelli
   Cisco
   170 West Tasman Drive
   San Jose, CA  95134
   USA

   Email: sgundave@cisco.com


   Mark Townsley
   Cisco

   Email: townsley@cisco.com


   Ole Troan
   Cisco
   Skoyen Atrium, Drammensveien 145A
   Oslo,   N-0277
   Norway

   Email: otroan@cisco.com


   Wojciech Dec
   Cisco
   Haarlerbergweg 13-19
   Amsterdam, Noord-Holland  1101 CH
   Netherlands

   Email: wdec@cisco.com


















Gundavelli, et al.       Expires August 19, 2010               [Page 11]

