


Networking Working Group                                J. Tripathi, Ed.
Internet-Draft                                       J. de Oliveira, Ed.
Intended status: Informational                         Drexel University
Expires: July 15, 2011                                  JP. Vasseur, Ed.
                                                     Cisco Systems, Inc.
                                                        January 11, 2011


   Performance Evaluation of Routing Protocol for Low Power and Lossy
                             Networks (RPL)
                 draft-tripathi-roll-rpl-simulation-06

Abstract

   This document presents a performance evaluation of the Routing
   Protocol for Low power and Lossy Networks (RPL) for a small outdoor
   and for a large scale smart meter network.  Detailed simulations are
   carried out to produce several routing performance metrics using a
   set of real-life scenarios.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on July 15, 2011.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must



Tripathi, et al.          Expires July 15, 2011                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft    draft-tripathi-roll-rpl-simulation-06     January 2011


   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   3.  Methodology and Simulation Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   4.  Performance Metrics  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     4.1.  Common Assumptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     4.2.  Path Quality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     4.3.  Routing Table Size . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     4.4.  Delay bound for P2P Routing  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     4.5.  Control Packet Overhead  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     4.6.  Loss of connectivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   5.  RPL in a building automation routing scenario  . . . . . . . . 12
     5.1.  Path Quality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     5.2.  Delay  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   6.  RPL in a Large Scale Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     6.1.  Path Quality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     6.2.  Delay  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
     6.3.  Control Packet Overhead  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   7.  Scaling Property and Routing Stability . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   8.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
     8.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
     8.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18






















Tripathi, et al.          Expires July 15, 2011                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft    draft-tripathi-roll-rpl-simulation-06     January 2011


1.  Terminology

   Please refer to the following document for terminology:
   [I-D.ietf-roll-terminology].  In addition, the following terms are
   specified:

      PDR: Packet delivery ratio

      CDF: Cumulative Distribution Function describes the probability
      that a real-valued random variable X with a given probability
      distribution will be found at a value less than or equal to x.
      Mathematically, CDF of X is F(X) = P(Variable 'X' is less than or
      equal to a value 'x').

      Fractional Stretch Factor of link ETX Metric against ideal
      shortest path: The ETX path stretch is defined as the difference
      between the number of expected transmissions (ETX Metric) taken by
      a packet traveling from source to destination, following a route
      determined by RPL and a route determined by a hypothetical ideal
      shortest path routing protocol (using link ETX as the metric).
      The fractional path stretch is the ratio of ETX path stretch to
      ETX path cost for the shortest path route for that source-
      destination pair.

      Stretch factor for node hop distance against ideal shortest path:
      The hop stretch is defined as the difference between the number of
      hop counts taken by a packet traveling from source to destination,
      following a route determined by RPL and by a hypothetical ideal
      shortest path algorithm, both using ETX as the link cost.  The
      fractional stretch factor is computed as the ratio of path stretch
      to count value between a source-destination pair for the
      hypothetical shortest path route optimizing ETX path cost.


2.  Introduction

   Designing a routing protocol for Low power and Lossy link Networks
   (LLNs) imposes great challenges, mainly due to low data rates, high
   probability of packet delivery failure, and strict energy constraint
   in nodes.  The IETF ROLL Working Group took on this task and
   specified the Routing Protocol for Low power and Lossy Networks (RPL)
   in [I-D.ietf-roll-rpl].

   RPL is designed to meet the core requirements specified in
   [RFC5826],[RFC5867],[RFC5873] and [RFC5548].

   This document's contribution is to provide a performance evaluation
   of RPL with respect to several metrics of interest.  This is



Tripathi, et al.          Expires July 15, 2011                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft    draft-tripathi-roll-rpl-simulation-06     January 2011


   acomplished using real data and topologies in a discrete event
   simulator, developed to reproduce the protocol behavior.

   The following metrics are evaluated:

   o  Path quality metrics;

   o  Control plane overhead;

   o  End to End delay between nodes;

   o  Ability to cope with unstable situations (link churns, node
      dying);

   o  Required resource constraints on nodes (routing table size, etc.).

   Although simulation cannot prove formally that a protocol operates
   properly in all situations, it can give a good level of confidence in
   protocol behavior in highly stressful conditions, if and only if real
   life data are used.  Simulation is particularly useful when
   theoretical model assumptions may not be applicable to such networks
   and scenarios.  In this document, real deployed network data traces
   have been used to model link behaviors and network topologies.


3.  Methodology and Simulation Setup

   In the context of this document, RPL has been simulated using OMNET++
   [OMNETpp], a well-known discrete event based simulator written in C++
   and NED.  Castalia-2.2 [Castalia-2.2] has been used as Wireless
   Sensor Network Simulator framework within OMNET++.  The output and
   events in the simulating are visualized with the help of the Network
   AniMator or NAM, which is distributed with NS (Network
   Simulator)[NS-2].

   Note that NS or any of its versions are not used in this simulation
   study.  Only the visualization tool was borrowed for verification
   purposes.

   In contrast with theoretical models, which as stated before may have
   assumptions not applicable to lossy links, real-life data has been
   used for two aspects of the simulations:

   * Link failure model: Time varying real network traces containing
   packet delivery probability for each link, over all channels for both
   indoor network deployment and outdoor network deployment.

   * Topology: Gathered from real-life deployment (traces mentioned



Tripathi, et al.          Expires July 15, 2011                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft    draft-tripathi-roll-rpl-simulation-06     January 2011


   above) as opposed to random topology simulations.

   A 45 node topology, deployed as an outdoor network, shown in Figure
   1, and a 2442 node topology, gathered from a smart meter network
   deployment, were used in the simulations.

   Figure 1
   Figure 1: 45 nodes outdoor network topology.

   Note that this is just a start to validate the simulation before
   using large scale networks.

   A set of time varying link quality data was gathered from real
   network deployment to form a database used for the simulations.  Each
   link in the topology randomly 'picks up' a link model (trace) from
   the database.  Each link has a Packet Delivery Ratio (PDR) that
   varies with time (in the simulation, a new PDR is read from the
   database every 10 minutes) according to the gathered data.  Packets
   are dropped randomly from that link with probability (1 - PDR).  Each
   time a packet is about to be sent, the module generates a random
   number using the Mersenne Twister Random number generation method.
   The random number is compared to the PDR to determine whether the
   packet should be dropped.  Note that each link uses a different
   random number generator to maintain true randomness in the simulator,
   and to avoid correlation between links.  Also, the packet drop
   applies to all kinds of data and control packets (RPL) such as the
   DIO, DAO, DIS packets defined in [I-D.ietf-roll-rpl].  Figure 2 shows
   typical temporal characteristics of some links in the network for the
   indoor network traces used in the simulations.
   Figure 2
   Figure 2: Example of link characteristics.

   In the RPL simulator, the LBR first initiates sending out DIO
   messages, and the DAG is gradually constructed.  RPL makes use of
   trickle timers: I_min is initially set to 1 second and I_doubling is
   equal to 16, so that maximum time between two consecutive DIO
   emissions by a node (under a steady network condition) is 18.2 hours.
   The trickle time interval for emitting DIO message assumes the
   initial value of 1 second, and then changes over simulation time as
   mentioned in [I-D.ietf-roll-trickle].

   Another objective of this study is to give insight to the network
   administrator on how to tweak the trickle values.  These
   recommendations could then be used in applicability statement
   documents.

   Each node in the network, other than the LBR (Low power and lossy
   Border Router), also emits DAO messages as specified in



Tripathi, et al.          Expires July 15, 2011                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft    draft-tripathi-roll-rpl-simulation-06     January 2011


   [I-D.ietf-roll-rpl], to initially populate the routing tables with
   the prefixes received from children via the DAO messages to support
   Point to Point (P2P) and Point to Multipoint traffic (P2MP) in the
   "down" direction.  During these simulations, it is assumed that each
   node is capable of storing route information for other nodes in the
   network (storing mode of RPL).

   For nodes implementing RPL, as expected, the routing table memory
   requirement varies according to the position in the DODAG
   (Destination Oriented Directed Acyclic Graph).  The (worst-case)
   assumption is made that there is no route summarization (aggregation)
   in the network.  Thus a node closer to the DAG will have to store
   more entries in its routing table.  It is also assumed that all nodes
   have equal memory capacity to store the routing states.

   For simulations of the indoor network, each node sends traffic
   according to a Constant Bit Rate (CBR) to all other nodes in the
   network, over the simulation period.  Each node generates a new data
   packet every 10 seconds.  Each data packet has a size of 127 bytes
   including 802.15.4 PHY/MAC headers and RPL packet headers.  All
   control packets are also encapsulated with 802.15.4 PHY/MAC headers.
   To simulate a more realistic scenario, 80% of the generated packets
   by each node are destined to the root, and the remaining 20% of the
   packets are uniformly assigned as destined to nodes other than the
   root.  Therefore the root receives a considerably larger amount of
   data than other nodes.  These values may be revised when studying P2P
   traffic so as to have a majority of traffic going to all nodes as
   opposed to the root.  In the later part of the simulation, a typical
   home/building routing scenario is also simulated and different path
   quality metrics are computed for that traffic pattern.

   The packets are routed through the DODAG built by RPL according to
   the mechanisms specified in [I-D.ietf-roll-rpl].

   A number of RPL parameters are studied (such as Packet Rate from each
   source, Time Period of the LBR emitting new DAG Sequence Number) to
   observe their effect on the performance metric of interest.


4.  Performance Metrics

4.1.  Common Assumptions

   As the DAO messages are used to feed the routing tables in the
   network, they grow with time and size of the network.  Nevertheless,
   no constraint was imposed on the size of the routing table nor on how
   much information the node can store.  The routing table size is not
   expressed in terms of Kbyte of memory usage but measured in terms of



Tripathi, et al.          Expires July 15, 2011                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft    draft-tripathi-roll-rpl-simulation-06     January 2011


   number of entries for each node.  Each entry has the next hop node
   and path cost associated with the destination node.

   The link ETX (Expected Transmission Count) metric is used to build
   the DODAG.  The link ETX routing metric is specified in
   [I-D.ietf-roll-routing-metrics].

4.2.  Path Quality

   Number of Hops: for each source-destination pair, the average number
   of hops for both RPL and shortest path routing is computed.  Shortest
   path routing refers to a hypothetical ideal routing protocol that
   would always provide the shortest path in term of path cost ETX (or
   whichever metric is used) in the network.  The Cumulative
   Distribution Function (CDF) of hop distance for all paths (n*(n-1) in
   an n-node network) in the network with respect to the number of hops
   is plotted in Figure 3 for both RPL and shortest path routing.  One
   can observe that the CDF corresponding to 4 hops is around 80% for
   RPL and 90% for shortest path routing.  In other words, for the given
   topology, 90% of paths have a path length of 4 hops or less with an
   ideal shortest path routing methodology, whereas in RPL Point-to-
   Point (P2P) routing, 90% of the paths will have a length of no more
   than 5 hops.  This result indicates that despite having a non-
   optimized P2P routing scheme, the path quality of RPL is close to an
   optimized P2P routing mechanism for the topology in consideration.
   Another reason for this may relate to the fact that the sink is at
   the center of the network, thus routing through the sink is often
   close to an optimal (shortest path) routing.  This result may be
   different in a topology where the sink is located at one end of the
   network.
   Figure 3
   Figure 3: CDF: hop distance versus number of hops.

   Path Cost ETX: The path cost ETX along the path is computed for each
   source-destination pair.  In the simulation, the path ETX from source
   to destination for each packet is computed.  Figure 4 shows the CDF
   of the total path cost ETX, both with RPL and shortest path routing.
   Here also one can observe that the path cost ETX from all source to
   all destinations is close to that of a shortest path routing for the
   network.
   Figure 4
   Figure 4: CDF: Total ETX along path versus link ETX value.

   Path Stretch: In this simulation, the path stretch is also calculated
   for each packet that traversed the network.  The path stretch is
   determined as the difference between the number of hops taken by a
   packet while following a route built via RPL and the number of hops
   taken by shortest path routing (using link ETX as the metric).



Tripathi, et al.          Expires July 15, 2011                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft    draft-tripathi-roll-rpl-simulation-06     January 2011


   Once again, the CDF of the path stretch is plotted against the value
   of path stretch over all packets in Figures 5 and 6, for hop count
   stretch and ETX metric stretch, respectively.  It can be observed
   that for a few packets, the path built via RPL has fewer hops than
   the ideal shortest path where path ETX is minimized along the DAG.
   This is because there are a few source - destination pairs where the
   total path ETX is equal to or less than that of the ideal shortest
   path when the packet takes a longer hop count.  As the RPL
   implementation ignores 20% change in total path cost before switching
   to a new parent or emitting new DIO, RPL not necessarily provides the
   shortest path in terms of total ETX path cost.  Thus, this
   implementation yields a few paths with smaller hop count but larger
   (or equal) total ETX path cost.
   Figure 5
   Figure 5: CDF: Hop count stretch versus hop count of a packet.
   Figure 6
   Figure 6: CDF: ETX metric stretch versus ETX value.

4.3.  Routing Table Size

   The objective of this metric is to observe the distribution of the
   number of entries per node.  Figure 7 shows the CDF of the number of
   routing table entries for all nodes.  Note that 90% of the nodes need
   to store less than 10 entries in their routing table.
   Figure 7
   Figure 7: CDF of routing table size with respect to number of nodes.

4.4.  Delay bound for P2P Routing

   For delay sensitive applications, such as home and building
   automation, it is critical to optimize the end-to-end delay.  Figure
   8 shows the upper bound and distributions of delay for paths between
   any two given nodes for different hop counts between source and
   destination.  Here, the hop count refers to the number of hops a
   packet travels to reach the destination when using RPL paths.  This
   hop distance does not correspond to shortest path distance between
   two nodes.  Note that, each packet has a length of 127 bytes, with a
   240 kbps radio, which makes the transmission time approximately 4 ms.
    Figure 8
   Figure 8: Comparison of packet latency for different path length
   expressed in hop count.

4.5.  Control Packet Overhead

   The control plane overhead is an important routing characteristic in
   LLNs.  It is imperative to bound the control plane overhead.  One of
   the distinctive characteristics of RPL is that it makes use of
   trickle timers so as to reduce the number of control plane packets by



Tripathi, et al.          Expires July 15, 2011                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft    draft-tripathi-roll-rpl-simulation-06     January 2011


   eliminating redundant messages.  The aim of this performance metric
   is thus to analyse the control plane overhead both in stable
   conditions (no network element failure overhead) and in the presence
   of failures.

   Data and control plane traffic comparison for each node: Figure 9
   shows the comparison between the amount of data packets transmitted
   (including forwarded) and control packets (DIO and DAO messages)
   transmitted for all individual nodes when link ETX is used to
   optimize the DAG.  As mentioned earlier, each node generates a new
   data packet every 10 seconds.  Here one can observe that a
   considerable amount of traffic is routed through the sink itself.
   The x axis indicates the node ID in the network.  Also, as expected,
   the nodes closer to sink and that act as routers (as opposed to
   leaves) handle much more data traffic than other nodes.  Looking at a
   link close to the root, we can observe that the proportion of control
   traffic is negligible.  This result also reinforces the fact that the
   amount of control plane traffic generated by RPL is negligible.  Leaf
   nodes have comparable amount of data and control packet transmission
   (they do not take part in routing the data).
   Figure 9
   Figure 9: Amount of data and control packets transmitted against node
   ID using link ETX as routing metric.

   Data and Control Packet Transmission with Respect to Time: In Figures
   10, 11 and 12, the amount of data and control packets transmitted for
   node 12 (low rank in DAG, closer to the root), node 43 (in the
   middle) and node 31 (leaf node) are shown, respectively.  These
   values stand for number of data and control packets transmitted for
   each 10 minute intervals for the particular node, to help understand
   what is the ratio between data and control packets exchanged in the
   network.  One can observe that nodes closer to the sink have a higher
   proportion of data packets (as expected), and the proportion of
   control traffic is negligible in comparison with the data traffic.
   Also, the amount of data traffic handled by a node within given
   interval varies largely over time for a node closer to sink, because
   in each interval the destinations of the packets from same source
   changes, while 20% of the packets are destined to the sink.  As a
   result, pattern of the traffic handled changes widely in each
   interval for the nodes closer to the sink.  For the nodes that are
   farther away from sink, the ratio of data and control traffic is
   smaller since the amount of data traffic is greatly reduced.

   The control traffic load exhibits a wave-like pattern.  The amount of
   control packets for each node drops quickly as the DODAG stabilizes
   due to the effect of trickle timers.  However, when a new DODAG
   sequence is advertised (global repair of the DODAG), the trickle
   timers are reset and the nodes start emitting DIOs frequently again



Tripathi, et al.          Expires July 15, 2011                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft    draft-tripathi-roll-rpl-simulation-06     January 2011


   to rebuild the DODAG.  For a node closer to the sink, the amount of
   data packets is much larger than that of control packets, and
   somewhat oscillatory around a mean value.  The amount of control
   packets exhibits a 'saw-tooth' behavior.  As the ETX link metric was
   used, when the PDR changes, the ETX link metric for a node to its
   child changes, which may lead to choosing a new parent, and changing
   the DAG rank of the child.  This event resets the trickle timer and
   triggers the emission of a new DIO.  Also, issue of a new DODAG
   sequence number triggers DODAG re-computation and resets the trickle
   timers.  Therefore, one can observe that the number of control
   packets attains a high value for one interval, and comes down to
   lower values for subsequent intervals.  The interval with high value
   of control packets denote the interval where the timers to emit new
   DIO are reset more frequently.  As the network stabilizes, the
   control packets are less dense in volume.  For leaf nodes, the amount
   of control packets is comparable to that of data packets, as leaf
   nodes are more prone to face changes in their DODAG rank as opposed
   to nodes closer to sink when the link ETX value in the topology
   changes dynamically.
   Figure 10
   Figure 10: Amount of data and control packets transmitted for node
   12.
   Figure 11
   Figure 11: Amount of data and control packets transmitted for node
   43.
   Figure 12
   Figure 12: Amount of data and control packets transmitted for node
   31.

4.6.  Loss of connectivity

   Upon link failures, a node may lose his parents: preferred and backup
   (if any) thus to leading to a loss of connectivity (no path to the
   DODAG root).  RPL specifies two mechanisms for DODAG repairs,
   referred to as the global repair and local repair.  In this version
   of the document, simulation results are presented to evaluate the
   amount of time data packets are dropped due to a loss of connectivity
   for the following two cases: a) when only using global repair (i.e.,
   the DODAG is rebuilt thanks to the emission of new DODAG sequence
   numbers by the DODAG root), and b) when using local repair (poisoning
   the sub-DAG in case of loss of connectivity) in addition to global
   repair.  The idea is to tune the frequency at which new DODAG
   sequence numbers are generated by the DODAG root, and also to observe
   the effect of varying the frequency for global repair and the
   concurrent use of global and local repair.  It is expected that more
   frequent increments of DODAG sequence number will lead to shorter
   duration of connectivity loss at a price of a higher rate of control
   packet in the network.  For the use of both global and local repair,



Tripathi, et al.          Expires July 15, 2011                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft    draft-tripathi-roll-rpl-simulation-06     January 2011


   the simulation results show the trade-off in amount of time that a
   node may remain without service and total number of control packets
   for extra bit of signalling.

   Figure 13 shows the CDF of time spent by any node without service,
   when the rate of data packet is one packet every 10 seconds, and new
   DODAG Sequence Number is generated every 10 minutes.  This plot
   reflects the property of global repair without any local repair
   scheme.  When all the parents are temporarily unreachable from a
   node, the time before it hears a DIO from another node is recorded,
   which gives the time without service.  We define DAG repair timer to
   be the interval at which the LBR increments the DAG sequence number,
   thus trigerring a global reoptimization.  In some cases, this value
   might go up to the DAG repair timer value, because until a DIO is
   heard, the node does not have a parent, and hence no route to the LBR
   or other nodes not in its own sub-DAG.  Clearly, this situation
   indicates a lack of connectivity and loss of service for the node.

   The effect of the DAG repair timer on time without service is plotted
   in Figure 14, where the source rate is 20 seconds/packet and in
   Figure 15, where the source sends a packet every 10 seconds.
   Figure 13
   Figure 13: CDF: Loss of connectivity with global repair
   Figure 14
   Figure 14: CDF: Loss of connectivity for different global repair
   period, packet rate 20/s.
   Figure 15
   Figure 15: CDF: Loss of connectivity for different global repair
   period, packet rate 10/s.

   Figure 16 shows the effect of DAG global repair timer period on
   control traffic.  As expected, as the frequency at which new DAG
   sequence numbers are generated increases, the amount of control
   traffic decreases because DIO messages are sent less frequently to
   rebuild the DODAG.  However reducing the control traffic comes at a
   price of increased loss of connectivity when only global repair is
   used.
   Figure 16
   Figure 16: Amount of control traffic for different global repair
   periods

   The effect of the DAG Repair Timer on time without service when local
   repair is activated is now observed and plotted in Figure 17, where
   the source rate is 20 seconds/packet.  A comparison of the CDF of
   loss of connectivity for global repair mechanism and global + local
   repair mechanism is shown in Figures 18 and 19 (semilog plots, x axis
   in logarithmic and y axis in linear scale), where the source
   generates a packet every 10 seconds and 20 seconds, respectively.



Tripathi, et al.          Expires July 15, 2011                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft    draft-tripathi-roll-rpl-simulation-06     January 2011


   For these plots, the x axis shows time in log scale, and y axis
   denotes the corresponding CDF in linear scale.  One can observe that
   using local repair (with poisoning of the sub-DAG) greatly reduces
   loss of connectivity.
   Figure 17
   Figure 17: CDF: Loss of connectivity for different DAG repair timer
   values for global+local repair, packet rate 20/s.
   Figure 18
   Figure 18: CDF: comparing Loss of connectivity for global repair and
   global+local repair, packet rate 10/s.
   Figure 19
   Figure 19: CDF: comparing Loss of connectivity for global repair and
   global+local repair, packet rate 20/s.

   A comparison between the amount of control plane overhead used for
   global repair only and global plus local repair mechanism is shown in
   Figure 20, which highlights the improved performance of RPL in terms
   of convergence time at very little extra overhead.
   Figure 20
   Figure 20: Number of control packets for different DAG Seq Number
   period, for both global repair and global+local repair.


5.  RPL in a building automation routing scenario

   Unlike the previous traffic pattern, where a majority of the total
   traffic generated by any node is destined to the root, this section
   considers a different traffic pattern, which is more prominent in
   home or building routing scenario.  In the simulations shown below,
   the nodes send 60% of their total generated traffic to the physically
   1-hop distant node, 20% of traffic to a 2-hop distant node (again
   this is a typical traffic pattern in building and home automation
   networks).  The other 20% of traffic is distributed among other nodes
   in the network.  The CDF of average hop distance path stretch in
   terms of hop distance, ETX path cost and delay for P2P routing for
   all pair of nodes is calculated.  Maintaining low delay bound for P2P
   traffic is of high importance in this traffic scenario, as the
   applications in home and building routing have typically low delay
   tolerance.

5.1.  Path Quality

   Figure 21 shows the CDF of number of hops for both RPL and ideal
   shortest path routing for the traffic pattern described above.
   Figure 22 shows CDF of the expected number of transmission (ETX) for
   each packet to reach destination.  Figures 23 and 24 show CDF of the
   stretch factor for these two metrics.  To illustrate the stretch
   factor, an example from figure 24 will be given next.  For all paths



Tripathi, et al.          Expires July 15, 2011                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft    draft-tripathi-roll-rpl-simulation-06     January 2011


   built by RPL, 85% of the time the path cost is less than the path
   cost for the ideal shortest path plus one.
   Figure 21
   Figure 21: Comparison of end-to-end hop distance for RPL and ideal
   shortest path in home routing.
   Figure 22
   Figure 22: Comparison of path ETX metric for RPL and ideal shortest
   path in home routing.
   Figure 23
   Figure 23: Stretch factor for node hop distance from ideal shortest
   path.
   Figure 24
   Figure 24: Stretch Factor of path ETX metric from ideal shortest
   path.

5.2.  Delay

   To get an idea of maximum observable delay in the mentioned traffic
   pattern, the delay for different number of hops to the destination
   for RPL is considered.  Figure 25 shows how the end-to-end packet
   latency is distributed for different packets with different hop
   counts in the network.
   Figure 25
   Figure 25: Comparison of packet latency for different hop count in
   RPL.


6.  RPL in a Large Scale Network

   In this section we focus on simulating how RPL operates in a large
   network and study its scalability by focusing on a few performance
   metrics: the latency and path cost stretch, and the amount of control
   packets for scalability.  The 2442 node smart meter network with its
   corresponding link traces is used in this scalability study.  To
   simulate a more realistic scenario for a smart meter network, 100% of
   the generated packets by each node are destined to the root.
   Therefore, no traffic is destined to nodes other than the root.

6.1.  Path Quality

   To investigate RPL's scalability, the CDF of ETX path cost in the
   large scale smart meter network is compared to a hypothetical ideal
   shortest path routing protocol which minimizes the total path ETX
   (Figure 26).  In this simulation, the path stretch is also calculated
   for each packet that traverses the network.  The path stretch is
   determined as the difference between the path ETX taken by a packet
   while following a route built via RPL and a path computed using an
   ideal shortest path routing protocol.  Here, the CDF of fractional



Tripathi, et al.          Expires July 15, 2011                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft    draft-tripathi-roll-rpl-simulation-06     January 2011


   path stretch, which is determined as the path stretch value over the
   path cost of an ideal shortest path, is plotted in Figure 27.  The
   same fractional path stretch value for hop distance is shown in
   Figure 28.
   Figure 26
   Figure 26: CDF of total ETX path cost.
   Figure 27
   Figure 27: CDF of fractional stretch in ETX path cost.
   Figure 28
   Figure 28: CDF of fractional stretch in hop count.

6.2.  Delay

   Figure 29 shows how the end-to-end packet latency is distributed for
   different packets with different hop counts in the network.
   Figure 29
   Figure 29: End-to-end packet delivery latency for different hop
   count.

6.3.  Control Packet Overhead

   Figure 30 shows the comparison between data packets (originated and
   forwarded) and control packets (DIO and DAO messages) transmitted by
   each node (link ETX is used as the routing metric).  Here one can
   observe that in spite of the large scale of the network, the amount
   of control traffic in the protocol is negligible in comparison to
   data packet transmission.  The smaller node id for this network
   actually indicates closer proximity to the sink and nodes with high
   ID are actually further away from the sink.  Also, as expected, we
   can observe on Figures 31, 32, 33 that the (non-leaf) nodes closer to
   the sink have much more data packet transmission than other nodes.
   The leaf nodes have comparable amount of data and control packet
   transmission, as they do not take part in routing the data.  As seen
   before, the data traffic for a child node has much less variation
   than the nodes which are closer to the sink.  This variation
   decreases with increase in DAG depth.  In this topology, Nodes 1, 2,
   and 3, etc., are direct children of the LBR.
   Figure 30
   Figure 30: Data and control packet comparison.
   Figure 31
   Figure 31: Data and control packet over time for Node 1.
   Figure 32
   Figure 32: Data and control packet over time for Node 78.
   Figure 33
   Figure 33: Data and control packet over time for Node 300.

   In Figure 34, the effect of global repair period timer on control
   packet overhead is shown.



Tripathi, et al.          Expires July 15, 2011                [Page 14]

Internet-Draft    draft-tripathi-roll-rpl-simulation-06     January 2011


   Figure 34
   Figure 34: Amount of control packet for different global repair timer
   period.


7.  Scaling Property and Routing Stability

   An important metric of interest is the maximum load experienced by
   any node (CPU usage) in terms of the number of control packets
   transmitted by the node.  Also, to get an idea of scaling properties
   of RPL in large scale networks, it is also key to analyze the number
   of packets handled by the RPL nodes for different sizes of the
   network.

   In these simulations, at any given interval, the node with maximum
   control overhead load is identified.  The amount of maximum control
   overhead processed by that node is plotted against time for three
   different networks under study.  The first one is Network 'A', which
   has 45 nodes and is shown in figure 1 in section 3; Network 'B',
   which is another deployed outdoor network with 86 nodes; and finally,
   Network 'C', which is the large deployed smart meter network with
   2442 nodes being considered in this document.

   In Figure 35, the comparison of maximum control load is shown for
   different network sizes.
   Figure 35
   Figure 35: Scaling property of maximum control packets processed by
   any node over time.

   For a network built with low power devices interconnected by lossy
   links, it is of the utmost importance to ensure that routing packets
   are not flooded in the entire network, and that the routing topology
   stays as stable as possible.  Any change in routing information,
   specially parent-child relationship, would reset the timer leading to
   emitting new DIOs, and hence, change the node's path metric to reach
   the root.  This change will trigger a series of control place
   messages (RPL packets) in the DODAG.  Therefore, it is important to
   carefully control the triggering of DIO control packets via the use
   of thresholds.

   In this study, the effect of the tolerance value before emitting new
   DIO reflecting a new path cost is analyzed.  Four cases are
   considered in this study:

   o  No change in DAG depth of a node is ignored.

   o  The implementation ignores 10% of change in the ETX path cost to
      the root.  That is, if the change in total path cost to LBR, due



Tripathi, et al.          Expires July 15, 2011                [Page 15]

Internet-Draft    draft-tripathi-roll-rpl-simulation-06     January 2011


      to a DIO reception from most preferred parent or due to shifting
      to another parent, is less than 10%, the node will not advertise
      the new metric to the root,

   o  The implementation ignores 20% change in path cost to the root for
      any node before deciding to advertise a new depth, and

   o  The implementation ignores 30% change in the total path cost to
      root of a node before deciding to advertise a new depth.

   This decision does affect the optimum path quality to the root.  As
   observed in Figure 36, for 0% tolerance, 95% of paths used have a
   stretch factor less than 10%.  Similarly, for 10% and 20% tolerance
   level, 95% of paths will have a 15% and 20% fractional path stretch.
   However, the increased routing stability and decreased control
   overhead is the profit gained from the 10% extra increase in path
   length or ETX, whichever is used as the metric to optimize DAG.
   Figure 36
   Figure 36: Fractional stretch factor for different tolerance levels.

   As the above mentioned threshold also affects the path taken by a
   packet, this study also demonstrates the effect of the threshold on
   routing stability (number of times P2P paths change between a source
   and a destinaton).  For Network 'A' shown in Figure 1 and the large
   smart meter nework 'C', the CDF of path change is plotted against
   fraction of path change for different thresholds triggering the
   emission of a new DIO upon path cost change.

   In Figures 37 and 38, we show the CDF of fraction of times a path has
   changed (for each source-destination pair).  If X packets are
   transferred from source A to destination B, and out of X times, Y
   times the path between this source-destination pair is changed, then
   we compute the fraction of path change as Y/X * 100% .  This metric
   is computed over all source-destination pairs, and the CDF is plotted
   in the Y axis.
   Figure 37
   Figure 37: Distribution of fraction of path change, Network `A'
   Figure 38
   Figure 38: Distribution of fraction of path change, large Network `C'

   This document also compares the CDF of fraction of path change for
   three different networks, A, B and C. Figure 39 shows how the three
   networks exhibit change of P2P path when 30% change in metric cost to
   the root is ignored before shifting to a new parent.
   Figure 39
   Figure 39: Comparison of distribution of fraction of path change





Tripathi, et al.          Expires July 15, 2011                [Page 16]

Internet-Draft    draft-tripathi-roll-rpl-simulation-06     January 2011


8.  References

8.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

8.2.  Informative References

   [Castalia-2.2]
              Boulis, A., "Castalia: Revealing pitfalls in designing
              distributed algorithms in WSN, in Proceedings of the 5th
              international conference on Embedded networked sensor
              systems (SenSys'07)", 2007.

   [I-D.ietf-roll-routing-metrics]
              Vasseur, J., Kim, M., Pister, K., Dejean, N., and D.
              Barthel, "Routing Metrics used for Path Calculation in Low
              Power and Lossy Networks",
              draft-ietf-roll-routing-metrics-14 (work in progress),
              December 2010.

   [I-D.ietf-roll-rpl]
              Winter, T., Thubert, P., et al., "RPL: Routing Protocol
              for Low Power and Lossy Networks, draft-ietf-roll-rpl-04
              (work in progress)", November 2009.

   [I-D.ietf-roll-terminology]
              JP Vasseur, "Terminology in Low power And Lossy Networks,
              draft-ietf-roll-terminology-02 (work in progress)", May
              2009.

   [I-D.ietf-roll-trickle]
              Levis, P., Clausen, T., Hui, J., Gnawali, O., and J. Ko,
              "The Trickle Algorithm", draft-ietf-roll-trickle-08 (work
              in progress), January 2011.

   [NS-2]     "The Network Simulator-2, http://www.isi.edu/nsnam/ns/".

   [OMNETpp]  Varga, "The OMNeT++ Discrete Event Simulation System, in
              Proceedings of the European Simulation Multiconference
              (ESM'2001)", June 2001.

   [RFC5548]  Dohler, M., Watteyne, T., Winter, T., and D. Barthel,
              "Routing Requirements for Urban Low-Power and Lossy
              Networks", RFC 5548, May 2009.

   [RFC5826]  Brandt, A., Buron, J., and G. Porcu, "Home Automation



Tripathi, et al.          Expires July 15, 2011                [Page 17]

Internet-Draft    draft-tripathi-roll-rpl-simulation-06     January 2011


              Routing Requirements in Low Power and Lossy Networks,
              draft-ietf-roll-home-routing-reqs-08 (work in progress)",
              September 2009.

   [RFC5867]  Martocci, J., Riou, N., Mil, P., and W. Vermeylen,
              "Building Automation Routing Requirements in Low Power and
              Lossy Networks, draft-ietf-roll-building-routing-reqs-07
              (work in progress)", September 2009.

   [RFC5873]  Pister, K., Thubert, P.,  Dwars, S., Phinney, T.,
              "Industrial Routing Requirements in Low Power and Lossy
              Networks, draft-ietf-roll-indus-routing-reqs-06 (work in
              progress)", June 2009.

   [draft-iphc]
              J. Jurski, "Limited IP Header Compression over PPP,
              draft-jurski-pppext-iphc-02.txt (work in progress)", March
              2007.


Authors' Addresses

   Joydeep Tripathi (editor)
   Drexel University
   3141 Chestnut Street 7-313
   Philadelphia, PA  19104
   USA

   Email: jt369@drexel.edu


   Jaudelice C. de Oliveira (editor)
   Drexel University
   3141 Chestnut Street 7-313
   Philadelphia, PA  19104
   USA

   Email: jau@ece.drexel.edu


   JP Vasseur (editor)
   Cisco Systems, Inc.
   11, Rue Camille Desmoulins
   Issy Les Moulineaux,   92782
   France

   Email: jpv@cisco.com




Tripathi, et al.          Expires July 15, 2011                [Page 18]


