TICTOC                                                       D. Marlow,
Internet Draft                                        S. Knickerbocker,
Intended status: Informational                             T. Plunkett,
Expires: August 25, 2011                                        NSWC-DD

                                                      February 25, 2011
 
                                    
     Network Time Mechanisms for Improving Computer Clock Accuracy 
            draft-marlow-tictoc-computer-clock-accuracy-00.txt 
    

Status of this Memo 

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the 
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.  

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents 
   at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as 
   reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
 
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html 

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 27, 2011. 

Copyright Notice 

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the 
   document authors. All rights reserved. 

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal 
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents 
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of 
   publication of this document. Please review these documents 
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with 
   respect to this document. 

 
 


Marlow/Knickerbocker/Plunkett Expires August 25 2011           [Page 1] 

Internet-Draft    Improving Computer Clock Accuracy       February 2011 
         

Abstract 

   This draft describes network time synchronization mechanisms which 
   may enable increased accuracy, beyond that possible with the current 
   Network Time Protocol version 4 (NTPv4) standard, to time and 
   frequency of computer clocks. The mechanisms considered are those 
   that will provide improved estimates as to when a packet is put on 
   the network, transferred across a network, or taken from the 
   network. Potential standardization actions will be considered for 
   the mechanisms considered, though no such actions are recommended at 
   this time.  

Table of Contents 

   1. Introduction...................................................2 
      1.1. Motivation for Increased Performance......................3 
      1.2. NTP/PTP Commonality and Differences.......................4 
   2. Use Case Targeted..............................................4 
      2.1. Emerging Need for NTP and PTP Commonality.................5 
   3. Approach.......................................................5 
   4. Mechanisms Considered..........................................5 
      4.1. NTP Interleave............................................5 
         4.1.1. Standardization Considerations.......................6 
      4.2. Use of IEEE 1588 PTP and 802.1AS Mechanisms in the 
      Underlying Network Service (e.g., Network Interface Controller 
      [NIC]).........................................................6 
         4.2.1. Standardization Considerations.......................6 
      4.3. Use of IEEE 1588 PTP to Synchronize Computer Clocks.......6 
         4.3.1. Standardization Considerations.......................7 
   5. Early Experimentation..........................................7 
      5.1. Future Experimentation....................................8 
   6. Analysis of Results............................................9 
   7. Security Considerations.......................................10 
   8. Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA) Considerations.....10 
   9. Conclusions...................................................10 
   10. Informative References.......................................11 
   11. Acknowledgments..............................................11 
    

1. Introduction 

   The IETF Timing over IP Connection and Transfer of Clock (TICTOC) 
   Working Group was formed to investigate emerging needs to distribute 
   highly accurate time and frequency information over Internet 
   Protocol (IP) and Multiprotocol Label Switching (MPLS) Packet 
   Switched Networks (PSNs). In this draft, new mechanisms beyond those 
   identified in the NTPv4 standard (i.e., Request For Comment (RFC) 
      
      
Marlow/Knickerbocker/Plunkett  Expires August 25, 2011         [Page 2] 

Internet-Draft    Improving Computer Clock Accuracy       February 2011 
         

   5905) are considered to provide increased time synchronization 
   accuracy for computer (i.e., operating system) clocks' time and 
   frequency. The mechanisms considered are those that will provide 
   improved estimates as to when a packet is put on the network, 
   transferred across a network, or taken from the network. This draft 
   identifies a set of mechanisms that are candidates for 
   experimentation. Standardization considerations will be described 
   for the mechanisms identified.  

   The purpose of this draft is to examine methods for improving NTPv4 
   time synchronization performance. The authors are requesting 
   comments and contributions on the mechanisms described and on 
   additional mechanisms that should be considered. It is hoped that 
   discussions within the IETF TICTOC Working Group will motivate 
   experimentation that will lead to standardization actions to enable 
   better accuracy to those utilizing a future Network Time Protocol 
   (NTP) specification. 

1.1. Motivation for Increased Performance 

   There are two reasons to improve upon the time synchronization 
   performance that is currently available from NTP. Not only is the 
   increased performance needed for existing product designs that would 
   make use of the added performance if it were available, but it is 
   expected that new uses will be identified that were not even 
   possible until performance is improved. This is similar to how 
   network speeds are increased every several years, and the uses for 
   the increased network bandwidth soon follow. 

   The current methods for achieving an increase in time 
   synchronization performance involve use of a technology separate 
   from the existing computer network (e.g., Inter-Range 
   Instrumentation Group [IRIG] technology) or use of a technology like 
   Precision Time Protocol (PTP), which is defined in the Institute of 
   Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) 1588 standard. With PTP, 
   the computer applications must interface with the installed PTP 
   hardware in order to read time from its oscillator. There is a lot 
   of resiliency built into NTP, which does not exist in the PTP 
   hardware oscillator. It is unknown what happens to the time provided 
   by the PTP hardware when a network switch in the network path to the 
   time source is temporarily unavailable (i.e., the network switch 
   gets rebooted). It would be beneficial to have the resiliency of the 
   NTP algorithms be paired with the highly accurate PTP hardware-based 
   time distribution.  



      
      
Marlow/Knickerbocker/Plunkett  Expires August 25, 2011         [Page 3] 

Internet-Draft    Improving Computer Clock Accuracy       February 2011 
         

1.2. NTP/PTP Commonality and Differences 

   NTP and PTP are both packet-based protocols for exchanging time with 
   a time server over a computer network. Both protocols are used to 
   determine the offset between two independent clocks. Both implement 
   a hierarchical tree structure for obtaining time from a master time 
   source through intermediary time sources to time clients. Both 
   assume network paths are symmetric, and both have their own methods 
   for addressing network delays that are not symmetric. NTP uses its 
   algorithms to determine which of several consecutive time 
   measurements are most accurate and uses that measurement. PTP makes 
   use of hardware means of measuring delays as packets traverse 
   intermediate network devices and corrects its received time 
   information based upon those measured delays.  

   Because PTP has the ability to measure actual packet delays and to 
   correct for them, PTP can provide the most accurate measurement of 
   clock offset between two clocks. PTP does not define the method for 
   synchronizing that clock once the highly accurate time measurements 
   have been obtained. PTP is normally used to synchronize a hardware 
   clock located on an interface card and does not synchronize the 
   operating system clock. NTP, on the other hand, possesses the 
   ability to synchronize the operating system clock based upon 
   received clock offset measurements. The NTP algorithms have a lot of 
   resiliency so that operating system clocks stay stable despite the 
   conditions on the network.  

2. Use Case Targeted 

   The use case considered by this internet draft is a dense 
   concentration of computing elements connected by a network. A 
   satellite-based time source (e.g., Global Positioning System [GPS]) 
   is used for synchronizing primary time servers. Secondary time 
   servers and leaf computing elements are synchronized to the primary 
   time servers via the network. In this use case, there are 
   approximately 150 or so total computers where there are 3 to 4 
   levels of time servers. These time servers may have to communicate 
   to each other through layer 2 and layer 3 network switches (could be 
   10 to 20 different layer 2 subnetworks). All of the computers are 
   connected together through gigabit or faster network connections. In 
   this environment, there will be some groups of computers that will 
   need to synchronize to each other to within a microsecond, while 
   other groups of computers only have to be synchronized to each other 
   to within a millisecond. In this use case, there is one 
   interconnected time synchronization scheme where NTP, PTP, or a 
   combination of both is used to meet all time synchronization needs. 

      
      
Marlow/Knickerbocker/Plunkett  Expires August 25, 2011         [Page 4] 

Internet-Draft    Improving Computer Clock Accuracy       February 2011 
         

2.1. Emerging Need for NTP and PTP Commonality  

   Due to its accuracy capabilities, PTP is beginning to replace NTP as 
   the base protocol for time clients within dense computing sites. 
   This results in an implementation in which some hosts use PTP while 
   others use NTP within the same building and sometimes within the 
   same room. Over time, hosts are being changed from NTP to PTP. This 
   leads to an emerging need to provide similar approaches for basic 
   time service functions for operational ease of managing the time 
   distribution assets. Examples of functions where commonality is 
   considered to be an emerging need include providing synchronization 
   of the computer clock, providing management to time clients, and 
   configuring timeservers. A standard means of synchronizing the 
   computer clock for both protocols is in particular of interest 
   because there appears to be no value in using different methods when 
   the hosts that both protocols are supporting are often working 
   within the same system.  

   In addition, there are highly accurate PTP time clients that could 
   serve as highly accurate secondary timeservers for the NTP time 
   clients if this capability were supported in vendor products. 

3. Approach 

   The approach taken by the authors of this draft includes determining 
   what the current accuracy capabilities are with NTPv4 and 
   investigating additional mechanisms that may provide improvements in 
   accuracy. Through experiments of those additional mechanisms, 
   estimations of improvements can be calculated. Depending on the 
   standardization difficulty and potential benefits offered, more than 
   one standardization action may be recommended in the future. 

4. Mechanisms Considered 

4.1. NTP Interleave 

   NTP Interleave is an extension of the NTPv4 protocol, which is 
   included in the current NTP distribution [1]. It is designed to be 
   backward compatible (i.e., not affecting NTP implementations that do 
   not use the interleave extensions). It also utilizes the same NTP 
   packet format as the current standard NTPv4. NTP Interleave uses an 
   IEEE 1588 PTP-like feature that provides a follow-up packet with a 
   better estimate of when a previous NTP packet was sent on the 
   network and a message exchange sequence to determine network mean 
   path delay.  


      
      
Marlow/Knickerbocker/Plunkett  Expires August 25, 2011         [Page 5] 

Internet-Draft    Improving Computer Clock Accuracy       February 2011 
         

   This mechanism could be used by some of the primary time servers for 
   synchronizing secondary (i.e., lower stratum) time servers and leaf 
   computing elements, which have very accurate time synchronization 
   requirements.  

   Future experimentation may identify what gains are possible with 
   this mechanism. 

4.1.1. Standardization Considerations 

   If the NTP Interleave investigation generates promising results, 
   this may initiate a standardization proposal to add this capability 
   to the NTPv4 standard.  

4.2. Use of IEEE 1588 PTP and 802.1AS Mechanisms in the Underlying 
   Network Service (e.g., Network Interface Controller [NIC]) 

   The purpose of investigating this mechanism is to determine if using 
   special capabilities in the underlying network service can improve 
   the timestamp estimates when NTP packets are put on the network, 
   transferred across networks, or taken from the network.  

4.2.1. Standardization Considerations 

   If the investigation of these mechanisms generates promising 
   results, this may initiate a standardization proposal for additions 
   to the NTPv4 standard to make use of these capabilities. 
   Alternatively, a modification to the NTPv4 standard may be proposed, 
   which would enable hardware assists to be incorporated into future 
   NICs. 

4.3. Use of IEEE 1588 PTP to Synchronize Computer Clocks 

   The purpose of investigating this mechanism is to determine the 
   viability of using the IEEE 1588 to synchronize computing elements, 
   which require very accurate synchronization. This mechanism 
   considers bringing the 1588 synchronization all the way to the 
   computer clock through a standardized clock discipline algorithm. 
   Computing elements synchronized by 1588 are candidates to be time 
   servers (by the use of NTP) for computing elements not synchronized 
   by 1588. Based on their respective strengths, the natural way to 
   merge NTP and PTP would be to use PTP as the means of obtaining 
   extremely accurate time information from across the network and to 
   let the NTP algorithms use that time to keep local clocks 
   synchronized. 


      
      
Marlow/Knickerbocker/Plunkett  Expires August 25, 2011         [Page 6] 

Internet-Draft    Improving Computer Clock Accuracy       February 2011 
         

4.3.1. Standardization Considerations 

   If the investigation of this mechanism generates promising results, 
   this may initiate a standardization proposal to specify a 1588 
   profile for use by NTP. It may be possible to replace the current 
   NTP clock coordination services without affecting the NTP time 
   management services or the clock access mechanisms used by each 
   operating system. A variety of studies will be needed if this 
   approach is pursued, including a study to determine if there are any 
   issues for secondary time servers to run both NTP and PTP. If such 
   issues are identified, standards activities may be needed in the 
   IETF or in IEEE 1588.  

5. Early Experimentation 

   Some preliminary experiments were performed that tested the new 
   Interleave mode available in NTP version 4.2.6. This mode mimics the 
   operation of PTP defined by IEEE 1588 where an additional follow-up 
   message is sent so that a more accurate transmission time can be 
   used. In this experiment, seven workstations running Red Hat 
   Enterprise Linux (RHEL) 5 were used. These workstations are 2-years 
   old and make use of two dual-core processors. Since the GPS-based 
   (i.e., stratum 1) time server does not currently have version 4.2.6 
   of NTP available, which supports the interleave mode, one of the 
   seven workstations was synchronized to the stratum 1 time server; 
   then, served as the stratum 2 time server to the other six stratum 3 
   workstations. The stratum 2 server and four of the six other 
   workstations were upgraded to use NTP version 4.2.6, while the 
   remaining two workstations were left running version 4.2.2 of NTP 
   that was included with RHEL 5. 

   Interleave mode was achieved by using the "xleave" option when 
   either the broadcast mode or peer mode was used under NTP. The 
   stratum 2 server was configured as a broadcast server, making use of 
   the standard multicast address and using the "xleave" option. Two of 
   the workstations running NTP 4.2.6 were configured as multicast 
   clients so that the Interleave mode was utilized. The other two NTP 
   4.2.6 workstations were configured to synchronize to the stratum 2 
   server using standard client/server (unicast) mode. The two 
   workstations running 4.2.2 of NTP were configured to be broadcast 
   clients; however, they did not use Interleave mode since NTP 4.2.2 
   does not include Interleave support. All NTP polling intervals were 
   configured to 16 seconds. 

   Offset measurements were obtained between the six clients and the 
   stratum 2 server using the ntpdate command with the "-q" option. 
   Measurements were taken every minute over a period of approximately 
 
      
Marlow/Knickerbocker/Plunkett  Expires August 25, 2011         [Page 7] 

Internet-Draft    Improving Computer Clock Accuracy       February 2011 
         

   four days. These workstations were not running any other major 
   tasks, and NTP ran over a network with no discernable network load. 
   All of the workstations were connected through the same Virtual 
   Local Area Network on the same network switch (i.e., no routers 
   involved). All of the network connections were 100 Mbit/sec 
   Ethernet. 

   Some results were obtained from the experiments where the average 
   and the standard deviation of the absolute value of clock offset 
   were measured. The worst behaved NTP Interleave client was able to 
   stay synchronized with an average clock offset of 9 microseconds 
   with a standard deviation of 8 microseconds. The worst behaved 
   computer that synchronized using client/server mode was able to 
   maintain an average clock offset of 11 microseconds with a standard 
   deviation of 10 microseconds. The worst behaved broadband (without 
   NTP Interleave) client stayed synchronized with an average clock 
   offset of 49 microseconds and with a standard deviation of 58 
   microseconds. 

   These results illustrate that broadcast with NTP Interleave does 
   provide results that are better than having every client poll the 
   server via unicast. However, the result is not significantly better 
   (e.g., not an order of magnitude better). Preliminary experiments 
   with hardware-based PTP have been performed in the past where the 
   average offsets between PTP NICs and the PTP Grandmaster clock are 
   in the hundreds of nanoseconds with standard deviations in the tens 
   of nanoseconds.  

5.1. Future Experimentation   

   The results so far should be treated as preliminary, and further 
   experiments are needed to draw conclusions. One concern is that the 
   clock offsets are in the microsecond range. The use of ntpdate may 
   not be a valid way to accurately measure clock offsets at this level 
   since ntpdate makes measurements across the network and is 
   susceptible to errors caused by variations in network delay. Further 
   work is needed to ensure valid offset measurements. An out-of-band 
   measurement technique, which is not affected by variations in 
   network delay, needs to be investigated for use in future 
   experiments.  

   Another concern is that no load has been applied either to the 
   processor or to the network carrying the NTP packets. Future 
   experiments need to be performed to measure the resiliency of the 
   NTP Interleave while under network and processor load and then make 
   comparisons to the other time synchronization methods. This 
   experiment was performed in a configuration in which the test 
 
      
Marlow/Knickerbocker/Plunkett  Expires August 25, 2011         [Page 8] 

Internet-Draft    Improving Computer Clock Accuracy       February 2011 
         

   workstations were connected to the same network switch. Future 
   experiments should be performed to determine how performance is 
   affected when a more complex network configuration is used. 

   Developing a standard to define time synchronization performance 
   metrics would be beneficial by allowing different experimental 
   efforts to be performed in a way that the results are comparable. 

6. Analysis of Results 

   In 2008, it was reported [2] that the synchronization of computer 
   clocks using NTPv4 over a Local Area Network (LAN) can approach 
   values on the order of ~145us (mean plus 3 sigma). This has been 
   demonstrated in the laboratory and was achieved across a single 
   stratum (e.g., stratum 1 to stratum 2). Recently, using newer 
   hardware and a newer version of NTP, time synchronization values 
   were measured on the order of ~40us (mean plus 3 sigma). The 
   variation in the time synchronization comprises the majority of the 
   40us value. The results need to be analyzed in detail, but in a 
   little over two years, the time synchronization of computer clocks 
   over a LAN has improved; most likely due to hardware improvements 
   and minor software enhancements. 

   If this 40us synchronization can be maintained from stratum to 
   stratum for all subsequent tiers in a well-engineered network with 3 
   to 5 stratums, a maximum theoretical time synchronization offset on 
   the order of 120 to 200us could be achieved. A 50 percent 
   improvement in the variability of clock synchronization from stratum 
   to stratum would reduce this number to less than 125us. This does 
   not imply that stratum-to-stratum accuracy should not be improved. 
   On the contrary, by working on the accuracy and variability together 
   all users of time synchronization will benefit. This needs to be 
   accomplished without overloading the computer or the network. 

   A 50 percent improvement appears to be a reasonable goal; however, 
   if the stratum-to-stratum synchronization variability could be 
   improved by an order of magnitude, it is reasonable to anticipate 
   maximum theoretical time synchronization offsets of 50us or less in 
   a well-behaved LAN and potentially in the hundreds of microseconds 
   for a Wide Area Network. Follow-on discussions within the IETF 
   TICTOC Working Group are needed to define what level of improvement 
   in accuracy would warrant a standardization action to add an 
   Interleave option to the NTP standard. 




      
      
Marlow/Knickerbocker/Plunkett  Expires August 25, 2011         [Page 9] 

Internet-Draft    Improving Computer Clock Accuracy       February 2011 
         

7. Security Considerations 

   Security aspects of the aforementioned options will need to be 
   considered in more detail. 

8. Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA) Considerations 

   No IANA actions are required as a result of the publication of this 
   document. 

9. Conclusions 

   Preliminary results tentatively indicate that an Interleave 
   capability can provide a modest improvement to the accuracy achieved 
   with NTPv4 and, as a result of these preliminary findings, the 
   authors recommend conducting further testing to determine whether 
   this should be added as an option to the NTPv4 standard. Preliminary 
   results also tentatively indicate that Interleave will not provide 
   accuracies in the range that PTP with hardware assists can; thus, 
   the other two mechanisms described in this paper should be pursued 
   in parallel. 

   Assuming any of the proposed mechanisms in this draft or other 
   mechanisms proposed through IETF TICTOC discussions provide a 
   significant improvement in computer clock time synchronization, it 
   is recommended that the IETF TICTOC Working Group initiate work on a 
   standards-track targeted working group Internet-Draft. 

   It would be of benefit to the IETF TICTOC Working Group to 
   standardize the performance metrics used in describing the behavior 
   of clock synchronization. Such a standard would enable better 
   comparisons between the mechanisms considered. In addition to the 
   same definitions of the metrics used, better agreement should be 
   obtained in experiments being performed by different organizations. 

   The authors are interested in contributions on the mechanisms 
   described in this draft as well as on additional mechanisms that may 
   improve the accuracy of computer clocks synchronized via a network. 
   The authors request that other experimental results on mechanisms 
   that can improve NTPv4 accuracy be shared. It is hoped that 
   discussions on this topic within the IETF TICTOC Working Group will 
   lead to standardization actions to enable better accuracy to those 
   utilizing a future NTP specification. 




      
      
Marlow/Knickerbocker/Plunkett  Expires August 25, 2011        [Page 10] 

Internet-Draft    Improving Computer Clock Accuracy       February 2011 
         

10. Informative References 

   [1]   Mills, David, 1 September 2010. "Analysis and Simulation of 
         the NTP On-Wire Protocols." 
         http://www.eecis.udel.edu/~mills/onwire.html.            
         Accessed 3 September 2010. 

   [2]   O'Donoghue, K., Glass, M., and Plunkett, T. (2008). "Next 
         Steps In Network Time Synchronization For Navy Shipboard 
         Applications" [Electronic Version]. 40th Annual Precise Time 
         and Time Interval (PTTI) Meeting, pp. 187-195. 

11. Acknowledgments 

   The authors wish to thank Karen O'Donoghue (Internet Society) for 
   her valuable comments. 

   Approved for public release. Distribution is unlimited. 

         

   This document was prepared using 2-Word-v2.0.template.dot. 

      

Authors' Addresses 

   David Marlow 
   NSWC-DD 
   17214 Avenue B Suite 126 
   Dahlgren, VA. 22448-5147 
   USA 
   Email: david.marlow@navy.mil 
         

   Sterling Knickerbocker 
   NSWC-DD 
   17214 Avenue B Suite 126 
   Dahlgren, VA. 22448-5147 
   USA 
   Email: sterling.knickerbocker@navy.mil 
         

   Timothy Plunkett 
   NSWC-DD 
      
      
Marlow/Knickerbocker/Plunkett  Expires August 25, 2011        [Page 11] 

Internet-Draft    Improving Computer Clock Accuracy       February 2011 
         

   17214 Avenue B Suite 126 
   Dahlgren, VA. 22448-5147 
   USA 
   Email: timothy.plunkett@navy.mil 
         









































      
      
Marlow/Knickerbocker/Plunkett  Expires August 25, 2011        [Page 12] 

