


AVT                                                       T. VanCaenegem
Internet-Draft                                            Alcatel-Lucent
Intended status:  Standards Track                         March 07, 2011
Expires:  September 8, 2011


 RTCP FB NACK storm suppression and its impact on retransmission in RTP
                      SSM sessions with unicast FB
           draft-vancaenegem-avtcore-fb-supp-and-retransm-00

Abstract

   This document discusses how RTCP Feedback storm suppression
   negatively affects retransmission efficacy for Source Specific
   Multicast sessions with unicast feedback architectures and proposes
   some recommendations by means of additional signaling (e.g.  RSI
   message and new attribute parameters) and a small AVPF FB suppression
   rule modification resulting in a overall better system where the FB
   suppression can be maintained but with a optimised retransmission
   efficacy.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 8, 2011.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect



VanCaenegem             Expires September 8, 2011               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft       RTCP FB NACK storm suppression           March 2011


   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Requirements Notation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Considered Architecture  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   4.  Feedback suppression in combination with retransmission
       for SSM with unicast feedback with single FT/RS  . . . . . . .  7
     4.1.  Packet Loss Upstream of the Distribution Source  . . . . .  7
     4.2.  Packet Loss Downstream of the Distribution Source  . . . .  9
       4.2.1.  Simple feedback model  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
       4.2.2.  Feedback summary model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   5.  Feedback suppression and retransmission for SSM with
       unicast feedback with multiple and disjoint FTs  . . . . . . . 13
   6.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
   7.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
     7.1.  Registration of SDP Attributes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
   8.  Acknowledgments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
   9.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
     9.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
     9.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
   Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
























VanCaenegem             Expires September 8, 2011               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft       RTCP FB NACK storm suppression           March 2011


1.  Introduction

   RTCP Feedback (FB) storm suppression is efficiently realised by means
   of the AVPF algorithm implemented at RTP receivers participating to
   multi-party RTP sessions, defined in [RFC4585].  In RTP multi-party
   sessions, a single event may impact many or even all RTP receivers.
   RTP receivers that react on a packet loss event by sending RTCP FB
   NACK messages, must follow the [RFC4585] AVPF timing rules which
   include a suppression rule:  a RTP receiver receiving the same FB
   message as the one it intends to send, must discard its own FB
   message.  This results in FB storm suppression or mitigation.  The
   AVPF FB storm suppression mechanism is introduced to protect the
   network, server(s) and indirectly all the receivers and works well in
   most RTP topologies, including SSM with unicast feedback.  However,
   such RTCP feedback storm suppression does result in decreased
   visibility on the status of RTP receivers, and hence impacts
   monitoring service and also services triggered by the reception of
   such RTCP FB messages, such as the packet loss recovery service by
   means of RTP retransmission .  RTP retransmissions are requested from
   RTP receivers by RTCP FB NACK messages, reporting RTP packet loss.
   The internet draft "draft-wu-avt-retransmission-supression-rtp"
   discusses FB storm suppression, and proposes a new RTCP message that
   is called "third party loss" message that can be taken advantage to
   counter FB storms for various considered architectures of various RTP
   multi-party sessions.  However, the usability of such message in the
   context of the AVPF suppression algorithm is not clearly addressed
   and the possible interference with a packet loss recovery service by
   means of RTP retransmission is omitted in draft
   "draft-wu-avt-retransmission-supression-rtp".  For instance, in the
   transport translator scenario that is addressed in the draft, all
   RTCP messages must normally be forwarded, and hence every RTCP NACK/
   FIR FB message from one receiver will be sent to all other receivers,
   where the [RFC4585] FB suppression rule will kick-in.  Hence the
   "third party loss" message does not bring substantial value.

   The present draft discusses also FB storm suppression, but focuses on
   RTCP SSM architectures with unicast feedback target(s).  It describes
   how the goals of FB NACK storm suppression and the goal of
   retransmission in terms of service enhancement are often in conflict
   with each other.  To that extent it discusses several packet loss
   event use cases for RTCP SSM with unicast FB -for both modes defined
   in [RFC5760] including the SSM architecture with multiple FTs and
   makes proposals to reconcile suppression and (retransmission) service
   fulfillment for SSM with unicast feedback, taking into account the
   minimisation of network bandwidth and server resources.  In certain
   scenarios/architectures, the "third party loss" message from
   "draft-wu-avt-retransmission-supression-rtp" can be leveraged.




VanCaenegem             Expires September 8, 2011               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft       RTCP FB NACK storm suppression           March 2011


2.  Requirements Notation

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].














































VanCaenegem             Expires September 8, 2011               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft       RTCP FB NACK storm suppression           March 2011


3.  Considered Architecture

   In this draft we consider the Source Specific Multicast (SSM) with
   unicast feedback architecture as defined in [RFC5760] defining one or
   several media senders, a Distribution Source (DS)-sourcing the SSM-,
   one or several Feedback Targets (FT) that may be co-joint with the DS
   and the SSM RTP receivers that provide unicast feedback to a FT.  On
   top, similar as defined in [I-D.ietf-avt-rapid-acquisition-for-rtp] ,
   also a Retransmission Source is considered that is co-joint with the
   Feedback Target, and together constitute the Retransmission Server
   (RS).  It is assumed that the receivers support sending RTCP NACK FB
   messages .  Two models for SSM with unicast FB have been defined in
   [RFC5760]:

   o  In distribution source feedback summary model, the unicast RTCP
      Receiver Report messages from the SSM RTP receivers are default
      aggregated by the DS and their information is transmitted as
      Receiver Summary Information (RSI) messages in the SSM session.
      The RTCP FB packets are default terminated by the DS.  However,
      the DS may also aggregate or forward RTCP FB packets and transmit
      them on the SSM, when this is explicitly signaled.  Note that from
      the RTP perspective, the DS is an RTP receiver generating its own
      RTCP RR as well as other RTCP packets and sending them to the
      receiver group and media senders.

   o  In simple feedback model the DS must reflect all RTCP messages
      (hence including RTCP FB) received in unicast via the FT from the
      SSM RTP receivers.

   In the remainder of this draft, both models will be considered.  It
   must be noted that for large group of receivers in a SSM with unicast
   feedback session, the feedback summary model is the most useful one,
   as the simple feedback model would result in significant reflected
   RTCP messaging overhead in the network and for all the SSM receivers,
   from bandwidth resources and processing overhead point of view.  We
   also make in this draft a distinction between two topologies for SSM
   with unicast feedback with retransmission server capability :

   o  a topology where there is one DS and a single FT, and where the FT
      is combined with a Retransmission Source function.  The FT/RS
      could be joint or disjoint from the DS, but this is not really
      relevant in the discussion.  Because a retransmission packet is in
      general a response on a NACK directed to a FT, combining the FT
      and the RS in a single entity is a logical choice.  In the
      remainder of this draft, the co-location of FT and RS is assumed,
      and they represent together the retransmission server, in
      agreement with [I-D.ietf-avt-rapid-acquisition-for-rtp].




VanCaenegem             Expires September 8, 2011               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft       RTCP FB NACK storm suppression           March 2011


   o  a topology where we have multiple FTs that are disjoint from the
      DS, and where each FT is combined with a Retransmission Source
      function.  Also here is assumed that the FT is co-located with the
      Retransmission Source, being together the Retransmission Server.

   The interference of the [RFC4585] FB suppression mechanism with the
   client's ability for receiving retransmissions from the RS is
   discussed first for SSM with unicast feedback and single FT/RS,
   followed by a discussion for an SSM architecture with multiple FT/RS.










































VanCaenegem             Expires September 8, 2011               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft       RTCP FB NACK storm suppression           March 2011


4.  Feedback suppression in combination with retransmission for SSM with
    unicast feedback with single FT/RS

   In the SSM architecture with single FT/RS that is either co-joint or
   separate from the DS, a FB storm can always be prevented or mitigated
   because SSM RTP receivers implementing AVPF, must adhere to the
   suppression rules defined in [RFC4585].  It is explored in this and
   the following sections how this impacts a RTP retransmission packet
   loss repair service for a given packet loss event at a SSM RTP
   receiver.

4.1.  Packet Loss Upstream of the Distribution Source

   As an first example of a packet loss event triggering FB suppression,
   a packet drop event somewhere along the data path between a media
   sender and the DS is considered.  All SSM RTP receivers will notice
   this packet loss, including the DS itself (in the RTP stream between
   the media sender and the DS).

   o  In the simple feedback model, all RTCP messages are relayed back
      to all receivers and the media source(s).  Hence, the first RTCP
      NACK(s) sent by a SSM RTP receiver or a subset of the SSM RTP
      receivers, will be relayed by the DS to all SSM receivers, which
      will make the other RTP SSM receivers refrain from sending a NACK,
      as determined by the RTP receiver's AVPF RTCP scheduling
      algorithm.  This will limit the amount of RTCP FB traffic from the
      SSM receivers both to the DS and to the media source(s), and avoid
      a FB storm.

   o  In the feedback summary model, the DS is an RTP receiver
      generating its own receiver reports and sending these to the
      receiver group and to the media senders.  For the given use case
      example, the DS can generate its own RTCP FB message and send it
      to the SSM group.  All SSM receivers supporting and implementing
      AVPF will adhere to the FB suppression rule defined in [RFC4585],
      and hence a FB storm is avoided.  The DS can choose to send a FB
      NACK multiple times for redundancy reasons, as long as it complies
      to the AVPF RTCP scheduling algorithm.

   Consider now that the FT is also a retransmission server which can
   respond with retransmissions when receiving a RTCP FB NACK from a RTP
   receiver- provided this server has access to the original RTP packet.
   Note that for the considered packet loss use case, the retransmission
   server will also detect the packet loss.  In both SSM models when
   considering large groups of receivers, at least one but not more than
   a few receivers will send a NACK FB.  However still all receivers
   will be impacted by the packet loss and desire a retransmission.  A
   fundamental aspect of combining retransmission service with FB



VanCaenegem             Expires September 8, 2011               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft       RTCP FB NACK storm suppression           March 2011


   suppression mechanism, is that retransmissions may be sent to
   receivers that are unsollicited.  An unsollicited retransmission can
   be defined as a retransmission received by a receiver which was not
   requested by this same receiver via an RTCP FB NACK message or any
   other explicit signaling from that receiver.  Sollicited
   retransmission is a retransmission provided to a receiver which was
   explicitly requested by that same receiver.  For the given packet
   loss event, when the RS is capable of recovering the lost packet (the
   way this is achieved is not relevant nor discussed here), it can
   provide the retransmission to all RTP receivers.  This retransmission
   can be performed either in a each separate unicast RTP retransmission
   sessions to each receiver or - in a single SSM RTP session that is
   session muxed with the original RTP SSM.

   Providing the retransmission over SSM has the advantage that

   o  the retransmission packet must be transmitted by the DS/RS only
      once, saving both network and server resources

   o  because the retransmission is not explicitly sollicited by means
      of a NACK, it may happen that the unsollicited retransmission
      packet when transmitted in unicast is blocked by any intermediate
      gateway on the path between the retransmission server and the RTP
      receiver.

   When a packet loss repair service is announced as a retransmission
   server-sourced SSM retransmission session, a RTP receiver that joins
   this RTP SSM retransmission session via IGMP/MLP, implicitly
   indicates it is willing to accept retransmissions over this SSM, that
   are unsollicited.  When there is no SSM retransmission session in
   place and signaled to the receivers, a RS can of course still send
   unsollicited retransmissions in those unicast retransmission sessions
   that are established as per [I-D.ietf-avt-ports-for-ucast-mcast-rtp].
   It is implementation-specific whether RTP receivers choose to ignore
   received unsollicited retransmission packets (in the same way as RTP
   receivers may ignore retransmission packets for which the receiver
   did send a NACK FB message, i.e. sollicited retransmission)

   It should be noted that when an SSM RTP receiver is involved in both
   a unicast retransmission session and a SSM retransmission session
   sourced by the same retransmission server, a retransmission of a
   packet transmitted in the original SSM may be sent in the unicast
   retransmission session, in the multicast retransmission session or
   both.  The retransmission server SHOULD send unsollicited
   retransmissions over the retransmission SSM session when such session
   is available.  A retransmission server that receives a RTCP FB NACK
   and decides to provide a retransmission, should (also) send that
   retransmission in the unicast retransmission session to the receiver



VanCaenegem             Expires September 8, 2011               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft       RTCP FB NACK storm suppression           March 2011


   that sent the RTCP FB NACK (when such a unicast retransmission
   session is available and established as described in
   [I-D.ietf-avt-ports-for-ucast-mcast-rtp].

   In conclusion, note that in this packet loss event use case:

   o  all SSM RTP receivers were impacted by the packet loss and
      detected this packet loss

   o  all receivers behave compliant to [RFC4585] in terms of RTCP
      transmission scheduling and suppression rules

   o  no RTCP FB storms occur

   o  all SSM RTP receivers can receive the retransmission either in a
      dedicated retransmission SSM or in separate unicast retransmission
      sessions established by the RTP receivers.

   Whether the retransmission server does provide a retransmission and
   to which RTP receiver (when using unicast retransmission) is governed
   by the retransmission server policy.

4.2.  Packet Loss Downstream of the Distribution Source

   As a second example packet loss event triggering feedback
   suppression, consider a packet drop event in the SSM tree downstream
   of the DS/FT, which may impact just one SSM RTP receiver but can
   possibly also impact a large set of SSM RTP receivers (all those that
   are downstream of the SSM tree branch where the packet loss event
   occured).  The DS/RS in general does not know a particular RTP packet
   got lost untill it starts receiving RTCP FB NACK(s) from one or more
   SSM RTP receivers.  Note that for the considered packet loss event
   use case, the RS will have in its cache the missing packet as the
   original packet got dropped downstream of the DS/RS.  The feedback
   suppression will, depending on where the packet was lost, possibly
   interfere with the packet loss repair service based on RTP
   retransmission , as explained below for the two SSM feedback models.

4.2.1.  Simple feedback model

   Consider the simple feedback model where a retransmission server is
   in place that is co-located with the DS.  Assume that multiple RTP
   receivers observe the same packet loss in the RTP SSM, which is most
   likely caused by a single packet loss drop in a branch of the SSM
   tree connecting to the impacted receivers.  Even though the
   retransmission server may be capable of providing a retransmission to
   all impacted SSM RTP receivers, even when each receiver individually
   transmits a RTCP FB NACK, some receivers may not have a chance to



VanCaenegem             Expires September 8, 2011               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft       RTCP FB NACK storm suppression           March 2011


   receive a retransmission.  This is due to the fact that the DS is
   supposed to reflect all RTCP FB messages.  Hence because of the RTCP
   FB transmission suppression algorithm, the RS will not know which
   (other) SSM receivers experienced the same packet loss.

   There are two ways to make sure that all impacted receivers do get a
   retransmission:

   o  FB suppression is enabled by having the DS reflecting any RTCP FB
      message received, but the RS does send a unsollicited
      retransmission to all SSM receivers, each time a RTCP FB NACK is
      received.  This solution is not desirable as it provides
      retransmissions to SSM receivers which are -in the large majority
      of possible cases- unneeded and results in a waste of network and
      also a waste of server resources when retransmissions are provided
      over unicast.

   o  FB suppression is disabled because the DS does not forward/reflect
      RTCP FB packets down the SSM.  All SSM RTP receivers impacted by
      the loss (ranging from one to all of the SSM RTP receivers) will
      send a RTCP FB NACK.  Only when the storm of RTCP FB packets has
      no detrimental impact, the RS can respond to each NACK with a
      retransmission packet in each unicast retransmission session -or,
      alternatively, the retransmission is provided over a dedicated
      retransmission SSM.

   In summary:  the DS/RS is capable of preventing a FB storm by
   reflecting the received RTCP FB messages down the SSM with the
   disadvantage of having no visibility on which receiver has detected
   which missing packets in the SSM.  Alternatively, the DS takes the
   risk of being confronted with a FB storm by not forwarding the RTCP
   FB messages, where in general each SSM receiver that detected the
   packet loss event, can be paired with a unicast retransmission.  The
   second option is in conflict with the forwarding requirement defined
   in [RFC5760].  It is also in disagreement with the first use case
   (packet loss upstream of the DS) where a simple reflection behaviour
   does result in efficient FB suppression, without withholding the
   impacted receivers from receiving a (unsollicited) retransmission.

   The general recommended solution addressing packet loss event use
   cases 1 and 2, is therefor to allow "selective" reflection (or
   "selective" termination) in the simple feedback model for RTCP FB
   messages.  It allows feedback suppression but still giving
   visisbility to the DS on which are the impacted receivers, and
   providing reasonable guarantees on a efficient retransmission service
   to all receivers.

   With "selective" RTCP FB reflection, the DS will in general not



VanCaenegem             Expires September 8, 2011              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft       RTCP FB NACK storm suppression           March 2011


   reflect RTCP FB messages received from SSM receivers except in the
   following two cases:

   o  the DS/RS itself is subject to packet loss and will reflect any
      RTCP FB NACK received from the downstream SSM RTP receivers
      reporting this same packet loss.

   o  the DS (selectively) reflects received RTCP FB NACK, when the RS
      itself was not impacted directly by the packet loss but a certain
      threshold for incoming RTCP FB NACK packets has been reached, all
      pertaining to the same original packet in the SSM.  This threshold
      is based on the total amount of receivers reporting to the FT/RS,
      and can be adjusted dynamically, but this is a metric internal to
      the FT/DS.

   Note that there is maximum efficiency in the retransmission operation
   that may occur after reflecting the RTCP FB NACK in these two
   exception cases, if the retransmission takes place over a
   (retransmission) SSM RTP session.

   The proposal is to define an additional parameter for the "rtcp-
   unicast" SDP attribute indicating SSM sessions with unicast feedback
   operated in simple feedback mode, named "selective reflection".  Its
   meaning is that RTCP FB messages may not be reflected by the FT/DS,
   but instead terminated.  All other RTCP reports are reflected, as
   imposed by [RFC5760].

4.2.2.  Feedback summary model

   For the considered use case of packet loss downstream of the DS/RS,
   similar as discussed for the simple feedback model discussion,
   feedback suppression is enabled by having the DS selectively
   forwarding the received RTCP FB messages:  e.g. when the number of
   received RTCP FB NACKs pertaining to the same RTP packet loss crosses
   a certain threshold, the DS fowards such a RTCP FB NACK.

   "Selective Forwarding" is therefore proposed as a new parameter for
   the processing attribute in the rsi-rule in the SDP for the summary
   feedback model, that is allowed ONLY for RTCP FB packets:

   Alternatively the DS/RS always terminates RTCP FB messages, but
   prevents FB storms, in the following two ways:

   o  for packet loss events taking place upstream of the DS, the DS
      simply sends itself a RTCP FB NACK

   o  for packet loss events taking place downstream of the DS, the
      reception of RTCP FB NACKs may trigger the transmission of a new



VanCaenegem             Expires September 8, 2011              [Page 11]

Internet-Draft       RTCP FB NACK storm suppression           March 2011


      RTCP FB packet by the DS, named "3rd party NACK" which has the
      same semantics as a RTCP FB NACK, as defined in draft
      "draft-wu-avt-retransmission-supression-rtp"

   A SSM RTP receiver , receiving this message in the SSM, shall treat
   it the same way as a RTCP FB NACK received from another SSM RTP
   receiver and hence SHALL NOT send a RTCP FB message.  The DS needs to
   carefully evaluate when to send or not send such a "3rd party NACK",
   as discussed previously in this section.










































VanCaenegem             Expires September 8, 2011              [Page 12]

Internet-Draft       RTCP FB NACK storm suppression           March 2011


5.  Feedback suppression and retransmission for SSM with unicast
    feedback with multiple and disjoint FTs

   A specific case of SSM with unicast FB, is where there are multiple
   FTs disjoint from the DS.  Similar as before, in the considered
   architectures, each FT is combined with a retransmission source,
   constituting a retransmission server
   [[I-D.ietf-avt-rapid-acquisition-for-rtp]].  Note that the RS (=FT+
   BRSource) are generally not positioned in the direct SSM path between
   the DS and the SSM RTP receivers.  This architecture provides a
   scalable solution for SSM with a large population of receivers,
   because it is able to distribute RTCP feedback processing loads
   across different entities in different parts of the network.  It is
   an architecture that is well suited for IPTV networks of large
   service providers, where the DS is the head-end sourcing the SSM that
   carry broadcast streams over IP.

   [RFC5760] indicates that for the simple FB model where the FT(s) are
   disjoint from the DS, the FT must forward all RTCP packets to the DS.

   [RFC5760] indicates that for the summary FB model where the FT(s) are
   disjoint from the DS, the following:

   o  The Feedback Target(s) MAY simply forward all RTCP packets
      incoming from the RTP receivers to the Distribution Source

   o  The Feedback Target(s) MAY also perform aggregation of incoming
      RTCP packets and send only aggregated information to the
      Distribution Source.

   o  If the Feedback Target performs summarization functions, it MUST
      also act as a receiver and choose a unique SSRC for its own
      reporting towards the Distribution Source.

   The discussion on how FB suppression and retransmissions can be
   efficiently combined for the SSM with single FT topology -as
   discussed above- remains applicable and valid for the SSM with
   multiple (disjoint) FTs topology, but there is an additional aspect
   that should be addressed, and a third example packet loss event use
   case visualises this.

   The considered topology is a DS with two disjoint FT/RS entities,
   FT/RS 1 and FT/RS 2 , where each FT receives RTCP messages from a
   separate group of SSM RTP receivers.  The assumption is that a RTP
   packet (with Sequence Number N) in the original SSM got dropped in
   the network upstream of the FT 1 (and hence impacting FT 1, as well
   as all the SSM receivers that report to FT 1).  Because FT 2 does not
   get the original SSM packets from the DS via the router where the



VanCaenegem             Expires September 8, 2011              [Page 13]

Internet-Draft       RTCP FB NACK storm suppression           March 2011


   packet loss took place, the FT 2 does receive the packet with SN N
   and so do the SSM receivers reporting to FT 2.

   The FT 1 and its reporting SSM receivers experience a situation that
   is discussed in the first use case for the SSM with single FT
   topology.  Because the packet loss event impacts all SSM receivers
   reporting to FT 1, it is paramount that those receivers in general
   suppress sending a RTCP FB NACK.  Hence having the FT 1 forwarding
   the first received RTCP FB NACK(s) from a SSM RTP receiver to the DS
   -which then reflects/forwards the FB NACK over the original SSM, is
   the correct thing to do from that point of view.  However, the
   reflection /forwarding of the FB NACK by the DS means that also the
   SSM RTP receivers reporting to the FT 2 will suppress sending an RTCP
   FB NACK for packet N in the SSM, even if they detect the same packet
   loss - but which is not caused by the packet loss event impacting
   FT/RS 2 and all its reporting SSM RTP receivers.  This means there is
   a discrepancy between the network reach of the suppression (covering
   all SSM receivers) and the actual network subdomain that was commonly
   impacted by the packet loss.  The RS 2 will in general not know
   whether there are any SSM receivers -reporting to FT 2- that missed
   RTP packet with RTP SN N because of a different packet loss event .

   Note also that the unsollicited retransmission by RS 1 -following the
   packet loss with SN N detection -can remain confined to the subdomain
   impacted by the loss, when the FT is co-located with the RS (using
   either unicast retransmission sessions or a SSM retransmission
   session sourced by the RS).

   SSM with multiple disjoint unicast FTs hence may result in efficient
   feedback storm supression across all SSM RTP receivers, but this also
   prevents any SSM RTP receiver from sending a RTCP FB NACK for
   detected packet loss, even when no FB storm was imminent for the
   subdomain covered by a particular FT.  A solution for maximising the
   retransmission service fulfillment may be for the DS to also act as
   RS and always send retransmissions requested by a particular FT, over
   a separate retransmission SSM to all SSM RTP receivers.  However,
   this unnecessarily loads the network and requires all the SSM RTP
   receivers to receive both an original/primary SSM and a
   retransmission SSM.

   A more optimised solution is to keep both the FB suppression and
   retransmission within the same local "subdomain".  This can be
   enabled by adding a rule to the AVPF FB suppression algorithm, that
   makes the suppression mechanism "selective" at the SSM RTP receivers
   side.  The proposed overall solution to enable such selective
   receiver FB storm suppression algorithm, is accomplished in three
   steps:




VanCaenegem             Expires September 8, 2011              [Page 14]

Internet-Draft       RTCP FB NACK storm suppression           March 2011


   o  The SSM RTP receivers first learn the SSRC identifier of the FT
      where the FT either acts as a translator in the original SSM
      session (simple feedback model) or acts as a SSM RTP receiver.
      There are several ways through which this can happen:

      *  "in-band" :  applies only for the feedback summary model, where
         by means of a new RSI message the DS provides a listing of all
         deployed FTs with the corresponding SSRC for each of these FTs.

      *  "out-of-band" for either the feedback summary or simple
         feedback model of SSM operation, by advertising the FT's SSRC
         as a media attribute for the FT in the SSM RTP session
         description [RFC5576] .

      The "out-of-band" signaling mechanism requires the application
      signaling to know/learn the SSRCs deployed by the FTs prior to
      signaling this information to the SSM RTP receivers (those
      receivers that are not acting as FT).

   o  In the feedback summary model, the FT does not forward RTCP FB
      NACK messages as received from the SSM RTP receivers to the DS.
      Instead the FT sends a RTCP FB NACK message using its own SSRC
      when the FT/RS itself directly detected the common packet loss
      event.  Alternatively, the FT sends the RTCP message "3rd party
      NACK" ["draft-wu-avt-retransmission-supression-rtp"] using its own
      SSRC when it senses a local FB storm is imminent but when the RS
      itself was not subject to the packet loss.  In the simple feedback
      model, the FT can act as translator in the SSM session and send
      the new RTCP FB message "3rd party NACK" using its own SSRC.
      Alternatively and similar as described for the feedback summary
      model, when the DS advertises itself as FT towards the RSs that
      host the FTs, the RS sends as SSM RTP receiver to the DS a RTCP FB
      NACK or RTCP FB "3rd party NACK", depending on whether it detected
      the reported packet loss itself or not.

   o  The DS forwards the RTCP FB NACK messages or RTCP FB "3rd party
      loss" messages received from any of the FTs in the SSM session,
      down on the original SSM session.  The feedback suppression can
      then remain localised, by having an SSM RTP receiver only
      activating feedback suppression when the "SSRC of packet sender"
      field value in the received RTCP FB message(s) matches with the
      SSRC that is used by the local FT to which it reports.

   Note that when the DS sends a third party loss report or NACK RTCP FB
   message using its own SSM SSRC, all the SSM RTP receivers (including
   the FTs) will abstain from sending a RTCP FB message, enabling a FB
   storm suppression across the whole SSM network domain.  This occurs
   e.g. when a packet loss event took place between a media sender and



VanCaenegem             Expires September 8, 2011              [Page 15]

Internet-Draft       RTCP FB NACK storm suppression           March 2011


   the DS.


















































VanCaenegem             Expires September 8, 2011              [Page 16]

Internet-Draft       RTCP FB NACK storm suppression           March 2011


6.  Security Considerations

   No dedicated security measures must be considered other than the ones
   defined in [RFC4585] and [RFC5760].















































VanCaenegem             Expires September 8, 2011              [Page 17]

Internet-Draft       RTCP FB NACK storm suppression           March 2011


7.  IANA Considerations

   The following contact information shall be used for all registrations
   in this document:

   "tom.van_caenegem@alcatel-lucent.com"

7.1.  Registration of SDP Attributes

   TBC.









































VanCaenegem             Expires September 8, 2011              [Page 18]

Internet-Draft       RTCP FB NACK storm suppression           March 2011


8.  Acknowledgments


















































VanCaenegem             Expires September 8, 2011              [Page 19]

Internet-Draft       RTCP FB NACK storm suppression           March 2011


9.  References

9.1.  Normative References

   [RFC3550]  Schulzrinne, H., Casner, S., Frederick, R., and V.
              Jacobson, "RTP: A Transport Protocol for Real-Time
              Applications", STD 64, RFC 3550, July 2003.

   [RFC4585]  Ott, J., Wenger, S., Sato, N., Burmeister, C., and J. Rey,
              "Extended RTP Profile for Real-time Transport Control
              Protocol (RTCP)-Based Feedback (RTP/AVPF)", RFC 4585,
              July 2006.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC5576]  Lennox, J., Ott, J., and T. Schierl, "Source-Specific
              Media Attributes in the Session Description Protocol
              (SDP)", RFC 5576, June 2009.

   [RFC5760]  Ott, J., Chesterfield, J., and E. Schooler, "RTP Control
              Protocol (RTCP) Extensions for Single-Source Multicast
              Sessions with Unicast Feedback", RFC 5760, February 2010.

9.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.ietf-avt-ports-for-ucast-mcast-rtp]
              Begen, A., Wing, D., and T. VanCaenegem, "Port Mapping
              Between Unicast and Multicast RTP Sessions",
              draft-ietf-avt-ports-for-ucast-mcast-rtp-11 (work in
              progress), January 2011.

   [I-D.ietf-avt-rapid-acquisition-for-rtp]
              Steeg, B., Begen, A., Caenegem, T., and Z. Vax, "Unicast-
              Based Rapid Acquisition of Multicast RTP Sessions",
              draft-ietf-avt-rapid-acquisition-for-rtp-17 (work in
              progress), November 2010.

   [RFC4588]  Rey, J., Leon, D., Miyazaki, A., Varsa, V., and R.
              Hakenberg, "RTP Retransmission Payload Format", RFC 4588,
              July 2006.










VanCaenegem             Expires September 8, 2011              [Page 20]

Internet-Draft       RTCP FB NACK storm suppression           March 2011


Author's Address

   Tom VanCaenegem
   Alcatel-Lucent
   Copernicuslaan 50
   Antwerpen,   2018
   Belgium

   Email:  Tom.Van_Caenegem@alcatel-lucent.com










































VanCaenegem             Expires September 8, 2011              [Page 21]


