


Operations & Management Area Working                       S. Karavettil
Group                                                ASTA Ventures, Inc.
Internet-Draft                                             B. Khasnabish
Intended status: Standards Track                           ZTE USA, Inc.
Expires: January 1, 2012                                           N. So
                                                                 Verizon
                                                                 W. Dong
                                                Tektronix Communications
                                                           June 30, 2011


        Security Framework for Virtualized Data Center Services
            draft-karavettil-vdcs-security-framework-00.txt

Abstract

   This document discusses the requirements and technology gaps related
   to security in the virtualized data center services (VDCS).  The
   objective is to ensure end-to-end security for various types of
   carrier services built on virtualized infrastructure.  The issues
   covered in this draft are focused on confidentiality and integrity of
   the services in the virtualized environment; including but not
   limited to infrastructure (IaaS), platform (PaaS), and application
   (SaaS) services.  This draft also takes into account transient nature
   of identity, resources and connectivity in the virtualized
   environment.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 1, 2012.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.



Karavettil, et al.       Expires January 1, 2012                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft     Karavettil VDCS Security Framework          June 2011


   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

   This document may contain material from IETF Documents or IETF
   Contributions published or made publicly available before November
   10, 2008.  The person(s) controlling the copyright in some of this
   material may not have granted the IETF Trust the right to allow
   modifications of such material outside the IETF Standards Process.
   Without obtaining an adequate license from the person(s) controlling
   the copyright in such materials, this document may not be modified
   outside the IETF Standards Process, and derivative works of it may
   not be created outside the IETF Standards Process, except to format
   it for publication as an RFC or to translate it into languages other
   than English.






























Karavettil, et al.       Expires January 1, 2012                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft     Karavettil VDCS Security Framework          June 2011


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.  Terminology and Abbreviation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   3.  Problem Statement and Examples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.1.  Virtualized Carrier Services Users . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.2.  Data, Information and Knowledge Base Security Problem  . .  6
     3.3.  Lack of mandatory Application Security in Protocol . . . .  8
   4.  Other Gaps in Existing Implementations & New Requirements  . . 10
     4.1.  Systems Security Gaps & New Requirements . . . . . . . . . 10
     4.2.  Network Security Gaps & New Requirements . . . . . . . . . 10
     4.3.  Mobile Security Gaps & New Requirements  . . . . . . . . . 11
     4.4.  Physical Security Gaps & New Requirements  . . . . . . . . 11
     4.5.  Operations & Management Security Gaps & New
           Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     4.6.  Other New Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   5.  Work Item for Consideration  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
     5.1.  Applications & Services  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
     5.2.  Infrastructure Operations & Management . . . . . . . . . . 14
   6.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   7.  Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   8.  Acknowledgement  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
   9.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
   10. References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20


























Karavettil, et al.       Expires January 1, 2012                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft     Karavettil VDCS Security Framework          June 2011


1.  Introduction

   The VDCS Security Framework is a reference framework to build secure
   and interoperable services on top of a virtualized infrastructure.
   Currently there are a variety of infrastructure equipments (servers
   and network equipments), and operational management software
   (hypervisors and provisioning/monitoring applications) and software-
   as-a-service that are proprietary in nature; therefore, causing
   service interoperability issues and creating security gaps.

   Developing protocol standards around virtualized services and the
   supporting infrastructures is an integral part of the overall end-to-
   end security assurance.  This draft proposes a security framework and
   the associated requirements for Protocols, Profiles, Network
   Interfaces, Operations and Management, and Application
   Interfaces(APIs) in an environment where virtualized resources are
   shared among a variety of public and private subscribers/clients
   seamlessly.

   The current applications & services using existing protocols (e.g.,
   HTTP) that are in need of security measures in a multi-tenant
   virtualized environment is described.  Similarly gaps in security
   implementation of inter-working protocols (e.g., inter-domain BGP,
   MPLS) among virtualized network infrastructure resources are
   identified here.

   These help design, develop and provide secure, inter-operable and on
   demand self-service applications and services for users from various
   vendors.  This also helps reduce human interventions in provisioning
   and management of resources in a more standardized manner.





















Karavettil, et al.       Expires January 1, 2012                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft     Karavettil VDCS Security Framework          June 2011


2.  Terminology and Abbreviation

   o  CSA: Cloud Security Alliance

   o  CSF: Cloud Security Framework

   o  CSP: Cloud Service Provider

   o  CSRF: Cross-Site Request Forgery

   o  DCOPS: Data Center Operations

   o  GRC: Governance, Risk & Compliance

   o  HIPAA: Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act

   o  OWASP: Open Web Application Security Project

   o  PCI: Payment Card Industry

   o  SDO: Standards Development Organizations

   o  SOX: Sarbanes Oxley

   o  VDCS: Virtualized Data Center Services

   o  VDI: Virtual Desktop Infrastructure

   o  VDI: Virtual Machine

   o  VPN: Virtual Private Network

   o  XSS: Cross-Site Scripting


















Karavettil, et al.       Expires January 1, 2012                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft     Karavettil VDCS Security Framework          June 2011


3.  Problem Statement and Examples

   The applications in virtualized carrier infrastructure often follow
   the Client-Server model.  The Server is typically a Virtual Machine
   (VM) hosting various applications while performing the computing and
   storage functions on top of generic server hardware.  The client is a
   remote machine connecting to the VM via virtual connection(s) and
   sharing the same application.

   In this case, security means protecting the information (data and
   content) in an on demand self service multi-tenant virtualized
   infrastructure and communication between the client and virtual host
   from unauthorized access, use, disclosure, disruption, modification,
   perusal, inspection, recording or destruction.

3.1.  Virtualized Carrier Services Users

   Security impacts all service users.  User identity security and
   verification needs to occur in a synchronized fashion along the
   service path end-to-end.  Understanding who the users are is the
   critical first step in understanding the security landscape.  Here is
   the list of the users that the security framework has to consider.

   o  Consumers

      *  Internet Application Services Users (Internet consumers across
         various internet applications)

      *  Enterprise Users (across various Organizations of Enterprise)

      *  Regulations & Compliance Auditors

      *  Investigations & Forensics

   o  Publishers

      *  Developers

      *  System Administrators, Network Administrators

      *  Management Users

3.2.  Data, Information and Knowledge Base Security Problem

   Data, information, and knowledge represent three levels of
   abstraction.  Data on its own carries no meaning.  For data to become
   information, it must be interpreted and take on a meaning.  When that
   information is interpreted and used practically to fulfill a purpose



Karavettil, et al.       Expires January 1, 2012                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft     Karavettil VDCS Security Framework          June 2011


   becomes knowledge.

   The types of data include:

   o  Live

      *  Web Application Form Data (Structured)

      *  Voice

      *  Video

   o  Archive

      *  Database Data Structures

      *  Files

         +  Data - PDF, DOC, Excel, etc

         +  Voice archive

         +  Video Archive

      *  Emails, Logs (unstructured)

   Information security has to be developed to manage the lifecycle of
   data, including data security while in use, in motion or at rest
   within a virtualized infrastructure environment.

   o  Data/content/media (e.g. videos) authenticity

      *  Association and identification of data to its owner (user,
         enterprise consumer, service provider, location, etc) and
         access privileges.

   o  Data while in use

      *  Isolation of data while in use by the computing resources.

      *  Data usage managed based on access privileges based on users,
         enterprise consumer, service provider.

   o  Data in motion

      *  Restricting the data transmission across geographical
         boundaries based on government regulations or enterprise
         policies and configurations as defined during self-service.



Karavettil, et al.       Expires January 1, 2012                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft     Karavettil VDCS Security Framework          June 2011


   o  Data at rest (monitoring and management)

      *  Data isolation in a multi-tenant environment to protect against
         side attack or admin attacks.

      *  Data migration managed as defined by enterprise/government
         policies.

      *  Deletion, loss/leakage, and location of data.

   In traditional data center, data/content migrates from machine to
   machine and from storage devices to storage devices frequently, both
   in normal operations as well as during backup/restore processes.
   Some of the data that are deemed sensitive for security or regulatory
   reasons can be isolated and controlled through dedicated physical
   devices for storage/access, therefore relatively easy to secure.
   However, in a virtualized environment, VMs are set up, relocate, shut
   down dynamically on demand.  The traditional physical-device-based
   isolation is no longer sufficient in the new paradigm.

   Data residing in a cloud environment shall go through the same
   create/update/delete lifecycle as in all other cases.  While the
   create/update of data are easily abstracted and handled by the cloud
   platform, the destruction of data in the cloud may be tricky,
   especially for security/regulatory compliance purposes.  Often in
   these cases, cloud service providers must demonstrate complete
   destruction of data taking into account of the virtual machine
   migration and remote data center backups.  Some of the data
   destructions may be conditional based on other factors, such as legal
   time limits.  Therefore, there must be a data lifecycle management
   function in the cloud framework based on policies defined by the
   users that shall govern the create/update/delete/migrate functions of
   data.

3.3.  Lack of mandatory Application Security in Protocol

   HTTP is the most widely used application layer protocol.  It
   functions as a request-response protocol in the client-server
   computing model.

   A Web service is a method of communication between two electronic
   devices over a network.  Web service is most widely implemented on
   top of HTTP protocol.  There are specifications defined for Web
   Services like WS-Interoperability (WS-I), WS-Security, WS-Addressing,
   WS-Policy, WS-Reliable Messaging, etc.

   The web services specifications has not yet been widely adopted in
   the application implementations, thus leaving security as a choice up



Karavettil, et al.       Expires January 1, 2012                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft     Karavettil VDCS Security Framework          June 2011


   to the developers of the organizations developing various
   applications.

   With the lack of mandatory security requirements there may be
   significant gaps in these application implementations.  Few use cases
   are mentioned here to exemplify the problem:

   The user identity and their session state management within an
   application context are not mandated or controlled at the protocol
   level thus leading to broken user session and authentication
   hijacking issues from the client side.

   There is also identity and access management problem as the
   applications used by enterprises are spread between private and
   public cloud providers, the users have to be single-signed on and
   authorized with appropriate privileges to access these resources.
   The ability to support multi-factor authentication between multiple
   cloud providers is another requirements that would significantly
   enhance the security of the application implementations based on
   these protocols.

   Another significant aspect that can be addressed at the protocol
   level by making it mandatory is the data input validation and
   encoding of data between the client and the host.  This will play an
   important role in maintaining data integrity without the use of other
   API during application development.  This helps to protection against
   security vulnerabilities like Cross-Site Scripting (XSS), Cross-Site
   Request Forgery and Injection (LDAP, SQL).























Karavettil, et al.       Expires January 1, 2012                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft     Karavettil VDCS Security Framework          June 2011


4.  Other Gaps in Existing Implementations & New Requirements

   These topics are mentioned here to address the completeness of the
   security framework where privileged users shall access or use the on
   demand self-service to run these applications & services in a tenant
   isolated and inter-operable virtualized environment.  These may be
   elaborated later as seen fit in the context of IETF protocol gaps.

4.1.  Systems Security Gaps & New Requirements

   The inter-operability and information exchanges between systems in
   the organization domains across an enterprise or across related
   enterprises are affected due to lack of proper protocol, profile
   definitions and raises security concerns with certain approaches.

   Transport channel encryption is a widely deployed security
   implementation.  While this practice helps avoid man in the middle
   attack it prevents detection of malicious attacks that has got into
   the system from the client side browser.

   Another challenge in todays implementations and new requirements for
   developing interoperable solutions in a virtualized environment are
   key management in a client/host (cloud user and cloud provider)
   architecture spread across multiple providers.  All the key exchange
   between enterprise and cloud shall be secured and protected.  The
   system shall be able to support the end users (consumers, or
   enterprise) to hold the encryption keys and integrate with their
   existing key management.  When they withdraw the encryption keys from
   the cloud, customers data in the cloud become inaccessible or
   unreadable.  It shall be protected from side attack and admin attack
   such as snapshot VM to get the encryption keys.  The system should be
   able to support standard key management protocols between encryption
   entity in the cloud and key manager in the enterprise domain such as
   KMIP.

4.2.  Network Security Gaps & New Requirements

   o  Develop security at the Protocol to accommodate various needs of
      the virtual infrastructure environments and applications running
      in that environment.

   o  Protect the channel using VPN enables secure communication between
      the client and the host.

   o  Cloud customers depend on functional networks to access their
      resources, and because networks are often not under the control of
      customers, there is a risk that the cloud may not be reachable.




Karavettil, et al.       Expires January 1, 2012               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft     Karavettil VDCS Security Framework          June 2011


   o  Connectivity resources (bandwidth) allocation for routing, VLAN
      and other network configuration to handle multiple customers.

4.3.  Mobile Security Gaps & New Requirements

   With the proliferation of mobile devices and the applications that
   are developed to serve the needs of consumers with better user
   experience it becoming critical to protect the privacy and security
   of these users during the physical loss of these devices.

   Managing the identity of the user accessing a mobile device is
   critical to the safety and privacy of the user content.  In addition
   there're high chances for private data falling into the wrong hands
   via removable media access or local blue tooth connections that are
   not turned off.

   In some instances where the mobile devices are physically lost it may
   be helpful to track the device to see if it in hands of someone or
   retrieve important data from it remotely and destroy the content on
   the device for safety.

   Another important requirement would be the ability to seamlessly
   provide content to authenticated and authorized users on their mobile
   platform during transit across various networks (from various network
   providers) without disruption of service.

   This content may also be viewed by authorized user via various
   display channels and be able to switch seamlessly from the mobile
   device in their hands or in their automobile across to their
   television or home personal computer.

   o  End-point security (protect against removable media)

   o  Protect against Bluetooth Connections Access

   o  Encryption of data

   o  Service Mobility Resources Allocation Services

   o  Locating the mobile device and ability to break it.

4.4.  Physical Security Gaps & New Requirements

   o  Access control - What is the basis for trusting the human cloud
      operators?

   o  Common operational picture that provides integrated view of
      various alarms, alerts and notifications from various physical



Karavettil, et al.       Expires January 1, 2012               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft     Karavettil VDCS Security Framework          June 2011


      devices like video surveillance cameras, motion sensors, access
      control card readers, etc.

   o  Roles and privileges based access to video surveillance content
      and alarm notifications.

   o  Perimeter security of the virtualized data center operations and
      provide real-time insight into security issues to the provider and
      to the enterprises using their services.

   o  Business hours based security monitoring of provider assets.

4.5.  Operations & Management Security Gaps & New Requirements

   o  Discovery of network nodes both physical and virtual and their
      access privileges (for example using SNMPv3), their locations in a
      virtualized infrastructure spread out physically.

   o  Ability to manage both physical network resources and virtual
      network resources through a consistent Network Management console.

   o  Management of configurations across various systems, network
      equipments.

   o  Need clarity on security control roles and responsibilities.

   o  Backup and recovery of information (import/export across multiple
      CSPs).

   o  Business continuity and disaster recovery - how to maintain
      continuity of operations if cloud providers fail?

   o  Business continuity and disaster recovery - how to maintain
      continuity of operations by having redundancy across multiple
      service providers?

   o  Management & Configuration Security

   o  Governance, Risk & Compliance

      *  Clear certification and accreditation guidelines

      *  Clear e-discovery guidelines

      *  Cloud audit assurance and log sensitivity management

      *  Need for clarity on how 800-53-style control guides can work
         for the cloud



Karavettil, et al.       Expires January 1, 2012               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft     Karavettil VDCS Security Framework          June 2011


      *  Need clear privacy guidelines

4.6.  Other New Requirements

   o  Inter-operability across various vendor products that spans across
      the Client or Host layers.

   o  Multi-Cloud Services integrated application at different CSPs.

   o  Inter-Cloud Information Exchange between CSPs.

   o  Visibility for Customers - How can customers observe their
      workloads to be aware of their health and general status.

   o  Control for Customers during self service - How can customers
      maintain effective control their workloads even though the
      protection mechanisms and even locations of workloads may not be
      known to customers.

   o  A tenant may have access to other tenants virtual machines,
      network traffic, actual/residual data, etc.

   o  A tenant may impact the normal operation of other tenants, steal
      their data, steal their identities, etc.

   o  Computer Resource Allocation Services - System, Computing,
      Storage, Network resources in a virtualized infrastructure
      environment.























Karavettil, et al.       Expires January 1, 2012               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft     Karavettil VDCS Security Framework          June 2011


5.  Work Item for Consideration

   The various applications and interworking protocols developed by the
   IETF MAY need to be extended or profiled to support the security
   requirements of virtualized services and infrastructure environment.

5.1.  Applications & Services

   The most widely used protocol that is in use today for application &
   services development areas like HTTP have been considered for the
   applications in the virtualized environment.  The protocol may have
   to be profiled or extended with significant changes to be ready to
   handle the security requirements in a virtualized environment.

5.2.  Infrastructure Operations & Management

   The various security parameters related to operations and management
   of virtualized network resources in multiple administrative domains
   may need to be defined.  The results of monitoring may need to be
   exchanged periodically to support the private and public virtualized
   domains and infrastructure in order to maintain the expected end-to-
   end security.





























Karavettil, et al.       Expires January 1, 2012               [Page 14]

Internet-Draft     Karavettil VDCS Security Framework          June 2011


6.  Security Considerations

   --[Editor's note] This document discusses security for virtualized
   environment.















































Karavettil, et al.       Expires January 1, 2012               [Page 15]

Internet-Draft     Karavettil VDCS Security Framework          June 2011


7.  Conclusion

   Over the last decade the times have changed from the exponential
   growth of the internet and the associated advances in technologies to
   the large scale adoption of connected devices.

   With this advancement we are seeing the rapid rise in security
   threats and vulnerabilities to today's application and
   infrastructure.

   It is time to take a look at existing protocols, API's not only for
   todays application and infrastructure but also to tackle the rising
   threats due to the use of same technologies and protocols for the
   virtualized applications and infrastructure environment development.

   These shall not only cause security and interoperability problems,
   but may also negatively impact further development of protocols and
   services in this very important area of virtualized applications and
   networking infrastructure environment.  IETF is the best organization
   to address these issues.































Karavettil, et al.       Expires January 1, 2012               [Page 16]

Internet-Draft     Karavettil VDCS Security Framework          June 2011


8.  Acknowledgement

   --[Editor's note] Will be added in future.
















































Karavettil, et al.       Expires January 1, 2012               [Page 17]

Internet-Draft     Karavettil VDCS Security Framework          June 2011


9.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no actions for IANA.
















































Karavettil, et al.       Expires January 1, 2012               [Page 18]

Internet-Draft     Karavettil VDCS Security Framework          June 2011


10.  References

   [CSA]      "Cloud Security Alliance".

   [NIST]     "National Institute of Standards and Technology".

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", March 1997.

   [draft-so-vpn-o-cs-00.txt]
              So, N., "Draft Requirement and Framework for VPN-Oriented
              Cloud Services", March 2011.







































Karavettil, et al.       Expires January 1, 2012               [Page 19]

Internet-Draft     Karavettil VDCS Security Framework          June 2011


Authors' Addresses

   Suren Karavettil
   ASTA Ventures, Inc.
   32 Hatikva Way
   Chelmsford, MA 01863
   USA

   Phone: +001-978-857-5461
   Email: surenck@gmail.com


   Bhumip Khasnabish
   ZTE USA, Inc.
   18 Patterson Road
   Lexington, MA 02421
   USA

   Phone: +001-781-752-8003
   Email: vumip1@gmail.com


   Ning So
   Verizon
   2400 N. Glenville Road
   Richardson, TX 75082
   USA

   Email: ning.so@verizonbusiness.com


   Wei Dong
   Tektronix Communications
   3033 President Bush Hwy
   Plano, TX 75075
   USA

   Phone: +001-469-330-4000
   Email: wei.dong@tek.com












Karavettil, et al.       Expires January 1, 2012               [Page 20]

