





      
      
     Energy Management Working Group                           E. Tychon 
     Internet Draft                                  Cisco Systems, Inc. 
     Intended status: Informational                        B. Schoening 
     Expires: December 24,2011                 Noveda Technologies, Inc. 
                                                     Mouli Chandramouli 
                                                      Cisco Systems Inc. 
                                                          June 24, 2011 
      
                                         
      
                                           
                  Energy Management (EMAN) Applicability Statement 
                  draft-tychon-eman-applicability-statement-02 


     Status of this Memo 

        This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with 
        the provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.  
         
        Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
        Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
        other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
        Drafts.  
         
        Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
        months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents 
        at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
        material or to cite them other than as  "work in progress." 
         
        The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt  
         
        The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html  
         
        This Internet-Draft will expire on December, 2011. 
         

     Copyright Notice 

        Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the 
        document authors. All rights reserved. 
         
        This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal 
        Provisions Relating to IETF Documents  
         

      
      
      
     <Tychon, et Al.>       Expires December24,2011                 [Page 1] 
      
     Internet-Draft       EMAN Applicability Statement             June 2011 
         

        (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of 
        publication of this document. Please review these documents 
        carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with 
        respect to this document. Code Components extracted from this 
        document must include Simplified BSD License text as described in 
        Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without 
        warranty as described in the Simplified BSD License. 
      

     Abstract 

        The objective of Energy Management (EMAN) is to provide an energy 
        management framework for networked devices. In this document the 
        applicability of the EMAN framework for a variety of network 
        scenarios is described. This document lists a number of use-cases 
        that can implement the EMAN framework and the associated MIB 
        modules. Furthermore, we describe the relationship of the EMAN 
        framework to other energy monitoring standards and architectures. 
         

     Table of Contents 

        1. Introduction................................................3 
           1.1. Energy Management Overview.............................4 
           1.2. Energy Measurement.....................................4 
           1.3. Energy Management......................................5 
           1.4. EMAN framework Application.............................5 
           1.5. EMAN WG Documents Overview.............................6 
        2. Scenarios and Target devices................................7 
           2.1. Network devices-Routers, switches....................7 
           2.2. Devices attached to a network-PoE powered devices.....7 
           2.3. Power probes and Smart Meters PDUs....................8 
           2.4. Mid-level managers.....................................8 
           2.5. Gateways to building networks..........................9 
           2.6. Home energy gateways..................................10 
           2.7. Data center devices...................................10 
           2.8. Ganged outlets on a PDU-Multiple power sources......11 
        3. Use case patterns..........................................12 
           3.1. Internal or External Metering.........................12 
           3.2. Power supply and Metering and/or Control..............12 
           3.3. Metering and/or Control...............................13 
           3.4. Multiple Power Sources................................13 
        4. Relationship of EMAN to other Energy Standards.............13 
           4.1. IEC...................................................13 
           4.2. ANSI C12..............................................14 
           4.3. DMTF..................................................14 
              4.3.1. Common Information Model Profiles................15 
      
      
     <Tychon, et Al.>      Expires December 24, 2011                [Page 2] 
         
     Internet-Draft       EMAN Applicability Statement             June 2011 
         

              4.3.2. DASH................................................15 
           4.4. ODVA.....................................................16 
           4.5. Ecma SDC.................................................16 
           4.6. ISO......................................................16 
           4.7. EnergyStar...............................................17 
           4.8. SmartGrid................................................18 
           4.9. NAESB, ASHRAE and NEMA...................................18 
           4.10. ZigBee..................................................19 
        5. Limitations...................................................20 
        6. Security Considerations.......................................20 
        7. IANA Considerations...........................................20 
        8. References....................................................21 
           8.1. Normative References.....................................21 
           8.2. Informative References...................................21 
        9. Acknowledgments...............................................22 
         
      

     1. Introduction 

        The focus of Energy Management (EMAN) framework is on energy 
        monitoring and management of energy aware devices.  The scope of 
        devices considered for energy management are network entities and 
        devices connected to the network. As a fundamental objective, Energy 
        Management framework enables devices to be energy aware; i.e. to 
        report their power usage (directly or indirectly) and secondly to 
        optimize their energy usage. EMAN framework enables heterogeneous 
        devices to report their energy consumption, and if permissible, 
        enable configuration of policies for power savings.  There are 
        multiple scenarios where this is desirable, particularly today 
        considering the increased importance of limiting consumption of 
        finite energy resources and reducing operational expenses. 
         
         
        The EMAN framework describes how energy information can be 
        retrieved, controlled and monitored from IP-enabled energy aware 
        devices using Simple Network Management Protocol (SNMP). In essence, 
        the Energy Management framework defines Management Information Base 
        (MIBs) for SNMP. 
         
        In this document, typical applications of the EMAN framework are 
        described; as well as opportunities and limitations of the 
        framework. Furthermore, other standards that are similar to EMAN but 
        address different domains are described. In addition, this document 
        serves as an introductory reference for an overall understanding of 
        Energy efficiency of networks and this document contains the 
        references to other Energy standards.  
      
      
     <Tychon, et Al.>      Expires December 24, 2011                [Page 3] 
         
     Internet-Draft       EMAN Applicability Statement             June 2011 
         

      

     1.1. Energy Management Overview 

        Firstly, a brief introduction to the definitions of Energy and Power 
        are presented.  
         
        Energy is defined as the capacity to perform a particular work. The 
        particular form of energy of interest is electrical energy 
        consumption by energy aware devices. Electrical energy is typically 
        expressed in kilowatt-hour units (noted kWh). One kilowatt-hour is 
        defined as the electrical energy used by a 1 Kilowatt appliance for 
        one hour. Power is defined as the rate of electrical energy consumed 
        by the device. In other words, power = energy / time. Power is often 
        measured in Watts. Billing is based on electrical energy (measured 
        in Watt-hours) supplied by the utility. 
         
        Towards the goal of attaining energy efficiency in networks, a first 
        step is to enable devices to report the energy usage over time. 
        Energy Management framework addresses this problem. An information 
        model on how to model the device: its identity, the device 
        context, the power measurement and measurement attributes are 
        captured in an information model.  
         
        SNMP based MIB module is proposed based on the information model. 
        Any network device that has implementation of the MIB module, can 
        report its energy consumption. In that context, from an energy-
        monitoring point of view, it is important to distinguish the device 
        types; i.e.; devices that can report its energy usage and the other 
        type of devices who collect and aggregate energy usage of a group of 
        subtended devices.  
         
        The scope of devices considered for Energy Management is listed in 
        the Use case section with detailed examples. 
         
     1.2. Energy Measurement 

        More and more devices today are able to measure and report their own 
        energy consumption. Smart power strips and some of the current 
        generation Power-over-Ethernet switches are already able to meter 
        consumption of the connected devices.  However, when managed and 
        reported through proprietary means, this information is not really 
        useful at the enterprise level. 
         
        The primary goal of EMAN is to enable reporting and management 
        within a standard framework that is applicable to a wide variety of 
        today's end-devices, meters and proxies. 
      
      
     <Tychon, et Al.>      Expires December 24, 2011                [Page 4] 
         
     Internet-Draft       EMAN Applicability Statement             June 2011 
         

         
        Being able to know who's consuming what, when and how at any time by 
        leveraging existing networks, across various equipment, in a unified 
        and consistent manner is one pillar of the EMAN framework.   
         
        Given that a device can consume energy and possibly provide energy 
        to other devices, it is possible to consider three types of meters 
        for energy measurement; i.e., meter for energy consumed, meter for 
        energy supplied to other devices, and a net (resultant) meter which 
        is the sum of consumed and provided.  
      
         
     1.3. Energy Management 

         
        There are many cases where reducing energy consumption is desirable, 
        such as when the demand is already high, when there's no one using 
        the resource, and so on.  
         
        In some cases, you can't simply turn it off without considering the 
        context. For instance you cannot turn off all the phones, because 
        some phones may still need to be available in case of emergency. You 
        can't turn office cooling off totally during non-work hours, but you 
        can reduce the comfort level, and so on. 
         
        Beyond monitoring, the EMAN framework shall be generalized to 
        consider the mechanisms for control of devices for power savings.  
         
        Power control requires flexibility and support for different polices 
        and mechanisms; including centralized management with a network 
        management station, autonomous management by individual devices, and 
        alignment with dynamic demand-response mechanisms. 
         
     1.4. EMAN framework Application 

        In this section, the typical application of EMAN framework is 
        described. A network operator can install management software for 
        collecting energy information for devices in the network. The scope 
        of the devices considered for energy management is listed in Section 
        2. 
         
        A Network Management System (NMS) is the entity that requests 
        information from compatible devices using SNMP. It may be a system 
        which also implements other network management functions, e.g. 
        security management, identity management and so on), or one that 
        only deals with energy in which case it is called EMS (Energy 

      
      
     <Tychon, et Al.>      Expires December 24, 2011                [Page 5] 
         
     Internet-Draft       EMAN Applicability Statement             June 2011 
         

        Management System).  It may be limited to monitoring energy use, or 
        it may also implement control functions. 
         
        Energy Management can be implemented by extending existing SNMP 
        support to the EMAN specific MIBs to deal with energy reporting. 
         
        By using SNMP, we have an industry proven and well-known technique 
        to discover, secure, measure and control SNMP enabled end devices.  
        EMAN framework provides an information and data model to unify 
        access to a large range of devices. 
         

     1.5. EMAN WG Documents Overview 

        The EMAN working group at IETF and its charter is focused on a 
        series of Internet standard drafts in the area of Energy management 
        of networks. The following drafts are currently under discussion in 
        the working group.  
         
          Requirements draft [EMAN-REQ] This draft presents the 
          requirements of Energy Monitoring and the scope of the devices 
          considered.  
           
          Applicability Statement draft [EMAN-AS] This draft presents the 
          use cases and scenarios for energy monitoring. In addition, other 
          relevant energy standards and architectures are listed.  
           
          Framework draft [EMAN-FRAMEWORK] This draft defines the 
          terminology and explains the different concepts associated with 
          energy monitoring. These concepts are used in the MIB modules.  
           
          Energy-Aware MIB draft [EMAN-AWARE-MIB] This draft proposes a 
          MIB module that characterizes the identity of the device and the 
          devices context. 
           
          Monitoring MIB draft [EMAN-MONITORING-MIB] This draft contains a 
          MIB module for monitoring the power and energy consumption of the 
          device. In addition, the MIB module contains an optional module 
          for the power quality metrics.  
           
          Battery MIB draft [EMAN-BATTERY-MIB] This draft contains a MIB 
          module for monitoring the energy consumption of a battery device.  
           
         
         
         
         
      
      
     <Tychon, et Al.>      Expires December 24, 2011                [Page 6] 
         
     Internet-Draft       EMAN Applicability Statement             June 2011 
         

         
         
      
      
     2. Scenarios and Target devices 

        In this section a selection of scenarios for energy management is 
        presented. For each scenario, a list of target devices is given in 
        the section heading, for which the energy management framework is 
        required and thus can be applied. 
      
     2.1. Network devices-Routers, switches  

         
        This scenario covers network devices and its components. Power 
        management of network devices is considered as a fundamental 
        requirement (basic first step) of Energy Management of networks. The 
        objective of this example scenario is to illustrate monitoring of 
        network devices and the granularity of monitoring.  
         
        From an energy management perspective, it is important to monitor 
        the power state and energy consumption of devices at a granularity 
        level that is finer than just the device level. For these network 
        devices, the chassis draws power from an outlet and feeds all its 
        internal sub-components. It is highly desirable to have monitoring 
        available for individual components, such as line cards, processors, 
        hard drives but also peripherals like USB devices or display 
        monitor. 
      
        As an illustrative example of network device scenario, consider a 
        switch with the following list of grouping of sub-entities of the 
        switch for which monitoring the energy monitoring could be useful.  
         
          .  physical view: chassis (or stack), line cards, service modules 
             of the switch 
          .  component view: CPU, ASICs, fans, power supply, ports (single 
             port and port groups), storage and memory  
          .  logical view: system, data-plane, control-plane, etc. 
      
     2.2. Devices attached to a network, PoE powered devices  

         
        This scenario covers devices using Power over Ethernet (PoE). Such a 
        connection provides both network connectivity as well as power over 
        a single connection. Down the PoE ports can be IP Phones, Wireless 
        Access Points, IP Camera devices.  
         
      
      
     <Tychon, et Al.>      Expires December 24, 2011                [Page 7] 
         
     Internet-Draft       EMAN Applicability Statement             June 2011 
         

        The switch uses its own power supply to power itself us, as well as 
        all the downstream PoE ports. Monitoring the power consumption of 
        the switch and the power consumption of the PoE endpoints is a 
        simple use case of this scenario. 
      
        A PoE Power Sourcing Equipment (PSE), a PoE switch, provides power 
        to a Powered Device (PD), a PoE desktop phone. Here, the PSE 
        provides means for controlling power supply (switching it on and 
        off) and for monitoring actual power provided at a port to a 
        specific PD. 
      
         
     2.3. Power probes and Smart Meters-PDUs 

        This use case describes the scenario of devices that can not measure 
        their own power consumption. In this case, another piece of 
        equipment can be used and measure the device power consumption. 
        Examples are smart meter and smart PDUs. 
      
        Some devices are not equipped with sufficient instrumentation to 
        measure their own actual power and accumulated energy consumption. 
        External probes can be connected to the power supply to measure 
        these properties for a single device or for a set of devices. 
      
        Power Distribution Unit (PDUs) attached to racks in a data center  
        and other smart power strips are evolving in parallel with smart 
        meters. Each socket of the PDU distributes power to a device in the 
        rack. The smart meters at the PDUs report the power consumption of 
        the device connected to the socket at PDU. Power consumption can be 
        measured at socket level and the switch provides the network 
        connectivity and can be the aggregator of power consumption for all 
        entities. These PDUs have remote management functionality which can 
        also be used to control power supply of each socket of the PDU.  
        Homes, buildings, have smart meters that monitor and report 
        accumulated power consumption of an entire home, a set of offices. 
         
      
     2.4. Mid-level managers 

         
        This use case describes the scenario of devices that receive power 
        supply from one source. The reporting of power measurement and 
        possibly control can be performed by some other entity.  
         
        Sometimes it is useful to have mid-level managers that provide 
        energy management functions not just for themselves but also for 

      
      
     <Tychon, et Al.>      Expires December 24, 2011                [Page 8] 
         
     Internet-Draft       EMAN Applicability Statement             June 2011 
         

        a set of associated devices. For example, a switch can provide  
        energy management functions for all devices connected to its ports, 
        even if these devices are not powered by the switch, but have their 
        own power supply as, for example, laptops.. 
         
        In a daisy-chain scenario, a switch port can have both a PoE 
        connection powering the IP Phone, and a PC connected to the IP Phone 
        for network connectivity. The PC draw power from the wall outlet, 
        the phone draws power from the switch.  
         
        However, it would be possible to monitor the power consumption of 
        even those non-PoE devices. The devices report their power 
        consumption to the switch and the switch is the aggregator for the 
        power consumption of those non-PoE devices.   
         
        Thus, the switch is the mid-level manager, offering reporting and 
        aggregation of power consumption even for devices it does not supply 
        power, devices connected to it and supplies power, and itself.  
         
        Yet another similar use case is when laptop computers connected to 
        the wireless access points. The wireless access points are connected 
        to the PoE ports of the switch. The switch, acting as a mid-level 
        manager, can aggregate the power consumption of those non-PoE 
        devices.  
         
      
         
     2.5. Gateways to building networks 

         
        This use case describes the scenario of energy management of 
        buildings. In these networks, there is a gateway interfacing to 
        building network protocols. 
         
        Building Management Systems (BMS) are often in place for many years 
        and most of them are not based on IP. For the purpose of uniform 
        management interface through EMAN, it is possible to have a gateway 
        interfacing between the EMAN framework and building management 
        network protocols.  
      
        Due to the potential energy savings, energy management of buildings 
        has received significant attention. There are gateway network 
        elements to manage the multiple components of a building energy 
        management network such as Heating Ventilating Air Conditioning 
        (HVAC), lighting, electrical, fire and emergency systems, elevators 
        etc. The gateway device communicates building network protocols with 

      
      
     <Tychon, et Al.>      Expires December 24, 2011                [Page 9] 
         
     Internet-Draft       EMAN Applicability Statement             June 2011 
         

        those devices and collects their energy usage and reports the 
        measurement to the network management systems.  
         
        This is an example of a proxy with possibly different protocols for 
        the network domain and building infrastructure domain. At the top of 
        the network hierarchy of a building network is a gateway device that 
        can perform protocol conversion between many facility management 
        devices. The south building gateway communicates to the controllers, 
        via RS-232/RS-485 interfaces, Ethernet interfaces, and building 
        management protocols such as BACNET or MODBUS.  Each controller is 
        associated with a specific energy-consuming function, such as HVAC, 
        electrical or lighting.  The controllers are in turn connected to 
        the actual building energy management devices:  meters, sub-meters, 
        valves, actuators, etc.  Controller 1 is associated with a meter for 
        the HVAC system and controller 2 can be associated with a meter for 
        the Lighting. 
         
         
     2.6. Home energy gateways 

         
        This use case describes the scenario of energy management of a home. 
        The home gateway scenario is an example of a proxy with interfaces 
        to electrical appliances and devices and the electrical grid. 
         
         
        Home energy gateway can be used for energy management of a home. 
        This gateway can manage the appliances (refrigerator, 
        heating/cooling, washing machine etc.) and interface with the 
        electrical grid. The gateway can implement policies based on 
        demand/response and energy pricing from the grid.  
         
         
     2.7. Data center devices    

         
        This use case describes the scenario of energy management of a Data 
        Center.  
         
        Energy efficiency of data centers has become a fundamental challenge 
        of data center operation. The motivation is due to the fact that 
        datacenters are big energy consumers. The equipment generates heat, 
        and heat needs to be evacuated though a HVAC (Heating, Ventilating, 
        and Air Conditioning) system. 
         


      
      
     <Tychon, et Al.>      Expires December 24, 2011               [Page 10] 
         
     Internet-Draft       EMAN Applicability Statement             June 2011 
         

        Energy management can be implemented on different aggregation 
        levels, such as network level, Power Distribution Unit (PDU) level, 
        and server level. 
      
        A typical data center network consists of a hierarchy of switches. 
        At the bottom of the hierarchy are servers mounted on a rack, and 
        these are connected to the top-of-the-rack switches.   

         
        The top switches are connected to aggregation switches that are  
        in turn connected to core switches.  As an example, Server 1 and  
        Server 2 are connected to different switch ports of the top switch.   
         
        Power consumption of all network elements and the servers in the 
        Data center should be measured. The switch can be the aggregator for 
        the power consumption of the data center. 
         
        Scenario 8: Battery powered devices 
         
        Some devices have a battery as a back-up source of power. Given the 
        finite capacity and lifetime of a battery, means for reporting the 
        actual charge, age, and state of a battery are required.  
         
        The battery scenario useful for providing backup power for a finite 
        duration for a single device can be generalized to energy storage 
        devices that can provide backup power for many devices contained in 
        data centers. Energy monitoring of such energy storage devices is 
        vital from a data center network operations point of view.  
         
        A server with an internal battery is shown. When the connection to 
        the PDU is disconnected, the Server runs on the internal battery. It 
        is important to monitor the power consumption of the battery.  
         
     2.8. Ganged outlets on a PDU Multiple power sources 

         
        This use case describes the scenario of multiple power sources of a 
        devices and logical groupings  
         
        Some PDUs allow physical entities like outlets to be "ganged" 
        together as a logical entity for simplified management purposes. 
        This is particularly useful for servers with multiple power 
        supplies, where each power supply is connected to a different 
        physical outlet. Other implementations allow "gangs" to be created 
        based on common ownership of outlets, such as business units or load 
        shed priority or other non-physical relationships. 
         
      
      
     <Tychon, et Al.>      Expires December 24, 2011               [Page 11] 
         
     Internet-Draft       EMAN Applicability Statement             June 2011 
         

        Current implementations allow for an "M-to-N" mapping between outlet 
        "gangs" and physical outlets.  An example of this mapping  
        includes the following: 
         
          . Outlet 1 - physical entity  
          . Outlet 2 - physical entity  
          . Outlet 3 - physical entity  
          . Outlet 4 - physical entity 
          . Outlet Gang A - virtual entity  
          . Outlet Gang B - virtual entity 
         
               o Gang A -> Outlets 1, 2 and 3  
               o Gang B -> Outlets 3 and 4  
         
         
        Note the allowed overlap on Outlet 3, where Outlet 3 belongs to both 
        "gangs." 
         
        Each "Outlet Gang" entity reports the aggregated data from the 
        individual outlet entities that comprise it and enables a single 
        point of control for all the individual outlet entities. 
         
         
      
         
     3. Use case patterns 

        The list of use cases presented can be abstracted in to one of the 
        following broad patterns.  
      
     3.1. Internal or External Metering 

      
          . Entities that consume power can perform internal power metering 
             on its own 
              
          . Entities that consume power but have an external power meter 
      
      
     3.2. Power supply and Metering and/or Control 

              
          . Entities that supply power for other devices however does not 
             perform power metering for devices 
              
          . Entities that supply power for other devices and also perform 
             power metering function 
      
      
     <Tychon, et Al.>      Expires December 24, 2011               [Page 12] 
         
     Internet-Draft       EMAN Applicability Statement             June 2011 
         

              
          . Entities supply power for other devices and also perform power 
             metering and control for other devices 
      
      
     3.3. Metering and/or Control 

      

          . Entities that do not supply power but perform only metering 
             function for other designated devices 
              
          . Entities which do not supply power but perform both metering 
             and control for other designated devices 
           

      
     3.4. Multiple Power Sources 

      
      
          . Entities that have multiple power sources and metering and 
             control is performed by one source  
              
          . Entities that have multiple power sources and metering and is 
             performed by one source and control another source 
      
      

     4. Relationship of EMAN to other Energy Standards 

        EMAN as a framework is tied with other standards and efforts in the 
        energy arena. Existing standards are leveraged as much as possible, 
        as well as providing control to adjacent technologies such as Smart 
        Grid. 
         
        Most of them are listed below with a brief description of their 
        objectives and the current state. 
         
     4.1. IEC 

        The International Electro technical Commission (IEC) has developed a 
        broad set of standards for power management.  Among these, the most 
        applicable to our purposes is IEC 61850, a standard for the design 
        of electric utility automation.  The abstract data model defined in 
        61850 is built upon and extends the Common Information Model (CIM). 

      
      
     <Tychon, et Al.>      Expires December 24, 2011               [Page 13] 
         
     Internet-Draft       EMAN Applicability Statement             June 2011 
         

        The complete 61850 CIM model includes over a hundred object classes 
        and is widely used by utilities in the US and worldwide. 
         
        This set of standards was originally conceived to automate control 
        of a substation. An electrical substation is a subsidiary station of 
        an electricity generation, transmission and distribution system 
        where voltage is transformed from high to low or the reverse using 
        transformers. While the original domain of 61850 is substation 
        automation, the extensive model that resulted has been widely used 
        in other areas, including Energy Management Systems (EMS) and forms 
        the core of many Smart Grid standards. 
         
        IEC TC57 WG19 is an ongoing working group to harmonize the CIM data 
        model and 61850 standards. 
         
        Concepts from IEC Standards have been reused in the EMAN WG drafts. 
        In particular, AC Power Quality measurements have been reused from 
        IEC 61850-7-4. The concept of Accuracy Classes for measurement of 
        power and energy has been reused IEC 62053-21 and IEC 62053-22. 
      
     4.2. ANSI C12 

        The American National Standards Institute (ANSI) has defined a 
        collection of power meter standards under ANSI C12.  The primary 
        standards include communication protocols (C12.18, 21 and 22), data 
        and schema definitions (C12.19), and measurement accuracy (C12.20). 
        European equivalent standards are provided by the IEC 62053-22. 
         
        ANSI C12.20 defines accuracy classes for watt-hour meters.  Typical 
        accuracy classes are class 0.5, class 1, and class 3; which 
        correspond to +/- 0.5%, +/- 1% and +/- 3% accuracy thresholds.   
        All of these standards are oriented toward the meter itself, and are 
        therefore very specific and used by electricity distributors and 
        producers. 
         
        The EMAN standard should be compatible with existing ANSI C12 and 
        IEC standards. 

     4.3. DMTF 

        The DMTF [DMTF] has standardized management solutions for managing 
        servers and desktops, including power-state configuration and 
        management of elements in a heterogeneous environment.  These 
        specifications provide physical, logical and virtual system 
        management requirements for power-state control. 
         

      
      
     <Tychon, et Al.>      Expires December 24, 2011               [Page 14] 
         
     Internet-Draft       EMAN Applicability Statement             June 2011 
         

        Through various Working Group efforts these specifications continue 
        to evolve and advance in features and functionalities.  

        The EMAN standard should reuse the concepts of Power Profile from 
        DMTF and has advocated that as one of the possible Power State 
        Series. 

         
     4.3.1. Common Information Model Profiles 

        The DMTF uses CIM-based (Common Information Model) 'Profiles' to 
        represent and manage power utilization and configuration of a 
        managed element.  The key profiles are 'Power Supply' (DSP 1015), 
        'Power State' (DSP 1027) and 'Power Utilization Management' (DSP 
        1085). 
         
        These profiles define monitoring and configuration of a Power 
        Managed Element's static and dynamic power saving modes, power 
        allocation limits and power states, among other features.   
         
        Power saving modes can be established as static or dynamic.  Static 
        modes are fixed policies that limit power to a utilization or 
        wattage limit. Dynamic power saving modes rely upon internal 
        feedback to control power consumption. 
         
        Power states are eight named operational and non operational levels.  
        These are On, Sleep-Light, Sleep-Deep, Hibernate, Off-Soft, and Off-
        Hard.  Power change capabilities provide immediate, timed interval, 
        and graceful transitions between on, off, and reset power states.  
        Table 3 of the Power State Profile defines the correspondence 
        between the ACPI and DMTF power state models, although it is not 
        necessary for a managed element to support ACPI. Optionally, a 
        TransitingToPowerState property can represent power state 
        transitions in progress. 
      

     4.3.2.  DASH 

        DMTF DASH (DSP0232) (Desktop And Mobile Architecture for System 
        Hardware ) has addressed the challenges of managing heterogeneous 
        desktop and mobile systems (including power) via in-band and out-of-
        band environments.  Utilizing the DMTF's WS-Management web services 
        and the CIM data model, DASH provides management and control of 
        managed elements like power, CPU etc. 
         


      
      
     <Tychon, et Al.>      Expires December 24, 2011               [Page 15] 
         
     Internet-Draft       EMAN Applicability Statement             June 2011 
         

        Both in service and out-of-service systems can be managed with the 
        DASH specification in a fully secured remote environment.  Full 
        power lifecycle management is possible using out-of-band management. 
         
         
     4.4. ODVA 

         
        ODVA is an association consisting of members from industrial 
        automation companies. ODVA supports standardization of network 
        technologies based on the Common Industrial Protocol (CIP). Within 
        ODVA, there is a special interest group focused on energy and 
        standardization and inter-operability of energy Aware devices. 
         
        While there are many similar concepts between the ODVA and EMAN 
        framework, in particular, the concept of different energy meters 
        based on the device properties has been reused.  
      
         
     4.5. Ecma SDC 

        The Ecma International committee on Smart Data Centre (TC38-TG2 SDC 
        [Ecma-SDC]) is in the process of defining semantics for management 
        of entities in a data center such as servers, storage, network 
        equipment, etc.  It covers energy as one of many functional 
        resources or attributes of systems for monitoring and control.  It 
        only defines messages and properties, and does not reference any 
        specific protocol.  Its goal is to enable interoperability of such 
        protocols as SNMP, BACNET, and HTTP by ensuring a common semantic 
        model across them. Four power states are defined, Off, Sleep, Idle 
        and Active.  The standard does not include actual power measurements 
        in kw or kwh. 
             th
        The 14  draft of SDC process was published in March 2001 and the 
        development of the standard is still underway. When used with EMAN, 
        the SDC standard will provide a thin abstraction on top of the more 
        detailed data model available in EMAN.   
         
         
      
         
     4.6. ISO 

        The ISO [ISO] is developing an energy management standard called ISO 
        50001, and complements ISO 9001 for quality management, and ISO 
        14001 for environment management.  The intent of the framework is to 
        facilitate the creation of energy management programs for 
      
      
     <Tychon, et Al.>      Expires December 24, 2011               [Page 16] 
         
     Internet-Draft       EMAN Applicability Statement             June 2011 
         

        industrial, commercial and other entities.  The standard defines a 
        process for energy management at an organization level.  It does not 
        define the way in which devices report energy and consume energy. 
        The IETF effort would be complementary.  
         
        ISO 50001 is based on the common elements found in all of ISO's 
        management system standards, assuring a high level of compatibility 
        with ISO 9001 (quality management) and ISO 14001 (environmental 
        management). ISO 50001 benefits includes: 
         
       o Integrating energy efficiency into management practices and 
          throughout the supply chain 
       o Energy management best practices and good energy management 
          behaviors 
       o benchmarking, measuring, documenting, and reporting energy 
          intensity improvements and their projected impact on reductions in 
          greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions 
       o Evaluating and prioritizing the implementation of new energy-
          efficient technologies 
      
        ISO 50001 has been developed by ISO project committee ISO/PC 242, 
        Energy management.  
         
     4.7. EnergyStar 

        The US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and US Department of 
        Energy (DOE) jointly sponsor the Energy Star program [ESTAR].  The 
        program promotes the development of energy efficient products and 
        practices.   
         
        To earn Energy Star approval, appliances in the home or business 
        must meet specific energy efficiency targets.  The Energy Star 
        program also provides planning tools and technical documentation to 
        help homeowners design more energy efficient homes. Energy Star is a 
        program; it's not a protocol or standard.  
         
        For businesses and data centers, Energy Star offers technical 
        support to help companies establish energy conservation practices.  
        Energy Star provides best practices for measuring current energy 
        performance, goal setting, and tracking improvement.  The Energy 
        Star tools offered include a rating system for building performance 
        and comparative benchmarks. 
         
        There is no immediate link between EMAN and EnergyStar, one being a 
        protocol and the other a set of recommendations to develop energy 
        efficient products. 
         
      
      
     <Tychon, et Al.>      Expires December 24, 2011               [Page 17] 
         
     Internet-Draft       EMAN Applicability Statement             June 2011 
         

         
         
         
     4.8. SmartGrid 

        The Smart Grid standards efforts underway in the United States are 
        overseen by the US National Institute of Standards and Technology 
        [NIST].  NIST was given the charter to oversee the development of 
        smart grid related standards by the Energy Independence and Security 
        Act of 2007.  NIST is responsible for coordinating a public-private 
        partnership with key energy and consumer stakeholders in order to 
        facilitate the development of smart grid standards. 
        The smart grid standards activity (sponsored and hosted by NIST) is 
        monitored and facilitated by the SGIP (Smart Grid Interoperability 
        Panel).  This group has several sub groups called working groups.  
        These teams examine smaller parts of the smart grid.  They include 
        B2G, I2G, and H2G and others (Building to Grid; Industrial to Grid 
        and Home to Grid). 
         
        When a working group detects a standard or technology gap, the team 
        seeks approval from the SGIP for the creation of a Priority Action 
        Plan (PAP).  The PAP is a private-public partnership with a charter 
        to close a specific gap.  There are currently 17 Priority Action 
        Plans (PAP).   
         
        PAP 10 Addresses "Standard Energy Usage Information". 
        Smart Grid standards will provide distributed intelligence in the 
        network and allow enhanced load shedding.  For example, pricing 
        signals will enable selective shutdown of non critical activities 
        during peak load pricing periods. These actions can be effected 
        through both centralized and distributed management controls.   
        Similarly, brown-outs, air quality alerts, and peak demand limits 
        can be managed through the smart grid data models, based upon IEC 
        61850. 
         
        There is an obvious functional link between SmartGrid and EMAN in 
        the form of demand/response, even if the EMAN framework does not 
        take any specific step toward SmartGrid communication.  
         
     4.9. NAESB, ASHRAE and NEMA 

        As an output of the PAP10's work on the standard information model, 
        multiple stakeholders agreed to work on a utility centric model in 
        NAESB (North American Electric Standards Board)and the building side 
        information model in a joint effort by American Society of Heating, 
        Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning Engineers (ASHRAE) and National 

      
      
     <Tychon, et Al.>      Expires December 24, 2011               [Page 18] 
         
     Internet-Draft       EMAN Applicability Statement             June 2011 
         

        Electrical Manufacturers Association (NEMA). The NAESB effort is a 
        NAESB REQ/WEQ [NAESB]. 
        The output of both ANSI approved SDO's is an information model.  It 
        is not a device level monitoring protocol.  
        After the ASHRAE SPC201 group formed as a result of initial work 
        done by the PAP 10, the SGIP added PAP17 in order to focus 
        specifically on in-building standards for energy using devices. 
         
        PAP 17 "will lead to development of a data model standard to enable 
        energy consuming devices and control systems in the customer 
        premises to manage electrical loads and generation sources in 
        response to communication with the Smart Grid. It will be possible 
        to communicate information about those electrical loads to 
        utilities, other electrical service providers, and market operators.   
        The term "Facility Smart Grid Information" is intended to convey the 
        nature of critical information originating from the customer 
        operated "facility" which deals with the representation and dynamics 
        of loads including prediction, measurement and shedding. It also 
        helps to distinguish between this PAP and that of PAP10 which deals 
        exclusively with the representation of energy usage.  
         
        This data model standard will complement the flow, aggregation, 
        summary, and forecasting of energy usage information being 
        standardized by NAESB in PAP10 through the definition of additional 
        distinct model components. While the NAESB standard is focusing on 
        "a single limited-scope information model" that "will not cover all 
        interactions associated with energy in the home or commercial space" 
        including, for example, load management ("Report to the SGIP 
        Governing Board: PAP10 plan," June 15, 2010), these new components 
        will address load modeling and behavior necessary to manage on-site 
        generation, demand response, electrical storage, peak demand 
        management, load shedding capability estimation, and responsive 
        energy load control." 
         
         

     4.10. ZigBee 

        The Zigbee Smart Energy 2.0 effort[ZIGBEE] currently focuses on 
        wireless communication to smart home appliances.  It is intended to 
        enable home energy management and direct load control by utilities.   
         
        ZigBee protocols are intended for use in embedded applications 
        requiring low data rates and low power consumption. ZigBee's current 
        focus is to define a general-purpose, inexpensive, self-organizing 
        mesh network that can be used for industrial control, embedded 

      
      
     <Tychon, et Al.>      Expires December 24, 2011               [Page 19] 
         
     Internet-Draft       EMAN Applicability Statement             June 2011 
         

        sensing, medical data collection, smoke and intruder warning, 
        building automation, home automation, etc.  
        It is not known if the Zigbee Alliance plans to extend support to 
        business class devices.  There also does not appear to be a plan for 
        context aware marking.   
         
        Zigbee is currently not an ANSI recognized SDO. 
         
        The EMAN framework addresses the needs of IP-enabled networks 
        through the usage of SNMP, while Zigbee looks for completely 
        integrated and inexpensive mesh solution. 
         
     5. Limitations 

        EMAN Framework shall address the needs of energy monitoring in term 
        of measurement and, to a lesser extent, on the control aspects of 
        energy monitoring of networks. 
         
        It is not the purpose of EMAN to create a new protocol stack for 
        energy-aware endpoints, but rather to create a data and information 
        model to measure and report energy and other metrics over SNMP. 
         
        Other legacy protocols may already exist (MODBUS), but are not 
        designed initially to work on IP, even if in some cases it is 
        possible to transport them over IP with some limitations. 
        The EMAN framework does not aim to address questions regarding 
        SmartGrid, electricity producers, and distributors even if there is 
        obvious link between them. 
         
         

     6. Security Considerations 

        EMAN shall use SNMP protocol for energy monitoring and thus has the 
        functionality of  SNMP's security capabilities. More specifically, 
        SNMPv3 [RFC3411] provides important security features such as 
        confidentiality, integrity, and authentication. 
         
         
     7. IANA Considerations 

        This memo includes no request to IANA. 





      
      
     <Tychon, et Al.>      Expires December 24, 2011               [Page 20] 
         
     Internet-Draft       EMAN Applicability Statement             June 2011 
         

     8. References 

     8.1. Normative References 

        [RFC3411] An Architecture for Describing Simple Network Management 
                Protocol (SNMP) Management Frameworks 
         
         
     8.2. Informative References 

         

         
        [DASH] "Desktop and mobile Architecture for System Hardware", 
                http://www.dmtf.org/standards/mgmt/dash/ 
         
        [NIST]  http://www.nist.gov/smartgrid/ 
         
        [Ecma-SDC] Ecma TC38 / SDC Task Group, "Smart Data Centre Resource 
                Monitoring and Control (DRAFT)", March 2011. 

        [ENERGY] http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kilowatt_hour 
         
        [EMAN-AS] Tychon, E., Laherty, M., and B. Schoening, "Energy 
                Management (EMAN) Applicability Statement", draft-tychon-
                eman-applicability-statement-01.txt, work in progress, March 
                2011. 
         
        [EMAN-REQ] Quittek, J., Winter, R., Dietz, T., Claise, B., and M. 
                Chandramouli, " Requirements for Energy Management ", draft-
                ietf-eman-requirements-01 (work in progress),March 2011. 
         
        [EMAN-MONITORING-MIB] M. Chandramouli, Schoening, B., Dietz, T., 
                Quittek, J. and B. Claise  "Energy and Power Monitoring MIB 
                ", draft-claise-energy-monitoring-mib-08, May 2011. 
         
        [EMAN-AWARE-MIB] J. Parello, and B. Claise, "draft-ietf-eman-energy-
                aware-mib-01 ", work in progress, March 2011. 
         
        [EMAN-FRAMEWORK] Claise, B., Parello, J., Schoening, B., and J. 
                Quittek, "Energy Management Framework", draft-ietf-eman-
                framework-01 , March 2011. 
         
        [EMAN-BATTERY-MIB] Quittek, J., Winter, R., and T. Dietz, 
                "Definition of Managed Objects for Battery Monitoring"  
                draft-ietf-eman-battery-mib-00.txt, April 2011. 
         

      
      
     <Tychon, et Al.>      Expires December 24, 2011               [Page 21] 
         
     Internet-Draft       EMAN Applicability Statement             June 2011 
         

        [DMTF] "Power State Management Profile DMTF  DSP1027  Version 2.0"  
                December 2009. 
                http://www.dmtf.org/sites/default/files/standards/documents/
                DSP1027_2.0.0.pdf 
      
        [ESTAR]  http://www.energystar.gov/[ISO]    
                http://www.iso.org/iso/pressrelease.htm?refid=Ref1434 
         
        [SGRID]  http://collaborate.nist.gov/twiki-
                sggrid/bin/view/SmartGrid/SGIPWorkingGroupsAndCommittees 
         
        [NAESB] http://www.naesb.org/smart_grid_PAP10.asp 
         
        [ASHRAE] http://collaborate.nist.gov/twiki-
                sggrid/bin/view/SmartGrid/PAP17Information 
         
        [PAP17] http://collaborate.nist.gov/twiki-
                sggrid/bin/view/SmartGrid/PAP17FacilitySmartGridInformationS
                tandard 
         
        [ZIGBEE] http://www.zigbee.org/ 
        
        [ISO]  http://www.iso.org/iso/pressrelease.htm?refid=Ref1337
         
         
      

     9. Acknowledgments 

         
        The authors would like to thank Jeff Wheeler, Benoit Claise, Juergen 
        Quittek, Chris Verges, John Parello, Matt Laherty, and Bruce Nordman 
        for their valuable contributions.  
         
         
         













      
      
     <Tychon, et Al.>      Expires December 24, 2011               [Page 22] 
         
     Internet-Draft       EMAN Applicability Statement             June 2011 
         

      

     Authors' Addresses 

        Emmanuel Tychon 
        Cisco Systems, Inc. 
        De Keleetlaan, 6A 
        B1831 Diegem 
        Belgium   
        Email: etychon@cisco.com 
      
            
        Brad Schoening 
        44 Rivers Edge Drive 
        Little Silver, NJ 07739 
        USA 
        Email: brad@bradschoening.com 
         
         
        Mouli Chandramouli 
        Cisco Systems, Inc. 
        Sarjapur Outer Ring Road 
        Bangalore, 
        IN 
         
        Phone: +91 80 4426 3947 
        Email: moulchan@cisco.com 
         
         
         

















      
      
     <Tychon, et Al.>      Expires December 24, 2011               [Page 23] 
         
