





      
      
     Energy Management Working Group                          E. Tychon 
     Internet Draft                                  Cisco Systems Inc. 
     Intended status: Informational                        B. Schoening 
     Expires: April 31, 2012                     Independent Consultant 
                                                     Mouli Chandramouli 
                                                     Cisco Systems Inc. 
                                                          Bruce Nordman 
                                  Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory 
                                                       October 31, 2011 
      
                                         
      
                                         
                Energy Management (EMAN) Applicability Statement 
                  draft-tychon-eman-applicability-statement-05 


     Status of this Memo 

        This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance 
        with the provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.  
         
        Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet 
        Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working 
        groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute working 
        documents as Internet-Drafts.  
         
        Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
        months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other 
        documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-
        Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than as "work 
        in progress." 
         
        The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt  
         
        The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html  
         
        This Internet-Draft will expire on April 31, 2012. 
         

     Copyright Notice 

        Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the 
        document authors. All rights reserved. 
         

      
      
      
     <Tychon, et Al.>             Expires April 31, 2012       [Page 1] 
      
     Internet-Draft     EMAN Applicability Statement       October 2011 
         

        This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal 
        Provisions Relating to IETF Documents 
        (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of 
        publication of this document. Please review these documents 
        carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with 
        respect to this document. Code Components extracted from this 
        document must include Simplified BSD License text as described 
        in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided 
        without warranty as described in the Simplified BSD License. 
      

     Abstract 

        The objective of Energy Management (EMAN)is to provide an energy 
        management framework for networked devices. This document 
        presents the applicability of the EMAN framework for a variety 
        of scenarios. This document lists use cases and target devices 
        that can potentially implement the EMAN framework and associated 
        SNMP MIB modules. These use cases are useful for identifying 
        monitoring requirements that need to be considered. Further, we 
        describe the relationship of the EMAN framework to relevant 
        other energy monitoring standards and architectures. 
         

     Table of Contents 

      1. Introduction ................................................3 
        1.1. Energy Management Overview ..............................4 
        1.2. Energy Measurement ......................................5 
        1.3. Energy Management .......................................5 
        1.4. EMAN Framework Application ..............................6 
        1.5. EMAN WG Document Overview ...............................6 
      2. Scenarios and Target Devices ................................7 
        2.1. Network Infrastructure Energy Objects ...................7 
        2.2. Devices Powered and Connected to a Network Device .......8 
        2.3. Devices Connected to a Network ..........................9 
        2.4. Power Meters ............................................9 
        2.5. Mid-level Managers .....................................10 
        2.6. Gateways to Building Systems ...........................11 
        2.7. Home Energy Gateways ...................................12 
        2.8. Data Center Devices ....................................13 
        2.9. Energy Storage Devices ................................14 
        2.10. Ganged Outlets on a PDU Multiple Power Sources ........14 
        2.11. Industrial Automation Networks   ......................15 
        2.12. Printers            ...................................15 
        2.13. Off-Grid Devices ......................................17 
        2.14. Demand/Response   .....................................17 
       
      
     <Tychon, et al.>            Expires April 31, 2012        [Page 2] 
         
     Internet-Draft     EMAN Applicability Statement       October 2011 
         

        2.15. Power Capping   ........................................18 
      3. Use Case Patterns  ..........................................18 
        3.1. Metering  ...............................................18 
        3.2. Metering and Control  ...................................19 
        3.3. Power Supply, Metering and Control  .....................19 
        3.4. Multiple power sources  .................................19 
      4. Relationship of EMAN to other Standards  ....................19 
        4.1. Data Model and Reporting  ...............................20 
              4.1.1. IEC - CIM. ......................................20 
              4.1.2. DMTF ............................................20 
              4.1.3. ODVA ............................................21 
              4.1.4. Ecma SDC ........................................22 
              4.1.5. IEEE-ISTO Printer Working Group (PWG) ...........22 
              4.1.6. ASHRAE ..........................................23 
              4.1.7. ZigBee ..........................................24 
        4.2. Measurement  ............................................24 
              4.2.1. ANSI C12 ........................................24 
              4.2.2. IEC62301 ........................................24 
        4.3. Other  ..................................................25 
              4.3.1. ISO .............................................25 
              4.3.2. EnergyStar ......................................26 
              4.3.3. SmartGrid .......................................26 
      5. Limitations  ................................................27 
      6. Security Considerations  ....................................27 
      7. IANA Considerations  ........................................27 
      8. Acknowledgements  ...........................................27 
      9. Open Issues   ...............................................28 
      10. References  ................................................28 
        10.1. Normative References  ..................................28 
        10.2. Informative References  ................................29 
       
      

     1. Introduction 

        The focus of the Energy Management (EMAN) framework is energy 
        monitoring and management of energy objects [EMAN-DEF].  The 
        scope of devices considered are network equipment and its 
        components, and devices connected directly or indirectly to 
        the network. The EMAN framework enables monitoring i.e.; 
        heterogeneous devices to report their energy consumption, and 
        secondly, if permissible, enables control policies for energy 
        savings.  There are multiple scenarios where this is 
        desirable, particularly considering the increased importance 
        of limiting consumption of finite energy resources and 
        reducing operational expenses. 
      
       
      
     <Tychon, et al.>            Expires April 31, 2012        [Page 3] 
         
     Internet-Draft     EMAN Applicability Statement      October 2011 
         

        The EMAN framework describes how energy information can be 
        retrieved from IP-enabled devices using Simple Network 
        Management Protocol (SNMP), specifically, Management Information 
        Base (MIBs) for SNMP. 
         
        This document describes typical applications of the EMAN 
        framework, as well as its opportunities and limitations. Other 
        standards that are similar to EMAN but address different domains 
        are described. This document contains references to those other 
        standards and describes how they relate to the EMAN framework. 
         
     1.1. Energy Management Overview 

        First, a brief introduction to the definitions of Energy and 
        Power are presented. A draft on terminology has been submitted 
        so that to reach a consensus on the definitions of commonly used 
        terms in the EMAN WG. While energy is available in many forms, 
        EMAN addresses only the electrical energy consumed by devices 
        connected to a network. 
         
        Energy is the capacity to perform work. Electrical energy is 
        typically expressed in kilowatt-hour units (kWh) or other 
        multiples of watt-hours (Wh). One kilowatt-hour is the 
        electrical energy used by a 1 kilowatt device for one hour. 
        Power is the rate of electrical energy flow. In other words, 
        power = energy / time. Power is often measured in watts. Billing 
        is based on electrical energy (measured in kWh) supplied by the 
        utility. 
         
        Towards the goal of increasing the energy efficiency in networks 
        and buildings, a first step is to enable energy objects to 
        report their energy usage over time. The EMAN framework 
        addresses this problem with an information model for some 
        electrical equipment: energy object identification, energy 
        object context, power measurement and power measurement 
        attributes.  
         
        The EMAN WG framework defines SNMP MIB modules based on the 
        information model.  By implementing the SNMP MIB modules, any 
        energy object can report its energy consumption according to the 
        information model. In that context, it is important to 
        distinguish energy objects that can report their own energy 
        usage from parent devices that can also collect and aggregate 
        energy usage of children energy objects.  
         
        The list of target devices and scenarios considered for Energy 
        Management are presented in Section 2 with detailed examples. 
       
      
     <Tychon, et al.>            Expires April 31, 2012        [Page 4] 
         
     Internet-Draft     EMAN Applicability Statement      October 2011 
         

         
     1.2. Energy Measurement 

        More and more devices are able to measure and report their own 
        energy consumption. Smart power strips and some Power over 
        Ethernet (PoE) switches can meter consumption of connected 
        devices.  However, when managed and reported through proprietary 
        means, this information is minimally useful at the enterprise 
        level. 
         
        The primary goal of the EMAN MIBs is to enable reporting and 
        management within a standard framework that is applicable to a 
        wide variety of end devices, meters, and proxies. This enables a 
        management system to know who's consuming what, when, and how at 
        any time by leveraging existing networks, across various 
        equipment, in a unified and consistent manner.   
         
        Given that an energy object can consume energy and/or provide 
        energy to other devices, there are three types of meters for 
        energy measurement: energy input to a device, energy supplied to 
        other devices, and net (resultant) energy consumed (the 
        difference between energy input and provided).  
         
     1.3. Energy Management 

        Beyond energy monitoring, the EMAN framework provides mechanisms 
        for energy control.  
         
        There are many cases where reducing energy consumption of 
        devices is desirable, such as when the device utilization islow 
        or when the electricity is expensive or in short supply. 
         
        In some cases, energy control requires considering the energy 
        object context. For instance, in a building: all phones would 
        not usually be turned off to keep some still available in case 
        of emergency; office cooling is usually not turned off totally 
        during non-work hours, but the comfort level is reduced; and so 
        on. 
      
        Energy object control requires flexibility and support for 
        different polices and mechanisms: from centralized management 
        with a network management station, to autonomous management by 
        individual devices, and alignment with dynamic demand-response 
        mechanisms. 
         
        The EMAN framework can be used as a tool for the demand/response 
        scenario where in response to time-of-day fluctuation of energy 
       
      
     <Tychon, et al.>            Expires April 31, 2012        [Page 5] 
         
     Internet-Draft     EMAN Applicability Statement      October 2011 
         

        costs or possible energy shortages, it is possible to respond 
        and reduce the energy consumption for the network devices, 
        effectively changing its power state. 
         
         
     1.4. EMAN Framework Application 

         
        A Network Management System (NMS) is the entity that requests 
        information from compatible devices using SNMP protocol. It may 
        be a system which also implements other network management 
        functions, e.g. security management, identity management and so 
        on), or one that only deals exclusively with energy in which 
        case it is called EnMS, Energy Management System. It may be 
        limited to monitoring energy use, or it may also implement 
        control functions. In a typical application of the EMAN 
        framework, management software collects energy information for 
        devices in the network.  
         
        Energy management can be implemented by extending existing SNMP 
        support to the EMAN specific MIBs. SNMP provides an industry 
        proven and well-known mechanism to discover, secure, measure, 
        and control SNMP-enabled end devices.  The EMAN framework 
        provides an information and data model to unify access to a 
        large range of devices. The scope of the target devices and the 
        network scenarios considered for energy management are listed in 
        Section 2. 
         
     1.5. EMAN WG Document Overview 

        The EMAN working group charter calls for producing a series of 
        Internet standard drafts in the area of energy management. The 
        following drafts are currently under discussion in the working 
        group.  
         
          Applicability Statement [EMAN-AS] This draft presents the use 
          cases and scenarios for energy monitoring.  In addition, other 
          relevant energy standards and architectures are listed.  
           
          Requirements [EMAN-REQ] This draft presents the requirements 
          of Energy Monitoring and the scope of the devices considered.  
           
          Framework [EMAN-FRAMEWORK] This draft defines the terminology 
          and explains the different concepts associated with energy 
          monitoring; these are used in the MIB modules.  
           

       
      
     <Tychon, et al.>            Expires April 31, 2012        [Page 6] 
         
     Internet-Draft     EMAN Applicability Statement      October 2011 
         

          Energy-Aware MIB [EMAN-AWARE-MIB] This draft proposes a MIB 
          module that characterizes a device's identity and context. 
           
          Monitoring MIB [EMAN-MONITORING-MIB] This draft defines a MIB 
          module for monitoring the power and energy consumption of a 
          device. In addition, the MIB module contains an optional 
          module for power quality metrics.  
           
          Battery MIB [EMAN-BATTERY-MIB] This draft contains a MIB 
          module for monitoring characteristics of an internal battery.  
           
          Energy Management Terminology [EMAN-DEF] This draft lists the 
          definitions and terms used in the Energy Management Working 
          Group. 
      
     2. Scenarios and Target Devices 

        In this section a selection of scenarios for energy management 
        are presented. The fundamental objective of the use cases is to 
        list important network scenarios that the EMAN framework should 
        solve. These use cases then drive the requirements for the EMAN 
        framework.  
         
        Each scenario lists target devices for which the energy 
        management framework can be applied, as well as how the 
        reported-on devices are powered, and how the reporting is 
        accomplished.    While there may be some overlap between some of 
        the use cases, the use cases serve as illustrative network 
        scenarios EMAN framework should solve. 
      
     2.1. Network Infrastructure Energy Objects 

        This scenario covers network devices and their components. Power 
        management of energy objects is considered as a fundamental 
        requirement of energy management of networks.  
         
        It can be important to monitor the power state and energy 
        consumption of these energy objects at a granularity level finer 
        than just the entire device. For these devices, the chassis 
        draws power from one or more sources and feeds all its internal 
        components. It is highly desirable to have monitoring available 
        for individual components, such as line cards, processors, and 
        hard drives as well as peripherals like USB devices. 
      
        As an illustrative example, consider a switch with the following 
        grouping of sub-entities for which energy monitoring could be 
        useful.  
       
      
     <Tychon, et al.>            Expires April 31, 2012        [Page 7] 
         
     Internet-Draft     EMAN Applicability Statement      October 2011 
         

         
          .  physical view: chassis (or stack), line cards, service 
             modules of the switch 
          .  component view: CPU, ASICs, fans, power supply, ports 
             (single port and port groups), storage and memory  
          .  logical view: system, data-plane, control-plane, etc. 
              
        The essential properties of this use case are:  
              
          . Target devices: Network devices such as routers, switches 
             and their components. 
          . How powered: Typically by a PDU on a rack or from a wall 
             outlet. The components of a device are powered by the 
             device chassis.  
          . Reporting: Direct power measurement can be performed at a 
             device level. Components can report their power consumption 
             directly or the chassis/device that can report on behalf of 
             some components. 
      
     2.2. Devices Powered and Connected to a Network Device 

         
        This scenario covers Power over Ethernet (PoE) devices. A PoE 
        Power Sourcing Equipment (PSE) device (e.g. a PoE switch) 
        provides power to a Powered Device (PD) (e.g. a desktop phone). 
        For each port, the PSE can control the power supply (switching 
        it on and off) and monitor actual power provided. PoE devices 
        obtain network connectivity as well as the power supply for the 
        device over a single connection so the PSE can determine which 
        device to allocate each port's power to. 
      
        PoE ports on a switch are commonly connected to IP phones, 
        wireless access points, and IP cameras. The switch powers 
        itself, as well as supplies power to downstream PoE ports. 
        Monitoring the power consumption of the switch (Energy Object 
        Parent) and the power consumption of the PoE end-points(Energy 
        Object Children) is a simple use case of this scenario. 
         
        The essential properties of this use case are:  
              
          . Target devices: Power over Ethernet devices such as IP 
             Phones, Wireless Access Points, and IP cameras. 
          . How powered: PoE devices are connected to the switch port 
             which supplies power to those devices.  
          . Reporting:  PoE device power consumption is often measured 
             and reported at the switch (PSE) port which supplies power 
             for the PoE device. 
       
      
     <Tychon, et al.>            Expires April 31, 2012        [Page 8] 
         
     Internet-Draft     EMAN Applicability Statement      October 2011 
         

         
        In this case, the PoE devices do not need to directly support 
        the EMAN framework, only the Power Sourcing Equipment (PSE) 
        does. 
      
      
     2.3. Devices Connected to a Network 

        The use case covers the metering relationship between an energy 
        object receiving power from a source such as a power brick, and 
        have an independent network connection to a parent energy object 
        such as a switch. 
      
        In continuation to the previous example is a switch port that 
        has both a PoE connection powering an IP Phone, and a PC has a 
        daisy-chain connection to the IP Phone for network connectivity. 
        The PC has a network connection from the switch, but draws power 
        from the wall outlet, in contrast to the IP phone draws power 
        from the switch.  
         
        It is also possible to consider a simple example of PC which has 
        a network connection but draws power from the wall outlet or 
        PDU.  
         
        The PC in this case, is an non-PoE device, can report power 
        usage by itself, for instance through the EMAN framework. 
         
        The essential properties of this use case are:  
              
          . Target devices:  Abroad set of energy objects that have a 
             network connection, but receive power supply from the wall 
             outlet.  
          . How powered:  These devices receive power supply from the 
             wall outlet or a PDU.  
          . Reporting:  There are two models: devices that can measure 
             and report the power consumption directly via the EMAN 
             framework, and those that communicate it to the network 
             device (switch) and the switch can report the device's 
             power consumption via the EMAN framework.  
      
     2.4. Power Meters 

        Some electrical devices are not equipped with instrumentation to 
        measure their own power and accumulated energy consumption.  
        External meters can be used to measure the power consumption of 
        such electrical devices.  
         
       
      
     <Tychon, et al.>            Expires April 31, 2012        [Page 9] 
         
     Internet-Draft     EMAN Applicability Statement      October 2011 
         

        This use case covers the proxy relationship of energy objects 
        able to measure or report the power consumption of external 
        electrical devices, not natively connected to the network. 
        Examples of such metering devices are smart PDUs and smart 
        meters. 
         
        Three types of external metering are relevant to EMAN: PDUs, 
        standalone meters, and utility meters.  External meters can 
        measure these properties for a single device or for a set of 
        devices. 
         
        Power Distribution Unit (PDUs) in a rack have inbuilt meters for 
        each socket and the PDUs can measure the power supplied to each 
        device in an equipment rack. The PDUs have remote management 
        functionality which can be used to measure and possibly control 
        the power supply of each outlet.  
         
        Standalone meters can be placed anywhere in a power distribution 
        tree, and can measure the power consumption.  
        Utility meters monitor and report accumulated power consumption 
        of the entire building. There can be sub-meters to measure the 
        power consumption of a portion of the building.  
         
        The essential properties of this use case are: 
         
          . Target devices:  PDUs and Smart Meters. 
          . How powered:  From traditional mains power but as passed 
             through a PDU or meter.  
          . Reporting:  The PDUs reports power consumption of 
             downstream devices. There is commonly only one device 
             downstream of each outlet, but there could be many.  There 
             can be external meters in between the power supply and 
             device and the meters can report the power consumption of 
             the device. 
         
     2.5. Mid-level Managers 

        This use case covers aggregation of energy management data at 
        "mid-level managers" that can provide energy management 
        functions for themselves as well as associated devices. 
      
        A switch can provide energy management functions for all devices 
        connected to its ports, whether or not these devices are powered 
        by the switch or whether the switch provides immediate network 
        connectivity to the devices; such a switch is a mid-level 
        manager, offering aggregation of power consumption data for 
        devices it does not supply power to them.  Devices report their 
       
      
     <Tychon, et al.>            Expires April 31, 2012        [Page 10] 
         
     Internet-Draft     EMAN Applicability Statement       October 2011 
         

        EMAN data to the switch and the switch aggregates the data for 
        these data.  
         
        The essential properties of this use case are summarized as 
        follows:  
      
          . Target devices: network devices which can perform 
             aggregation; commonly a switch or a proxy 
          . How powered:  Mid-level managers can be are commonly 
             powered by a PDU or from a wall outlet but there is no 
             limitation.  
          . Reporting:  The middle-manager aggregates the energy data 
             and reports that data to a NMS or higher mid-level manager.  
      
     2.6. Gateways to Building Systems 

        This use case describes energy management of buildings. Building 
        Management Systems (BMS) have been in place for many years using 
        legacy protocols not based on IP. In these buildings, a gateway 
        can provide a proxy relationship between IP and legacy building 
        automation protocols. The gateway can provide an interface 
        between the EMAN framework and relevant building management 
        protocols.  
         
        Due to the potential energy savings, energy management of 
        buildings has received significant attention. There are gateway 
        network elements to manage the multiple components ofa building 
        energy management system such as Heating, Ventilation, and Air 
        Conditioning (HVAC), lighting, electrical, fire and emergency 
        systems, elevators, etc. The gateway device uses legacy building 
        protocols to communicate with those devices, collects their 
        energy usage, and reports the results.  
         
        The gateway performs protocol conversion between many facility 
        management devices. The gateway communicates via RS-232/RS-485 
        interfaces, Ethernet interfaces, and protocols specific to 
        building management such as BACNET, MODBUS, or Zigbee.   
      
        The essential properties of this use case are : 
      
          . Target devices: Building energy management devices - HVAC 
             systems, lighting, electrical, fire and emergency systems. 
             There are meters for each of the sub-systems and the energy 
             data is communicated to the proxy using legacy protocols.  
          . How powered: Any method, including directly from mains 
             power or via a UPS.   

       
      
     <Tychon, et al.>            Expires April 31, 2012        [Page 11] 
         
     Internet-Draft     EMAN Applicability Statement       October 2011 
         

          . Reporting: The gateway collects energy consumption of non-
             IP systems and communicates the data via the EMAN 
             framework.  
      
     2.7. Home Energy Gateways 

        This use case describes the scenario of energy management of a 
        home. The home energy gateway is another example of a proxy that 
        interfaces to the electrical appliances and other devices in a 
        home and also has an interface to the utility. This gateway can 
        monitor and manage electrical equipment (refrigerator, 
        heating/cooling, washing machine etc.) possibly using one of the 
        many protocols (ZigBee, Smart Energy, ...) that are being 
        developed for the home area network products and considered in 
        standards organizations. 
         
        In its simplest form, metering can be performed at home. Beyond 
        the metering, it is also possible implement energy saving 
        policies based on energy pricing from the utility grid. From an 
        EMAN point of view, the information model that been investigated 
        can be applied to the protocols under consideration for energy 
        monitoring of a home.  
         
      
         
        The essential properties of this use case are:  
      
          . Target devices: Home energy gateway and Smart meters in a 
             home. 
          . How powered:  Any method. 
          . Reporting: Home energy gateway can collect power 
             consumption of device in a home and possibly report the 
             metering reading to the utility.  
      
        Beyond the canonical setting of a home drawing power from the 
        utility, it is also possible to envision an energy neutral 
        situation wherein the buildings/homes that can produce and 
        consume energy without importing energy from the utility grid. 
        There are many energy production technologies such as solar 
        panels, wind turbines, or micro generators. This use case 
        illustrates the concept of self-contained energy generation and 
        consumption and possibly the aggregation of the energy use of 
        homes. 
         
      


       
      
     <Tychon, et al.>            Expires April 31, 2012        [Page 12] 
         
     Internet-Draft     EMAN Applicability Statement       October 2011 
         

       2.8. Data Center Devices 

        This use case describes energy management of a Data Center 
        network. 
         
        Energy efficiency of data centers has become a fundamental 
        challenge of data center operation, as datacenters are big 
        energy consumers and their infrastructure is expensive. The 
        equipment generates heat, and heat needs to be evacuated though 
        a HVAC system. 
         
        A typical data center network consists of a hierarchy of 
        electrical energy objects.  At the bottom are servers mounted on 
        a rack; these are connected to the top-of-the-rack switches; 
        these are connected to aggregation switches; those in turn 
        connected to core switches.  Power consumption of all network 
        elements and the servers in the Data center should be measured. 
        In addition, there are also network storage devices. Energy 
        management can be implemented on different aggregation levels, 
        such as network level, Power Distribution Unit (PDU) level, and 
        server level. 
         
        The Data center network contains UPS to provide back-up power 
        for the network devices in the event in the event of power 
        outages. Thus from a Data center energy management point of 
        view, in addition, to monitoring the energy usage of network 
        devices, it is also important to monitor the remaining capacity 
        of the UPS. 
         
        In addition to monitoring the power consumption, at a data 
        center level, additional metrics such as power quality, power 
        characteristics can be important metrics. The dynamic variations 
        in the input power supply from the grid referred to as power 
        quality is one metric. Secondly, how the devices use the power 
        can be referred to as power characteristics and it is also 
        useful to monitor these metrics. Lastly, the power plate set 
        will make it possible to know an aggregate of the potential 
        worst-case power usage and compare it to the budgeted power in 
        the data center. 
         
        The essential properties of this use case are:  
      
          . Target devices: All network devices in a data center, such 
             as network equipment, servers, and storage devices.  
          . How powered: Any method but commonly by a PDUs in racks. 
          . Reporting: Devices may report on their own behalf, or for 
             other connected devices as described in other use cases.  
       
      
     <Tychon, et al.>            Expires April 31, 2012        [Page 13] 
         
     Internet-Draft     EMAN Applicability Statement       October 2011 
         

      
     2.9. Energy Storage Devices 

        There are two types of devices with energy storage: those whose 
        primary function is to provide power to another device (e.g. a 
        UPS), and those with a different primary function, but have an 
        energy storage as a component as an alternate internal power 
        source (e.g. a notebook).  EMAN covers both types of products in 
        this use case. 
         
        The energy storage can be a battery, or any other means to store 
        electricity such as a hydrogen cell. 
         
        Some devices have an internal battery as a back-up or 
        alternative source of power to mains power. When the connection 
        to the power supply of the device is disconnected, the device 
        can run on the internal battery. As batteries have a finite 
        capacity and lifetime, means for reporting the actual charge, 
        age, and state of a battery are required. 
         
        UPS can provide backup power for many devices in a data centers 
        for a finite period of time. Energy monitoring of such energy 
        storage devices is vital from a data center network operations 
        point of view. The UPS MIB provides a framework for monitoring 
        the remaining capacity of the UPS. 
         
        There are also battery systems for mobile towers particularly 
        for use in remote locations. It is important to monitor the 
        remaining battery life and raise an alarm when the battery life 
        is below a threshold.  
         
        The essential properties of this use case are:  
      
          . Target devices: Devices that have an internal battery such 
             as notebook PC and other mobile devices.   
          . How powered: From internal batteries or mains power.  
          . Reporting:  The device reports on its internal battery.  
              
      
     2.10. Ganged Outlets on a PDU Multiple Power Sources 

        This use case describes the scenario of multiple power sources 
        of a devices and logical groupings of devices in a PDU.  
         
        Some PDUs allow physical entities like outlets to be "ganged" 
        together as a logical entity to simplify management. 

       
      
     <Tychon, et al.>            Expires April 31, 2012        [Page 14] 
         
     Internet-Draft     EMAN Applicability Statement       October 2011 
         

        This is particularly useful for servers with multiple power 
        supplies, where each power supply is connected to a different 
        physical outlet. Other implementations allow "gangs" to be 
        created based on common ownership of outlets, such as business 
        units, load shed priority, or other non-physical relationships. 
         
        Current implementations allow for an "M-to-N" mapping between 
        outlet "gangs" and physical outlets, as with this example: 
         
          . Outlet 1 - physical entity  
          . Outlet 2 - physical entity  
          . Outlet 3 - physical entity  
          . Outlet 4 - physical entity 
          . Outlet Gang A - virtual entity  
          . Outlet Gang B - virtual entity 
         
               o Gang A -> Outlets 1, 2 and 3  
               o Gang B -> Outlets 3 and 4  
         
        Note the allowed overlap on Outlet 3, which belongs to both 
        "gangs." 
         
        Each "Outlet Gang" entity reports the aggregated data from the 
        individual outlet entities that comprise it and enables a single 
        point of control for all the individual outlet entities. 
         
      
     2.11. Industrial Automation Networks 

        Energy consumption statistics in the industrial sector are 
        staggering. The industrial sector alone consumes about half of 
        the world's total delivered energy, making it the largest end-
        use sector. Thus, the need for optimization of energy usage in 
        this sector is natural.  
        Industrial facilities consume energy in process loads, and in 
        non-process loads.   
        The essential properties of this use case are:  
         
          . Target devices: Devices used in industrial automation  
          . How powered: Any method. 
          . Reporting: Currently, CIP protocol is currently used for 
             reporting energy for these devices 
      
     2.12. Printers 

        This use case describes the scenario of energy monitoring and 
        management of Printer devices.  
       
      
     <Tychon, et al.>            Expires April 31, 2012        [Page 15] 
         
     Internet-Draft     EMAN Applicability Statement       October 2011 
         

         
        Printers in this use case stand in for all imaging equipment, 
        also including multi-function devices (MFDs), copiers, scanners, 
        fax machines, and mailing machines.  Energy use of printers has 
        been an industry concern for several decades, and they usually 
        have sophisticated power management with a variety of low-power 
        modes, particularly for managing energy-intensive thermo-
        mechanical components. Printers also have long made extensive 
        use of SNMP for end-user system interaction and for management 
        generally, and cross-vendor management systems are available 
        today to manage fleets of printers in enterprises.  Power 
        consumption during active modes can vary widely, with high peak 
        levels. 
         
        Printers today can expose detailed power state information, 
        distinct from operational state information, with some printers 
        reporting transition states between stable long-term states.   
        Many also support active setting of power states, and setting of 
        policies such as delay times when no activity will cause 
        automatic transition to a lower power mode.  Other features 
        include reporting on components of imaging equipment, counters 
        for state transitions, and typical power levels by state, 
        scheduling, and events/alarms. 
         
        Some large printers also have a "Digital Front End" which is a 
        computer that performs functions on behalf of the physical 
        imaging system.  These will typically have their own presence on 
        the network and are sometimes separately powered. 
         
        There are some unique characteristics of Printers from the point 
        of view energy monitoring. While the printer is not in use, 
        there are timer based low power states (sleep, stand-by), which 
        consume very little power. On the other hand, while the printer 
        is printing or copying the cylinder needs to be heated so that 
        power consumption is quite high but only for a short period of 
        time (duration of the print job). Given this work load, periodic 
        polling of energy consumption would not suffice.  
         
        Target Devices: All imaging equipment. 
         
        How Powered: Typically via mains AC from a wall outlet 
         
        Reporting: Devices report for themselves 
         



       
      
     <Tychon, et al.>            Expires April 31, 2012        [Page 16] 
         
     Internet-Draft     EMAN Applicability Statement       October 2011 
         

     2.13. Off-Grid Devices 

        This use case concerns self-contained devices that use energy 
        but are not connected to an infrastructure power delivery grid.  
        These devices typically scavenge energy from environmental 
        sources such as solar energy or wind power. The device generally 
        contains a closely coupled combination of  
         
          . power scavenging or generation component(s)  
          . power storage component(s) (e.g., battery)  
          . power consuming component(s)  
           
        With scavenged power, the energy input is often dependent on the 
        random variations of the weather. These devices therefore 
        require energy management both for internal control and remote 
        reporting of their state. In order to optimize the performance 
        of these devices and minimize the costs of the generation and 
        storage components, it is desirable to vary the activity level, 
        and, hopefully, the energy requirements of the consuming 
        components in order to make best use of the available stored and 
        instantaneously generated energy.  With appropriate energy 
        management, the overall device can be optimized to deliver an 
        appropriate level of service without over provisioning the 
        generation and storage components. 
         
        In many cases these devices are expected to operate 
        autonomously, as continuous communications for the purposes of 
        remote control is either impossible or would result in excessive 
        power consumption.  Non continuous polling requires the ability 
        to store and access later the information collected while the 
        communication was not possible. 
         
        Target Devices:  Remote network devices (mobile network) that 
        consume and produce energy 
         
        How Powered: Can be battery powered or using natural energy 
        sources 
         
        Reporting: Devices report their power usage but only 
        occasionally.  
         
         
     2.14. Demand/Response 

        Demand/Response from the utility or grid is a common theme that 
        spans across some of the use cases. In some situations, in 
        response to time-of-day fluctuation of energy costs or sudden 
       
      
     <Tychon, et al.>            Expires April 31, 2012        [Page 17] 
         
     Internet-Draft     EMAN Applicability Statement       October 2011 
         

        energy shortages due power outages, it may be important to 
        respond and reduce the energy consumption of the network.  
        From EMAN use case perspective, the demand/response scenario can 
        apply to a Data Center or a Building or a residential home. As a 
        first step, it may be important to monitor the energy 
        consumption in real-time of a Data center or a building or home 
        which is already discussed in the previous use cases. Then based 
        on the potential energy shortfall, the Energy Management System 
        (EMS) could formulate a suitable response, i.e., the EMS could 
        shut down some selected devices that may be considered 
        discretionary or uniformly reduce the power supplied to all 
        devices. For multi-site data centers it may be possible to 
        formulate policies such as follow-the-moon type of approach, by 
        scheduling the mobility of VMs across Data centers in different 
        geographical locations. 
         
     2.15. Power Capping 

        Power capping is a technique to limit the total power 
        consumption of a server. This technique can be useful for power 
        limited data centers. Based on workload measurements, the server 
        can choose the optimal power state of the server in terms of 
        performance and power consumption. When the server operates at 
        less than the power supply capacity, it runs at full speed. When 
        the server power would be greater than the power supply  
        capacity, it runs at a slower speed so that its power 
        consumption matches the available power supply capacity. This 
        gives vendors the option to use smaller, cost-effective power 
        supplies that allow real world workloads to run at nominal 
        frequency.  
         

      

      
     3. Use Case Patterns 

        The use cases presented above can be abstracted to the following 
        broad patterns.  
      
     3.1. Metering 

        -energy objects which have capability for internal metering  
        - electrical devices which are metered by an external device  
      
      

       
      
     <Tychon, et al.>            Expires April 31, 2012        [Page 18] 
         
     Internet-Draft     EMAN Applicability Statement       October 2011 
         

     3.2. Metering and Control 

        - entities objects that do not supply power, butcan perform only 
        power metering for other devices 
      
        - entities objects that do not supply power, can perform both 
     metering and control for other devices 
         
         
     3.3. Power Supply, Metering and Control 

        - entities devices that supply power for other devices but do 
        not perform power metering for those devices 
         
        - entities that supply power for other devices and also perform 
        power metering  
         
        - entities supply power for other devices and also perform power 
        metering and control for other devices 
         
      
         
     3.4. Multiple power sources 

        - entities that have multiple power sources and metering and 
        control is performed by one source  
         
        - entities that have multiple power sources and metering is 
        performed by one source and control another source  
         
      

     4. Relationship of EMAN to other Standards 

        EMAN as a framework is tied to other standards and efforts that 
        deal with energy. Existing standards are leveraged when 
        possible.  EMAN helps enable adjacent technologies such as Smart 
        Grid. 
         
        The standards most relevant and applicable to EMAN are listed 
        below with a brief description of their objectives, the current 
        state and how that standard can be applied to EMAN. 
         




       
      
     <Tychon, et al.>            Expires April 31, 2012        [Page 19] 
         
     Internet-Draft     EMAN Applicability Statement       October 2011 
         

     4.1. Data Model and Reporting 

     4.1.1. IEC - CIM 

        The International Electro-technical Commission (IEC) has 
        developed a broad set of standards for power management.  Among 
        these, the most applicable to EMAN is IEC 61850,a standard for 
        the design of electric utility automation.  The abstract data 
        model defined in 61850 is built upon and extends the Common 
        Information Model (CIM). The complete 61850 CIM model includes 
        over a hundred object classes and is widely used by utilities 
        worldwide. 
         
        This set of standards was originally conceived to automate 
        control of a substation (facilities which transfer electricity 
        from the transmission to the distribution system). While the 
        original domain of 61850 is substation automation, the extensive 
        data model has been widely used in other domains, including 
        Energy Management Systems (EMS). 
         
        IEC TC57 WG19 is an ongoing working group to harmonize the CIM 
        data model and 61850 standards. 
         
        Concepts from IEC Standards have been reused in the EMAN WG 
        drafts. In particular, AC Power Quality measurements have been 
        reused from IEC 61850-7-4. The concept of Accuracy Classes for 
        measurement of power and energy has been reused IEC 62053-21 and 
        IEC 62053-22. 
         
     4.1.2. DMTF 

        The Distributed Management Task Force (DMTF)[DMTF] has 
        standardized management solutions for managing servers and PCs, 
        including power-state configuration and management of elements 
        in a heterogeneous environment.  These specifications provide 
        physical, logical and virtual system management requirements for 
        power-state control. 
         
        The EMAN standard references the DMTF Power Profile and Power 
        State Series. 

     4.1.2.1. Common Information Model Profiles 

        The DMTF uses CIM-based (Common Information Model) 'Profiles' to 
        represent and manage power utilization and configuration of 
        managed elements (note that this is not the 61850 CIM).  Key 
        profiles for energy management are 'Power Supply' (DSP 1015), 
       
      
     <Tychon, et al.>            Expires April 31, 2012        [Page 20] 
         
     Internet-Draft     EMAN Applicability Statement       October 2011 
         

        'Power State' (DSP 1027) and 'Power Utilization Management' (DSP 
        1085).These profiles define monitoring and configuration of a 
        Power Managed Element's static and dynamic power saving modes, 
        power allocation limits and power states, among other features.   
         
        Reduced power modes can be established as static or dynamic.  
        Static modes are fixed policies that limit power use or 
        utilization. Dynamic power saving modes rely upon internal 
        feedback to control power consumption. 
         
        Power states are eight named operational and non operational 
        levels.  These are On, Sleep-Light, Sleep-Deep, Hibernate, Off-
        Soft, and Off-Hard.  Power change capabilities provide 
        immediate, timed interval, and graceful transitions between on, 
        off, and reset power states.  Table 3 of the Power State Profile 
        defines the correspondence between the ACPI and DMTF power state 
        models, although it is not necessary for a managed element to 
        support ACPI. Optionally, a TransitingToPowerState property can 
        represent power state transitions in progress. 
         
     4.1.2.2. DASH 

        DMTF DASH (DSP0232) (Desktop And Mobile Architecture for System 
        Hardware) addresses managing heterogeneous desktop and mobile 
        systems (including power) via in-band and out-of-band 
        communications.  DASH provides management and control of managed 
        elements like power, CPU, etc. using the DMTF's WS-Management 
        web services and CIM data model. 
         
        Both in service and out-of-service systems can be managed with 
        the DASH specification in a fully secured remote environment.  
        Full power lifecycle management is possible using out-of-band 
        management. 
         
     4.1.3. ODVA 

        The Open DeviceNet Vendors Association (ODVA) is an association 
        for industrial automation companies and defines the Common 
        Industrial Protocol (CIP). Within ODVA, there is a special 
        interest group focused on energy. 
         
        There are many similar concepts between the ODVA and EMAN 
        frameworks towards monitoring and management of energy aware 
        devices. In particular, one of the concepts being considered 
        different energy meters based on if the device consumes 
        electricity or produces electricity or a passive device.  
         
       
      
     <Tychon, et al.>            Expires April 31, 2012        [Page 21] 
         
     Internet-Draft     EMAN Applicability Statement       October 2011 
         

        The Open DeviceNet Vendors Association (ODVA) is developing an 
        energy management framework for the industrial sector.  There 
        are synergies between the ODVA and EMAN approaches to energy 
        management. 

        ODVA defines a three-part approach towards energy management: 
        awareness of energy usage, consuming energy more efficiently, 
        and exchanging energy with the utility or others. Energy 
        monitoring and management promote efficient consumption and 
        enable automating actions that reduce energy consumption. 
         
        The foundation of the approach is the information and 
        communication model for entities. An entity is a network-
        connected, energy-aware device that has the ability to either 
        measure or derive its energy usage based on its native 
        consumption or generation of energy, or report a nominal or 
        static energy value. 
      
         
         
     4.1.4. Ecma SDC 

        The Ecma International committee on Smart Data Centre (TC38-TG2 
        SDC [Ecma-SDC]) is in the process of defining semantics for 
        management of entities in a data center such as servers, 
        storage, and network equipment.  It covers energy as one of many 
        functional resources or attributes of systems for monitoring and 
        control. It only defines messages and properties, and does not 
        reference any specific protocol. Its goal is to enable 
        interoperability of such protocols as SNMP, BACNET, and HTTP by 
        ensuring a common semantic model across them. Four power states 
        are defined, Off, Sleep, Idle and Active. The standard does not 
        include actual power measurements in kWor kWh. 
         
        The 14th draft of SDC process was published in March 2011 and 
        the development of the standard is still underway. When used 
        with EMAN, the SDC standard will provide a thin abstraction on 
        top of the more detailed data model available in EMAN.  
         
     4.1.5. IEEE-ISTO Printer Working Group (PWG) 

         
        The IEEE-ISTO Printer Working Group (PWG) defines SNMP MIB 
        modules for printer management and has recently defined a "PWG 
        Power Management Model for Imaging Systems v1.0" [PWG5106.4] and 
        a companion SNMP binding in the "PWG Imaging System Power MIB 
        v1.0" [PWG5106.5].  This PWG model and MIB are harmonized with 
       
      
     <Tychon, et al.>            Expires April 31, 2012        [Page 22] 
         
     Internet-Draft     EMAN Applicability Statement        October 2011 
         

        the DMTF CIM Infrastructure [DSP0004] and DMTF CIM Power State 
        Management Profile [DSP1027] for power states and alerts. 
         
         
        The PWG would like its MIBs to be harmonized as closely as 
        possible with those from EMAN.  The PWG covers many topics in 
        greater detail than EMAN, as well as some that are specific to 
        imaging equipment.  The PWG also provides for vendor-specific 
        extension states (i.e., beyond the standard DMTF CIM states.) 
         
         
      
     4.1.6. ASHRAE  

        In the U.S., there is an extensive effort to coordinate and 
        develop standards related to the "Smart Grid".  The Smart Grid 
        Interoperability Panel, coordinated by the government's National 
        Institute of Standards and Technology, identified the need for a 
        building side information model (as a counterpart to utility 
        models) and specified this in Priority Action Plan (PAP) 17.  
        This was designated to be a joint effort by American Society of 
        Heating, Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning Engineers (ASHRAE) 
        and National Electrical Manufacturers Association (NEMA), both 
        ANSI approved SDO's.  The result is to be an information model, 
        not a device level monitoring protocol.  
         
        The ASHRAE effort addresses data used only within a building as 
        well as data that may be shared with the grid, particularly as 
        it relates to coordinating future demand levels with the needs 
        of the grid.  The model is intended to be applied to any 
        building type, both residential and commercial.  It is expected 
        that existing protocols will be adapted to comply with the new 
        information model, as would any new protocols. 
         
        There are four basic types of entities in the model: generators, 
        loads, meters, and energy managers. 
         
        The metering part of this model overlaps with the EMAN framework 
        to a large degree, though there are features unique to each.  
        The load part speaks to control capabilities well beyond what 
        EMAN covers.  Details of generation and of the energy management 
        function are outside of EMAN scope. 
         
        A public review draft of the ASHRAE standard is expected soon, 
        and at that point detailed comparison of the two models can be 
        made.  There are no apparent major conflicts between the two 
        approaches, but there are likely areas where some harmonization 
       
      
     <Tychon, et al.>            Expires April 31, 2012        [Page 23] 
         
     Internet-Draft     EMAN Applicability Statement       October 2011 
         

        is possible, and regardless, a description of the 
        correspondences would be helpful to create. 
         
         
     4.1.7. ZigBee 

        The Zigbee Smart Energy 2.0 effort[ZIGBEE] focuses on wireless 
        communication to appliances and lighting.  It is intended to 
        enable building energy management and enable direct load control 
        by utilities.   
         
        ZigBee protocols are intended for use in embedded applications 
        requiring low data rates and low power consumption. ZigBee 
        defines a general-purpose, inexpensive, self-organizing mesh 
        network that can be used for industrial control, embedded 
        sensing, medical data collection, smoke and intruder warning, 
        building automation, home automation, etc.  
      
        Zigbee is currently not an ANSI recognized SDO. 
         
        The EMAN framework addresses the needs of IP-enabled networks 
        through the usage of SNMP, while Zigbee looks for completely 
        integrated and inexpensive mesh solution. 
         
     4.2. Measurement 

         
     4.2.1. ANSI C12 

        The American National Standards Institute (ANSI) has defined a 
        collection of power meter standards under ANSI C12.  The primary 
        standards include communication protocols (C12.18, 21 and 22), 
        data and schema definitions (C12.19), and measurement accuracy 
        (C12.20). European equivalent standards are provided by IEC 
        62053-22.ANSI C12.20 defines accuracy classes for watt-hour 
        meters.  
         
        All of these standards are oriented toward the meter itself, and 
        are therefore very specific and used by electricity distributors 
        and producers. 
         
        The EMAN standard references ANSI C12 accuracy classes. 

     4.2.2. IEC62301 

        IEC 62301, "Household electrical appliances  Measurement of 
        standby power", specifies a power level measurement procedure.  
       
      
     <Tychon, et al.>            Expires April 31, 2012        [Page 24] 
         
     Internet-Draft     EMAN Applicability Statement       October 2011 
         

        While nominally for appliances and low-power modes, many aspects 
        of it apply to other device types and modes and it is commonly 
        referenced in test procedures for energy using products. 

        While the standard is intended for laboratory measurements of 
        devices in controlled conditions, many aspects of it are 
        informative to those implementing measurement in products that 
        ultimately report via EMAN. 

         

         
     4.3. Other 

     4.3.1. ISO 

        The ISO [ISO] is developing an energy management standard, ISO 
        50001, to complement ISO 9001 for quality management, and ISO 
        14001 for environment management. The intent of the framework is 
        to facilitate the creation of energy management programs for 
        industrial, commercial and other entities.  The standard defines 
        a process for energy management at an organization level.  It 
        does not define the way in which devices report energy and 
        consume energy. 
         
        EMAN is complementary to ISO 9001.  
         
        ISO 50001 is based on the common elements found in all of ISO's 
        management system standards, assuring a high level of 
        compatibility with ISO 9001 (quality management) and ISO 14001 
        (environmental management). ISO 50001 benefits includes: 
         
       o Integrating energy efficiency into management practices and 
          throughout the supply chain 
       o Energy management best practices and good energy management 
          behaviors 
       o benchmarking, measuring, documenting, and reporting energy 
          intensity improvements and their projected impact on 
          reductions in greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions 
       o Evaluating and prioritizing the implementation of new energy-
          efficient technologies 
      
        ISO 50001 has been developed by ISO project committee ISO/PC 
        242, Energy management.  
         


       
      
     <Tychon, et al.>            Expires April 31, 2012        [Page 25] 
         
     Internet-Draft     EMAN Applicability Statement       October 2011 
         

     4.3.2. EnergyStar 

        The US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and US Department 
        of Energy (DOE) jointly sponsor the Energy Star program [ESTAR].  
        The program promotes the development of energy efficient 
        products and practices.   
         
        To qualify as Energy Star, products must meet specific energy 
        efficiency targets. The Energy Star program also provides 
        planning tools and technical documentation to encourage more 
        energy efficient building design. Energy Star is a program; it 
        is not a protocol or standard.  
         
        For businesses and data centers, Energy Star offers technical 
        support to help companies establish energy conservation 
        practices.  Energy Star provides best practices for measuring 
        current energy performance, goal setting, and tracking 
        improvement.  The Energy Star tools offered include a rating 
        system for building performance and comparative benchmarks. 
         
        There is no immediate link between EMAN and EnergyStar, one 
        being a protocol and the other a set of recommendations to 
        develop energy efficient products.  However, Energy Star could 
        include EMAN standards in specifications for future products, 
        either as required or rewarded with some benefit. 
      
     4.3.3. SmartGrid 

        The Smart Grid standards efforts underway in the United States 
        are overseen by the US National Institute of Standards and 
        Technology [NIST].NIST is responsible for coordinating a public-
        private partnership with key energy and consumer stakeholders in 
        order to facilitate the development of smart grid standards. The 
        NIST smart grid standards activities are monitored and 
        facilitated by the SGIP (Smart Grid Interoperability Panel).  
        This group has working groups for specific topics including 
        homes, commercial buildings, and industrial facilities as they 
        relate to the grid.   
         
        When a working group detects a standard or technology gap, the 
        team seeks approval from the SGIP for the creation of a Priority 
        Action Plan (PAP), a private-public partnership to close the 
        gap.  There are currently 17 PAPs.  PAP 17 is discussed in 
        section 4.1.6. 
         
        PAP 10 addresses "Standard Energy Usage Information". 

       
      
     <Tychon, et al.>            Expires April 31, 2012        [Page 26] 
         
     Internet-Draft     EMAN Applicability Statement       October 2011 
         

        Smart Grid standards will provide distributed intelligence in 
        the network and allow enhanced load shedding.  For example, 
        pricing signals will enable selective shutdown of non critical 
        activities during peak-load pricing periods.  These actions can 
        be effected through both centralized and distributed management 
        controls.   
         
        There is an obvious functional link between SmartGrid and EMAN 
        in the form of demand response, even if the EMAN framework does 
        not take any specific step toward SmartGrid communication.  
         
     5. Limitations 

        EMAN Framework shall address the needs of energy monitoring in 
        terms of measurement and, considers limited control capabilities 
        of energy monitoring of networks. 
         
        EMAN does not create a new protocol stack, but rather defines a 
        data and information model useful for measuring and reporting 
        energy and other metrics over SNMP. 
      
        The EMAN framework does not address questions regarding 
        SmartGrid, electricity producers, and distributors even if there 
        is obvious link between them. 
         
     6. Security Considerations 

        EMAN shall use SNMP protocol for energy monitoring and thus has 
        the functionality of SNMP's security capabilities. SNMPv3 
        [RFC3411] provides important security features such as 
        confidentiality, integrity, and authentication. 
         
     7. IANA Considerations 

        This memo includes no request to IANA. 

     8. Acknowledgements 

        The authors would like to thank Jeff Wheeler, Benoit Claise, 
        Juergen Quittek, Chris Verges, John Parello, and Matt Laherty, 
        for their valuable contributions.  
         
        The authors would like to thank Georgios Karagiannis for use 
        case involving energy neutral homes, Elwyn Davies for off-grid 
        electricity systems, and Kerry Lynn for the comment on the 
        Demand/Response scenario. 

       
      
     <Tychon, et al.>            Expires April 31, 2012        [Page 27] 
         
     Internet-Draft     EMAN Applicability Statement       October 2011 
         

     9. Open Issues 

        "EDITOR NOTE: use the latest definition from draft-parello-eman-
        definitions" 
         
        OPEN ISSUE 1: Relevant IEC standards for application for EMAN  
          Applicability Statement document can provide guidance on the 
          issue of what is appropriate standard used by EMAN 
           
          IEC 61850-7-4 has been extensively used in EMAN WG documents.  
          The other IEC documents referred for possible use are IEC 
          61000-4-30, IEC 62053-21 and IEC 62301.  
           
          There is feedback that IEC 61850-7-4 applies only to sub-
          stations ? 
           
      
      
        OPEN ISSUE 2: Should review ASHRAE SPC 201P standard when it is 
        released for public review  
         
          . Need to review ASHRAE information model and the use cases 
             and how it relates to EMAN 
         
      
      
        OPEN ISSUE 3: Review ALL requirements to ensure that they can be 
        traced to a use case 
          . Missing is an use case for power quality  
         
        OPEN ISSUE 4: Question for the WG. Should we have unique use 
        cases that introduce specific requirements ? or can there be 
        some overlap between use cases ?   
         
        Any use cases out of scope scenarios ? 
         
      
         
     10. References 

     10.1. Normative References 

        [RFC3411] An Architecture for Describing Simple Network 
                Management Protocol (SNMP) Management Frameworks, RFC 
                3411, December 2002. 
         
      
       
      
     <Tychon, et al.>            Expires April 31, 2012        [Page 28] 
         
     Internet-Draft     EMAN Applicability Statement       October 2011 
         

     10.2. Informative References 

      
        [DASH] "Desktop and mobile Architecture for System Hardware", 
                http://www.dmtf.org/standards/mgmt/dash/ 
         
        [NIST]  http://www.nist.gov/smartgrid/ 
         
        [Ecma-SDC] Ecma TC38 / SDC Task Group, "Smart Data Centre 
                Resource Monitoring and Control (DRAFT)", March 2011. 
         
        [ENERGY] http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kilowatt_hour 
         
        [EMAN-AS] Tychon, E., B. Schoening,MouliChandramouli, Bruce 
                Nordman, "Energy Management (EMAN) Applicability 
                Statement", draft-tychon-eman-applicability-statement-
                04.txt, work in progress, October 2011. 
         
        [EMAN-REQ] Quittek, J., Winter, R., Dietz, T., Claise, B., and 
                M. Chandramouli, "Requirements for Energy Management ", 
                draft-ietf-eman-requirements-04 (work in progress),July 
                2011. 
         
        [EMAN-MONITORING-MIB] M. Chandramouli, Schoening, B., Dietz, T., 
                Quittek, J. and B. Claise  "Energy and Power Monitoring 
                MIB ", draft-ietf-eman-monitoring-mib-00,August 2011. 
         
        [EMAN-AWARE-MIB] J. Parello, and B. Claise, "draft-ietf-eman-
                energy-aware-mib-02", work in progress, July 2011. 
         
        [EMAN-FRAMEWORK] Claise, B., Parello, J., Schoening, B., and J. 
                Quittek, "Energy Management Framework", draft-ietf-
                eman-framework-02 ,July 2011. 
         
        [EMAN-BATTERY-MIB] Quittek, J., Winter, R., and T. Dietz, 
                "Definition of Managed Objects for Battery Monitoring"  
                draft-ietf-eman-battery-mib-02.txt, July 2011. 
         
        [EMAN-DEF] J. Parello"Energy Management Terminology", draft-
                parello-eman-definitions-03 
         
        [DMTF] "Power State Management ProfileDMTFDSP1027  Version 2.0"  
                December2009. 
                http://www.dmtf.org/sites/default/files/standards/docum
                ents/DSP1027_2.0.0.pdf 
      
        [ESTAR]  http://www.energystar.gov/ 
       
      
     <Tychon, et al.>            Expires April 31, 2012        [Page 29] 
         
     Internet-Draft     EMAN Applicability Statement       October 2011 
         

         
        [ISO]    http://www.iso.org/iso/pressrelease.htm?refid=Ref1434 
         
        [SGRID]  http://collaborate.nist.gov/twiki-
                sggrid/bin/view/SmartGrid/SGIPWorkingGroupsAndCommittee
                s 
         
      
        [ASHRAE] http://collaborate.nist.gov/twiki-
                sggrid/bin/view/SmartGrid/PAP17Information 
         
        [PAP17] http://collaborate.nist.gov/twiki-
                sggrid/bin/view/SmartGrid/PAP17FacilitySmartGridInforma
                tionStandard 
         
        [ZIGBEE] http://www.zigbee.org/ 
         
        [ISO]  http://www.iso.org/iso/pressrelease.htm?refid=Ref1337 
         
        [DSP0004] DMTF Common Information Model (CIM) Infrastructure, 
                DSP0004, May 2009. 
                http://www.dmtf.org/standards/published_documents/DSP00
                04_2.5.0.pdf  
         
        [DSP1027] DMTF Power State Management Profile, DSP1027, December 
                2009. 
                http://www.dmtf.org/standards/published_documents/DSP10
                27_2.0.0.pdf 
         
        [PWG5106.4]IEEE-ISTO PWG Power Management Model for Imaging 
                Systems v1.0, PWG Candidate Standard 5106.4-2011, 
                February 2011.ftp://ftp.pwg.org/pub/pwg/candidates/cs-
                wimspower10-20110214-5106.4.mib 
         
        [PWG5106.5] IEEE-ISTO PWG Imaging System Power MIB v1.0, PWG 
                Candidate Standard 5106.5-2011, February 2011. 
         
        [IEC62301] International Electrotechnical Commission, "IEC 62301 
                Household electrical appliances  Measurement of standby 
                power", Edition 2.0, 2011. 
         






       
      
     <Tychon, et al.>            Expires April 31, 2012        [Page 30] 
         
     Internet-Draft     EMAN Applicability Statement       October 2011 
         

      

     Authors' Addresses 

        Emmanuel Tychon 
        Cisco Systems, Inc. 
        De Keleetlaan, 6A 
        B1831 Diegem 
        Belgium   
        Email: etychon@cisco.com 
      
            
        Brad Schoening 
        44 Rivers Edge Drive 
        Little Silver, NJ 07739 
        USA 
        Email:brad@bradschoening.com 
         
         
        MouliChandramouli 
        Cisco Systems, Inc. 
        Sarjapur Outer Ring Road 
        Bangalore, 
        India 
        Phone: +91 80 4426 3947 
        Email: moulchan@cisco.com 
         
         
        Bruce Nordman 
        Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory 
        1 Cyclotron Road, 90-4000 
        Berkeley  94720-8136 
        USA 
         
        Phone: +1 510 486 7089 
        Email: bnordman@lbl.gov 
         
         
         








       
      
     <Tychon, et al.>            Expires April 31, 2012        [Page 31] 
         
