



Internet Engineering Task Force                                    Q. Ma
Internet-Draft                                                     R. Gu
Intended status: Informational                                   T. Yang
Expires: April 21, 2014                                     China Mobile
                                                        October 18, 2013


     Test for router and BRAS devices on the degree of IPv6 support
                     draft-ma-v6ops-router-test-00

Abstract

   This document introduces the test for the router and BRAS devices on
   the degree of IPv6 support.  IPv6 functions and performance of the
   routers and BRAS widely deployed in current networks are included in
   testing items.  It turns out that some specific IPv6 functions and
   performance are not well-supported by the router and BRAS devices.
   The test results have been discussed to share with internet
   community.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 21, 2014.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.



Ma, et al.               Expires April 21, 2014                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                 TEST-RESULT                  October 2013


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Test overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   3.  Test topology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   4.  Results and analysis of router devices testing  . . . . . . .   4
     4.1.  Functionality of QPPB . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     4.2.  Functionality of NetFlow  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     4.3.  Performance of IPv6 FIB capacity  . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     4.4.  Summary for routers testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   5.  Results and analysis of BRAS devices testing  . . . . . . . .   5
     5.1.  Functionality of PPPoE  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     5.2.  Functionality of DHCPv6 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     5.3.  Summary for BRAS testing  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   6.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   7.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   8.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8

1.  Introduction

   Every device on the Internet must be assigned an IP address in order
   to communicate with other devices.  With the ever-increasing number
   of new devices being connected to the Internet, the need arose for
   more addresses than IPv4 is able to accommodate.  IPv6 was developed
   to deal with the long-anticipated problem of IPv4 address exhaustion
   and the deployment of IPv6 became imperative to the global Internet
   service providers (ISPs).

   In order to deploy IPv6 in current networks, IPv6 support is required
   in the network equipments.  It's necessary to test the existing
   equipments to verify whether they meet the operational needs of
   network operators in IPv6 migration.  China Mobile processed the IPv6
   supporting test to the router and BRAS equipments to ensure that
   these equipments will meet the requirement of IPv6 function and
   perform well in the future IPv6 commercial networks.

   This document has described the detailed test contents such as
   functionality, performance and other aspects of IPv6 support in
   router and BRAS devices.  The test results have been evaluated and
   problems of router and BRAS devices in IPv6 support are analyzed.
   Results show that the functionality of QPPB, NetFlow and the FIB
   capacity performance of the tested router devices in the current
   networks do not meet the requirement of IPv6 deployment and the
   problems in PPPoE and DHCPv6 function of BRAS devices still exist.
   These problems may lead to the conditions that the multicast-based
   services may not be well-developed, separate DHCPv6 servers should be
   built, and the QoS of the IPv6 network may be largely influenced.



Ma, et al.               Expires April 21, 2014                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                 TEST-RESULT                  October 2013


   Discussions of the testing results will give technical guidance to
   ISPs and device manufacturers in the commercial IPv6 deployment.

2.  Test overview

   The IPv6 supporting tests contain IPv6 functionality, performance,
   and other aspects of router and BRAS devices deployed in the current
   networks.  Throughout the full test, the service providers will be
   able to understand the technical maturity of the various equipment
   manufacturers, obtain the crisis data and technical support to the
   deployment of IPv6.

   The tests mainly include the following aspects:

   - functionality test of basic IPv6 protocols including IPv6, ICMPv6,
   TCP, UDP, PPP, MLD, etc;

   - functionality test of Dual-Stack routing protocols including router
   protocol of OSPFv3/ISISv6/BGP4+;

   - functionality test of QPPB based on source address or destination
   address of IPv4/IPv6;

   - functionality test of GR/NSR/NSF, including router protocol of OSPF
   /ISIS/BGP;

   - functionality test of ECMP, including router protocol of OSPF/ISIS/
   EBGP, MPLS-TE, ECMP max link numbers;

   - functionality test of Access technology, including QinQ, PPPoEv6,
   PPP, DHCPv6 relay;

   - -functionality test of DHCPv6 including DHCPv6 protocol, DHCP-PD,
   PHCP-PD with PPPoE;

   - functionality test of Multicast, including multicast replication,
   managed, and source specified;

   - functionality test of NetFlow, including IPv4/IPv6 Unicast and
   Multicast;

   - functionality test of Radius, including authentication and
   accounting;

   - functionality test of 6PE/6vPE protocol;

   - performance test of IPv4/IPv6 FIB capacity;




Ma, et al.               Expires April 21, 2014                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                 TEST-RESULT                  October 2013


   - performance test of IPv4/IPv6 ACL quantity;

   - performance test of QoS queue quantity;

   - performance test of the max concurrent sessions and established
   link numbers of PPPoE/IPoE;

   - performance test of data package forwarding capabilities of IPv6
   including throughput and delay;

3.  Test topology



       |--------|     |------------|   |-----------|    |--------|
       | Tester |-----|Aggregation |---|ROUTER/BRAS|----| Tester |
       |        |     |   Device   |   |           |    |        |
       |--------|     |------------|   |-----------|    |--------|


                          Figure 1: Test topology

4.  Results and analysis of router devices testing

   Router devices play the roles of a traffic director on the Internet.
   A data packet is typically forwarded from one router to another
   through the networks that constitute the internetwork until it
   reaches its destination node.  Router devices should support various
   IPv6 functionality and IPv6 transition technology in order to perform
   smoothly in the transition from IPv4 to IPv6.

   All the tested router devices can support basic IPv4 and IPv6
   protocol stacks such as OSPFv3 [RFC2740], ISISv6 [RFC5308] and BGP4+
   [RFC2545] and have the functionality of 6PE/6vPE.  The performance of
   IPv4/IPv6 ACL quantity, QoS queue quantity and the data package
   forwarding capabilities can meet the requirement of commercial IPv6
   deployment.  But some specific IPv6 functions are not supported by
   the router devices currently adopted in the networks.

4.1.  Functionality of QPPB

   QoS Policy Propagation via BGP (QPPB) is a mechanism that allows
   propagation of quality of service policy and classification by the
   sending party based on access lists, community lists and autonomous
   system paths in the BGP.

   In testing the QPPB functionality, we found out that QPPB based on
   source address or destination address in IPv6 is not supported in



Ma, et al.               Expires April 21, 2014                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                 TEST-RESULT                  October 2013


   some current routers, because the design of router devices adopted in
   early networks does not take IPv6 into consideration.  In the recent
   router version, IPv4 and IPv6 are both considered, which means some
   routers in current networks should be upgraded.

4.2.  Functionality of NetFlow

   NetFlow is a network protocol developed for collecting IP traffic
   information, which is used in traffic monitoring and supported on
   various platforms.  While in multicast NetFlow test, it turns out
   that the function of IPv6 multicast NetFlow is not supportive among
   several router devices.  Even the IPv4 multicast NetFlow is not
   supported in some router devices.  The result shows that the
   functionality of NetFlow in IPv4/IPv6 traffic should be noted in the
   transition from IPv4 to IPv6.

4.3.  Performance of IPv6 FIB capacity

   Forwarding information base (FIB), also known as a forwarding table,
   is most commonly used to find the proper interface to which the input
   interface should forward a packet in routing networks.  However, the
   IPv6 FIB of most router devices does not meet the requirement in IPv6
   scenario for the reasons such as memory and software designed in the
   equipments, which should be taken into consideration in the IPv6
   network infrastructures.

4.4.  Summary for routers testing

   The specific test gives out a result that the router devices deployed
   in the current networks are partly supported in the IPv6 deployment
   except in the functionality of QPPB, NetFlow and the Performance of
   FIB capacity.  Thus the multicast-based services may be influenced
   and QoS may not satisfy the carriers and users in the commercial IPv6
   scenario, which should be noticed by ISPs and device manufacturers.

5.  Results and analysis of BRAS devices testing

   Broadband Remote Access Server (BRAS), is the aggregation point for
   the subscriber traffic.  It provides aggregation capabilities between
   the Access Network and the Metropolitan Area Network.  Besides, it is
   also the injection point for access authentication, policy management
   and QoS.  BRAS is the PPP session termination point at ISP edge.

   BRAS should support various IPv6 access technologies, be able to
   authenticate and manage IPv6 subscribers, and support IPv6 transition
   technology, such as 6PE [RFC4789], 6vPE [RFC4659] and Dual-Stack Lite
   technology in the smooth IPv6 transition.




Ma, et al.               Expires April 21, 2014                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                 TEST-RESULT                  October 2013


   IPv4 and IPv6 protocol stacks are supported by all tested BRAS
   devices.  Most BRAS devices can support basic PPPoEv6 and DHCPv6
   protocols and functions, which allow subscribers to dial-up to
   establish a PPP session [RFC5072] from host or routed CPE to BRAS for
   the IPv4 and IPv6 traffic, and can assign 128-bit IPv6 address to
   subscribers in the DHCPv6 IA_PD option , or assign 64-bit IPv6 prefix
   to subscribers through Stateless address auto configuration (SLAAC)
   scheme.  Most BRAS support the function of AFTR, and can be deployed
   as AFTR device in the DS-Lite architecture.  But some specific IPv6
   functions are not completed by the BRAS devices currently adopted in
   the networks.

5.1.  Functionality of PPPoE

   PPPoE is widely used in large scale broadband ISPs as a broadband
   connecting method.  For certain tested BRAS devices, some PPPoE
   functions for IPv6 are not well-supported.

   Some BRAS devices do not support multicast for IPv6 PPPoE session.
   Thus the multicast-based services are hardly developed without the
   functionality of multicast for IPv6 PPPoE session.

   Multilink PPP (MLP) is a variant of PPP used to aggregate multiple
   WAN links into one logical channel for the traffic transportation.
   It enables the traffic load-balance from different links and allows
   some levels of redundancy in case of a line failure on a single link.
   Several tested BRAS devices do not support Multilink PPPoE for IPv6.

   When accessing IPv6 Internet via PPPoE, the Win7 operating system
   cannot work with the 128-bit address, which is assigned to the Win7
   OS in IA-NA option and the low order 64-bit is different from the
   EUI-64.  The low order 64-bit of the address must be the EUI-64
   interface ID generated from a EUI-48 MAC address.  In other words,
   when connecting the IPv6 PPPoE access, Win7 operating system can only
   be assigned a 64-bit IPv6 prefix through SLAAC or DHCPv6.  The BRAS
   configuration in actual networks should set the managed address
   configuration flag to 0, assigning IPv6 prefix through SLAAC, or set
   the managed address configuration flag to 1, assigning 128-bit IPv6
   address with the EUI-64 interface ID through DHCPv6.

5.2.  Functionality of DHCPv6

   A few BRAS devices do not support DHCPv6 [RFC3315] server, which
   means they cannot assign IPv6 address to subscriber in the DHCPv6
   IA_PD option , and can only assign 64-bit IPv6 prefix to subscribers
   through Stateless address auto configuration (SLAAC) scheme.





Ma, et al.               Expires April 21, 2014                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                 TEST-RESULT                  October 2013


   Some tested BRAS do not support DHCPv6 relay function, which means
   they cannot listen for the DHCPv6 messages and broadcast and route
   the messages to a DHCPv6 server on a different subnet.

   Prefix delegation [RFC3633] is used to assign a network address
   prefix to a user site, configuring the user's router with the prefix
   to be used for each LAN.  A few BRAS devices do not support prefix
   delegation, which means they cannot assign IPv6 prefix to the LAN of
   customer premise equipment (CPE) using the Dynamic Host Configuration
   Protocol for IPv6 (DHCPv6)

5.3.  Summary for BRAS testing

   The specific test gives out results that the BRAS devices deployed in
   the current networks are well supported in IPv4 and IPv6 protocol
   stacks, and the basic PPPoEv6 and DHCPv6 protocols and functions are
   partly supported by the tested BRAS devices.  The existed problems in
   PPPoE and DHCPv6 function have an impact on the deployment of IPv6,
   such as operators have to build separate DHCPv6 servers, multicast-
   based service cannot be well-developed and the QoS of the IPv6
   network may be largely influenced.  All these should be noticed by
   ISPs and device manufacturers.

6.  Security Considerations

   It needs to be further identified.

7.  IANA Considerations

   TBD

8.  Normative References

   [RFC2545]  Marques, P. and F. Dupont, "Use of BGP-4 Multiprotocol
              Extensions for IPv6 Inter-Domain Routing", RFC 2545, March
              1999.

   [RFC2740]  Coltun, R., Ferguson, D., and J. Moy, "OSPF for IPv6", RFC
              2740, December 1999.

   [RFC3315]  Droms, R., Bound, J., Volz, B., Lemon, T., Perkins, C.,
              and M. Carney, "Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol for
              IPv6 (DHCPv6)", RFC 3315, July 2003.

   [RFC3633]  Troan, O. and R. Droms, "IPv6 Prefix Options for Dynamic
              Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP) version 6", RFC 3633,
              December 2003.




Ma, et al.               Expires April 21, 2014                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                 TEST-RESULT                  October 2013


   [RFC4659]  De Clercq, J., Ooms, D., Carugi, M., and F. Le Faucheur,
              "BGP-MPLS IP Virtual Private Network (VPN) Extension for
              IPv6 VPN", RFC 4659, September 2006.

   [RFC4789]  Schoenwaelder, J. and T. Jeffree, "Simple Network
              Management Protocol (SNMP) over IEEE 802 Networks", RFC
              4789, November 2006.

   [RFC5072]  Varada, S., Haskins, D., and E. Allen, "IP Version 6 over
              PPP", RFC 5072, September 2007.

   [RFC5308]  Hopps, C., "Routing IPv6 with IS-IS", RFC 5308, October
              2008.

Authors' Addresses

   Ma Qiongfang
   China Mobile
   32, Xuanwumenxi Ave.
   Xicheng District, Beijing  01719
   China

   Email: maqiongfang@chinamobile.com


   Gu Rong
   China Mobile
   32, Xuanwumenxi Ave.
   Xicheng District, Beijing  01719
   China

   Email: gurong@chinamobile.com


   Yang Tianle
   China Mobile
   32, Xuanwumenxi Ave.
   Xicheng District, Beijing  01719
   China

   Email: yangtianle@chinamobile.com










Ma, et al.               Expires April 21, 2014                 [Page 8]
