A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3585

        Title:      IPsec Configuration Policy Information Model
        Author(s):  J. Jason, L. Rafalow, E. Vyncke
        Status:     Standards Track
        Date:       August 2003
        Mailbox:    jamie.jason@intel.com, rafalow@watson.ibm.com,
                    evyncke@cisco.com
        Pages:      88
        Characters: 187308
        Updates/Obsoletes/SeeAlso:    None

        I-D Tag:    draft-ietf-ipsp-config-policy-model-07.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3585.txt


This document presents an object-oriented information model of IP
Security (IPsec) policy designed to facilitate agreement about the
content and semantics of IPsec policy, and enable derivations of
task-specific representations of IPsec policy such as storage schema,
distribution representations, and policy specification languages used
to configure IPsec-enabled endpoints.  The information model
described in this document models the configuration parameters
defined by IPSec.  The information model also covers the parameters
found by the Internet Key Exchange protocol (IKE).  Other key
exchange protocols could easily be added to the information model by
a simple extension.  Further extensions can further be added easily
due to the object-oriented nature of the model.

This information model is based upon the core policy classes as
defined in the Policy Core Information Model (PCIM) and in the Policy
Core Information Model Extensions (PCIMe).

This document is a product of the IP Security Policy Working Group of
the IETF.

This is now a Proposed Standard Protocol.

This document specifies an Internet standards track protocol for the
Internet community, and requests discussion and suggestions for
improvements.  Please refer to the current edition of the "Internet
Official Protocol Standards" (STD 1) for the standardization state
and status of this protocol.  Distribution of this memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.
