


CONEX                                                      H. Tschofenig
Internet-Draft                                    Nokia Siemens Networks
Intended status: Informational                                 A. Cooper
Expires: September 9, 2010                        Center for Democracy &
                                                              Technology
                                                           March 8, 2010


                 Congestion Exposure Problem Statement
                    draft-tschofenig-conex-ps-02.txt

Abstract

   The increasingly ubiquitous availability of broadband, together with
   flat-rate pricing, have made for increasing congestion problems on
   the network, which are often caused by a small number of users
   consuming a large amount of bandwidth.  In some cases, building out
   more capacity to handle this new congestion may be infeasible or
   unwarranted.  As a result, network operators have sought other ways
   to manage congestion both from their own users and from other
   networks.  These different types of solutions have different
   strengths and weaknesses, but all of them are limited in a number of
   key ways.

   This document discusses the problems created for operators by high-
   consuming users and describes the strengths and weaknesses of a
   number of techniques operators are currently using to cope with high
   bandwidth usage.  The discussion of these solutions ultimately points
   to a need for a new kind of congestion accounting.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.




Tschofenig & Cooper     Expires September 9, 2010               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft           Congestion Exposure PS               March 2010


   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 9, 2010.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the BSD License.
































Tschofenig & Cooper     Expires September 9, 2010               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft           Congestion Exposure PS               March 2010


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.  Existing Approaches to Congestion Management . . . . . . . . .  5
     2.1.  Volume-Based Approaches  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     2.2.  Rate-Based Approaches  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     2.3.  Congestion-Based Approaches  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     2.4.  Applications-Based Approaches  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   3.  General Limitations of All Approaches  . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   4.  New Activities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   5.  Next Steps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   6.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   7.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   8.  Acknowledgments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   9.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     9.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     9.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   Appendix A.  Example Policy Statement  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
     A.1.  Fair Usage Policy  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
       A.1.1.  What is the Fair Usage Policy? . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
       A.1.2.  How do I know I'm a very heavy user? . . . . . . . . . 15
       A.1.3.  I have Contract Option 3, does the Fair Usage
               Policy apply to me?  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
       A.1.4.  Peer to Peer (P2P) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17


























Tschofenig & Cooper     Expires September 9, 2010               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft           Congestion Exposure PS               March 2010


1.  Introduction

   With the growth of "always on" broadband connections, network
   operators are increasingly facing congestion problems caused by a
   small number of network users occupying a large proportion of network
   capacity [broadband-traffic-report][traffic2].  This trend does not
   necessarily present a problem on its face, as increased traffic
   volumes do not automatically lead to congestion.  However, in some
   cases where operators were not expecting these changes in growth
   rates and traffic consumption, their pricing models and congestion
   management architectures have proved inadequate.  This is true of
   both congestion caused by an operator's own subscribers and
   congestion caused by an interconnecting network.

   In some cases, building out more capacity to handle this new
   congestion may be infeasible or unwarranted.  The cost of building
   new capacity may be prohibitive, especially for network operators
   that charge flat-rate feeds to subscribers and are thus unable to
   charge heavier users more on the basis of their larger contribution
   to the congestion problem.  For an operator facing congestion caused
   by other operators' networks, building out its own capacity is
   unlikely to solve the congestion problem.  Operators are thus facing
   increased pressure to find effective solutions to dealing with high-
   consuming users, other than building out new capacity.

   There are many factors to consider for each kind of solution,
   including how the solution performs, its cost, what its public
   relations impact might be, and what legal framework exists to support
   its use.  The performance considerations must take into account the
   balance between device performance and forwarding performance (since
   many of the solution mechanisms slow down forwarding performance),
   and this determination is intimiately related to measuring a
   solution's overall cost.

   The responses that operators have sought to manage congestion both
   from their own users and from other networks are generally based on
   one of four factors that the operator can observe for each subscriber
   or hand-off point on the network: volume of bandwidth used, rates of
   data transfer, congestion volume, and applications used.  These
   different types of solutions have different strengths and weaknesses,
   but all of them are limited in a number of key ways.  Section 2
   discusses the specific strengths and weaknesses of each approach.
   Section 3, discusses the limitations that are common to all of the
   approaches.







Tschofenig & Cooper     Expires September 9, 2010               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft           Congestion Exposure PS               March 2010


2.  Existing Approaches to Congestion Management

2.1.  Volume-Based Approaches

   The volume of traffic sent or received by a particular user or
   network is easy to measure.  Operators have a number of different
   standardized protocols available to them to conduct volume
   accounting.  Many information elements can be sent from an accounting
   client to an accounting server using standardized protocols, such as
   RADIUS (see [RFC2866] and [RFC2865]) and Diameter [RFC3588], to
   effectuate volume-based accounting.  The existence of standardized
   protocols has allowed resource consumption measurement in roaming
   cases due to the interconnected AAA systems.  These protocols are now
   used in almost every enterprise and operator network.  The initial
   accounting mechanisms envisioned a rather non-real time nature in
   reporting resource consumption but with mechanisms like like Diameter
   Credit Control [RFC4006] allowed real-time credit control checks,
   allowing operators to make fine-grained congestion decisions based on
   volume.

   If the collected accounting information leads to billable events then
   this typically leads to a quite effective countermeasure against
   heavy usage.  For example, data usage while roaming is often charged
   per volume (or per time) and heavy usage leads to huge costs.  So,
   user's typically avoid heavy usage unless they are not aware of the
   fact that they are roaming, which may happen.

   In any case, the drawback of all of these approaches is that they
   tend to be less user friendly nor do they reflect congestion in any
   way.

2.2.  Rate-Based Approaches

   Volume-based protocols are blind to protocols like LEDBAT [ledbat]
   that are specifically designed to be more sensitive to congestion
   than the underlying transport.  One way that operators have used
   volume accounting is by including thresholds for baseline usage
   volume in end user contracts and reducing priority (or charging fees)
   when a user's consumption goes beyond the threshold.  Under such a
   scheme, users would not be incentivized to use applications that
   support protocols like LEDBAT, because the volume accounting would
   not take the congestion benefits of using a LEDBAT-style protocol
   into consideration.

2.3.  Congestion-Based Approaches

   Initial attempts to capture congestion situations have simply focused
   on the peak hours and aimed at rate limiting heavy users during that



Tschofenig & Cooper     Expires September 9, 2010               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft           Congestion Exposure PS               March 2010


   time.  For example, users who have consumed a certain amount of
   bandwidth during the last 24 hours got elected as those who get their
   traffic shaped, in case the total amount of traffic reaches a
   congestion situation in certain nodes within the operators network.

   More sophisticated schemes were developed to measure the congestion
   situation at different entities in the network and to take the
   overall consumption of the user's traffic into account when picking
   users for packet remarking that could lead, under congestion
   situation, to packet dropping.  The Comcast FairShare solution
   [I-D.livingood-woundy-congestion-mgmt] belongs to the more
   sophisticated schemes.

2.4.  Applications-Based Approaches

   The use of deep packet inspection (DPI) allows operators to observe
   and analyze traffic at the application layer.  This capability can be
   used to determine the applications and/or application-layer protocols
   that subscribers are using and respond on a per-application or per-
   protocol basis.  An example of an ISP's fair usage policy describing
   how it manages specific protocols is included in Appendix A.

   If an operator experiences much congestion based on the use of easily
   identifiable applications protocols, or if the DPI capability can
   also be used for other purposes, operators may find this approach
   attractive.  However, the applications-based approach has some
   drawbacks.  The process of inspecting traffic, particularly in real
   time, can be highly performance-intensive.  DPI equipment may also
   require continous software updates to ensure that the detection
   engine recognizes the latest protocol variants, and its use can
   result in a cat-and-mouse game with applications developers
   constantly seeking ways to work around the packet inspection engine.
   Public policy concerns -- privacy, operator liability, user backlash,
   and others -- are another drawback.

















Tschofenig & Cooper     Expires September 9, 2010               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft           Congestion Exposure PS               March 2010


3.  General Limitations of All Approaches

   All three of the approaches discussed above suffer from some general
   limitations.  First, they introduce performance uncertainty.  Flat-
   rate pricing plans are popular because operators know that users
   appreciate the certainty of having their monthly bill amount remain
   the same for each billing period, allowing users to plan their costs
   accordingly.  But while flat-rate pricing avoids billing uncertainty,
   it creates performance uncertainty: users cannot be sure that the
   performance of their connections is not being altered or degrated
   based on how the network operator manages congestion.

   Second, none of the approaches is able to make use of what may be the
   most important factor in managing congestion: the amount that an
   endpoint contributes to congestion on the network.  This information
   simply is not available to network nodes, and neither volume nor rate
   nor application usage is an adequate proxy for congestion volume,
   because none of these metrics measures a user or network's actual
   contribution to congestion on the network.  [This point needs a
   little more discussion.]

   Finally, none of these solutions accounts for inter-network
   congestion.  The currently available mechanisms for identifying and
   mitigating congestion largely run wholly within an operator's network
   and without a lot of information exchange about congestion
   information to or from end hosts or other network operators.
   Exposing this information may allow end devices to make more informed
   decisions (although policy enforcement would still be required by the
   operator).  [This point needs to be filled in more.]






















Tschofenig & Cooper     Expires September 9, 2010               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft           Congestion Exposure PS               March 2010


4.  New Activities

   Following the IETF Workshop on Peer-to-Peer (P2P) Infrastructure in
   2008 (see [RFC5594]), two working groups and one research group were
   created that relate to the congestion issues created by peer-to-peer
   application usage: :

      LEDBAT (Low Extra Delay Background Transport) [ledbat] is designed
      to keep the latency across a congested bottleneck low even as it
      is saturated.  This allows applications that send large amounts of
      data, particularly upstream on home connections (such as peer-to-
      peer applications) to operate without destroying the user
      experience in interactive applications.

      LEDBAT holds substantial promise should P2P clients adopt it
      widely.  This solution has been focused on P2P applications, and
      its applicability to other applications, such as video using
      H.264, is unclear.

      ALTO (Application-Layer Traffic Optimization) [alto] aims to
      design and specify mechanisms that will provide applications,
      typically P2P applications, with information to perform better-
      than-random initial peer selection to increase their performance
      and at the same time to avoid excessive cross-domain traffic that
      tends to be more expensive for the operator.  ALTO services may
      take different approaches at balancing factors such as maximum
      bandwidth, minimum cross-domain traffic, or lowest cost to the
      user, but in all cases the goal is to expose information that can
      ameliorate the interactions between peer-to-peer usage and other
      usages of shared networks.

      Peer to Peer Research Group [p2prg] aims to provide a discussion
      forum for resarchers related to all sorts of challenges presented
      by P2P systems in general, such as P2P streaming, interconnecting
      distinct P2P application overlays, security and privacy.  Current
      work on exposing myths about peer-to-peer filesharing
      [I-D.irtf-p2prg-mythbustering] provides a number of references to
      support some of the claimed benefits of ALTO solutions mechanisms,
      such as the expected decrease in cross- domain traffic.












Tschofenig & Cooper     Expires September 9, 2010               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft           Congestion Exposure PS               March 2010


5.  Next Steps

   Congestion is a reality.  Operators that would like to counteract the
   impact of congestion on their networks have a fair number of tools at
   their disposal.  These tools may allow operators to identify heavy
   users, collect performance and usage indications, and choose from a
   variety of mitigating steps depending on the operator's preferred
   business practices.  Subscriber-specific information, including
   policies, resource consumption information, and details about the
   current network attachment point, may be available in accounting
   servers.  Information about the network topology and the state of
   particular topology elements may be available in the network
   management infrastructure.  Solution approaches similar to
   [I-D.livingood-woundy-congestion-mgmt] have demonstrated one way of
   taking congestion information into consideration.

   The collection of congestion information poses the challenge of
   deciding where in the network to put the metering agents to ensure
   that enough information is collected at the right point in time.
   Distributed collection and the correlation of the information across
   different nodes is a complex task.  An approach that collects this
   congestion information along the path of the data packet (via inband
   signaling) would simplify this task.  Regardless of the technical
   solution utilized for collecting information, certain users will
   undoubtedly observe the effects of decisions that operators make
   about how to handle congestion.  Allowing users to understand these
   decisions will be crucial and having a channel to send feedback to
   the end device and/or subscriber would be a helpful step towards
   increased transparency.






















Tschofenig & Cooper     Expires September 9, 2010               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft           Congestion Exposure PS               March 2010


6.  Security Considerations

   This document highlights approaches for dealing with high-consuming
   network users and all of them raise security and privacy concerns.
   It does not introduce new mechanisms.  The security considerations
   for the existing mechanisms mentioned apply.













































Tschofenig & Cooper     Expires September 9, 2010              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft           Congestion Exposure PS               March 2010


7.  IANA Considerations

   This document does not require actions by IANA.
















































Tschofenig & Cooper     Expires September 9, 2010              [Page 11]

Internet-Draft           Congestion Exposure PS               March 2010


8.  Acknowledgments

   The authors would like to thank Alan DeKok, Jens-Peter Haack,
   Alexander Bachmutsky, Jonne Soininen, Joachim Charzinski, Hannu
   Flinck, Joachim Kross, Jouni Korhonen, Mayutan Arumaithurai, Richard
   Woundy, Daniel Correa Lobato, Luca Caviglione, Tommy Lindgren, Lars
   Eggert, and Jason Livingood for their time to discuss the topic.
   Additionally, we would like to thank Marcin Matuszewski for his help
   with the P2P infrastructure workshop paper (since it was used as a
   starting point for the work on this memo).









































Tschofenig & Cooper     Expires September 9, 2010              [Page 12]

Internet-Draft           Congestion Exposure PS               March 2010


9.  References

9.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

9.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.irtf-p2prg-mythbustering]
              Marocco, E., Fusco, A., Rimac, I., and V. Gurbani,
              "Improving Peer Selection in Peer-to-peer Applications:
              Myths vs. Reality", draft-irtf-p2prg-mythbustering-01
              (work in progress), March 2010.

   [I-D.livingood-woundy-congestion-mgmt]
              Bastian, C., Klieber, T., Livingood, J., Mills, J., and R.
              Woundy, "Comcast's Protocol-Agnostic Congestion Management
              System", draft-livingood-woundy-congestion-mgmt-03 (work
              in progress), February 2010.

   [RFC2865]  Rigney, C., Willens, S., Rubens, A., and W. Simpson,
              "Remote Authentication Dial In User Service (RADIUS)",
              RFC 2865, June 2000.

   [RFC2866]  Rigney, C., "RADIUS Accounting", RFC 2866, June 2000.

   [RFC2975]  Aboba, B., Arkko, J., and D. Harrington, "Introduction to
              Accounting Management", RFC 2975, October 2000.

   [RFC3576]  Chiba, M., Dommety, G., Eklund, M., Mitton, D., and B.
              Aboba, "Dynamic Authorization Extensions to Remote
              Authentication Dial In User Service (RADIUS)", RFC 3576,
              July 2003.

   [RFC3588]  Calhoun, P., Loughney, J., Guttman, E., Zorn, G., and J.
              Arkko, "Diameter Base Protocol", RFC 3588, September 2003.

   [RFC4006]  Hakala, H., Mattila, L., Koskinen, J-P., Stura, M., and J.
              Loughney, "Diameter Credit-Control Application", RFC 4006,
              August 2005.

   [RFC5594]  Peterson, J. and A. Cooper, "Report from the IETF Workshop
              on Peer-to-Peer (P2P) Infrastructure, May 28, 2008",
              RFC 5594, July 2009.

   [alto]     "",
              <http://www.ietf.org/dyn/wg/charter/alto-charter.html>.



Tschofenig & Cooper     Expires September 9, 2010              [Page 13]

Internet-Draft           Congestion Exposure PS               March 2010


   [broadband-traffic-report]
              Cho, K., "Broadband Traffic Report", Internet
              Infrastructure Review 4, 2009.

   [ledbat]   "",
              <http://www.ietf.org/dyn/wg/charter/ledbat-charter.html>.

   [p2prg]    "", <http://www.irtf.org/charter?gtype=rg&group=p2prg>.

   [traffic]  Cho, K., Fukuda, K., Kato, H., and A. Kato, "The impact
              and implications of the growth in residential user-to-user
              traffic", SIGCOMM Comput. Commun. Rev. 36, 2006.

   [traffic2]
              Cho, K., Fukuda, K., Esaki, H., and A. Kato, "Observing
              slow crustal movement in residential user traffic, in
              International Conference On Emerging Networking
              Experiments And Technologies, Proceedings of the 2008 ACM
              CoNEXT Conference, Madrid, Spain, Article No. 12",  ,
              2008.































Tschofenig & Cooper     Expires September 9, 2010              [Page 14]

Internet-Draft           Congestion Exposure PS               March 2010


Appendix A.  Example Policy Statement

A.1.  Fair Usage Policy

A.1.1.  What is the Fair Usage Policy?

   The Fair Usage Policy is designed to ensure that the service received
   by the vast majority of our customers is not negatively impacted
   because of extremely heavy usage by a very small minority of
   customers.  This is why ISP X continuously monitors network
   performance and may restrict the speed available to very heavy users
   during peak time.  This applies to customers on all Options.  Note if
   you are a heavy user we will only restrict your speed, service will
   not be stopped so ability to upload and download remains.  No
   restrictions will be imposed outside of the peak times.  Only a very
   small minority of customers will ever be affected by this (less than
   1 %).

A.1.2.  How do I know I'm a very heavy user?

   There is no hard and fast usage limit that determines if you are a
   heavy user as the parameters that determine heavy use vary with the
   demands placed on the network at that given time.  If you have a
   query about fair usage related restrictions on your line please call
   us.

A.1.3.  I have Contract Option 3, does the Fair Usage Policy apply to
        me?

   Yes, the Fair Usage Policy applies to all customers on all Options,
   including Option 3.  Option 3 allows unlimited downloads and uploads
   inclusive of the monthly rental price, so you will not be charged for
   over-use, however this does not preclude ISP X from restricting your
   speed at peak times if you are a heavy user.  If you are an Option 3
   heavy user this does not prevent you from continuing to use your
   service, nor does it cost you any more but it ensures that you do not
   negatively impact the majority of our customers who share the
   available bandwidth with you.

A.1.4.  Peer to Peer (P2P)

A.1.4.1.  I'm noticing slower P2P speeds at peak times even though I'm
          not a very heavy user, why is this?

   P2P is the sharing and delivery of files amongst groups of people who
   are logged on to a file sharing network.  P2P consumes a significant
   and highly disproportionate amount of bandwidth when in use even by
   small numbers of users.



Tschofenig & Cooper     Expires September 9, 2010              [Page 15]

Internet-Draft           Congestion Exposure PS               March 2010


   This is why we have a peak time policy where we limit P2P speeds to
   manage the amount of bandwidth that is used by this application in
   particular.

   Without these limits all our customers using their broadband service
   at peak times would suffer, regardless of whether they are using P2P
   or not.  It's important to remember that P2P isn't a time-critical
   application so if you do need to download large files we advise you
   to do this at off-peak times when no restrictions are placed, not
   only will you be able to download faster but your usage will not
   negatively impact other users.

A.1.4.2.  Does this mean I can't use Peer-to-Peer (P2P) applications?

   No, we are not stopping you from using any P2P service, P2P will just
   be slowed down at peak times.  Again, P2P is not generally a time-
   sensitive application.


































Tschofenig & Cooper     Expires September 9, 2010              [Page 16]

Internet-Draft           Congestion Exposure PS               March 2010


Authors' Addresses

   Hannes Tschofenig
   Nokia Siemens Networks
   Linnoitustie 6
   Espoo  FIN-02600
   Finland

   Phone: +358 (50) 4871445
   Email: Hannes.Tschofenig@gmx.net
   URI:   http://www.tschofenig.priv.at


   Alissa Cooper
   Center for Democracy & Technology
   1634 I Street NW, Suite 1100
   Washington, DC
   USA

   Email: acooper@cdt.org































Tschofenig & Cooper     Expires September 9, 2010              [Page 17]


