


CONEX                                                      H. Tschofenig
Internet-Draft                                    Nokia Siemens Networks
Intended status: Informational                                 A. Cooper
Expires: April 29, 2010                           Center for Democracy &
                                                              Technology
                                                        October 26, 2009


                 Congestion Exposure Problem Statement
                    draft-tschofenig-conex-ps-01.txt

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 29, 2010.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2009 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents in effect on the date of
   publication of this document (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info).
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.







Tschofenig & Cooper      Expires April 29, 2010                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft           Congestion Exposure PS             October 2009


Abstract

   The increasingly ubiquitous availability of broadband, together with
   flat-rate pricing, have made the use of new kinds of peer-to-peer
   applications increasingly common.  From the perspective of the
   Internet's evolution and its contributions to end user value, this is
   very exciting.  However, the uptick in peer-to-peer application usage
   has also contributed to the rise of "high-consuming users" who take
   their flat-rate contracts to the limit by continuously file-sharing
   to the maximum extent possible.  Network operators have responded to
   this phenomenon in a number of different fashions.

   This document discusses the problems created for operators by high-
   consuming users and illustrates a number of techniques operators are
   currently using to cope with high bandwidth usage.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  State-of-the-Art Building Blocks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     2.1.  Accounting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     2.2.  Deep Packet Inspection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   3.  Network Operator Responses to Congestion . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   4.  New Activities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   5.  Summary  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   6.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   7.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   8.  Acknowledgments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   9.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
     9.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
     9.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   Appendix A.  Example Policy Statement  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
     A.1.  Fair Usage Policy  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
       A.1.1.  What is the Fair Usage Policy? . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
       A.1.2.  How do I know I'm a very heavy user? . . . . . . . . . 16
       A.1.3.  I have Contract Option 3, does the Fair Usage
               Policy apply to me?  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
       A.1.4.  Peer to Peer (P2P) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18











Tschofenig & Cooper      Expires April 29, 2010                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft           Congestion Exposure PS             October 2009


1.  Introduction

   In recent years, network operators around the world have begun to
   feel the affects of "high-consuming users" -- those who use the
   maximum amount of bandwidth possible, usually for the purpose of
   peer-to-peer file sharing.  In 2006 K. Cho et al. [traffic] reported
   that for residential Japanese broadband connections, "a small number
   of users dictate the overall behavior; 4% of high-consuming users
   account for 75% of the inbound volume, and the fiber users account
   for 86% of the inbound volume."  A more recent paper published
   December 2008, see [traffic2], confirms that the distribution has not
   changed much.  User-to-user traffic comprised 63% of overall
   residential traffic volume.  The authors noted not only a changing
   traffic distribution, but also a substantial increase in overall
   traffic growth (37% per year).  Operators in other countries have
   experienced similar shifts.

   This trend does not necessarily present a problem on its face, as
   increased traffic volumes do not automatically lead to congestion.
   However, in some cases where operators were not expecting these
   changes in growth rates and traffic consumption, their pricing models
   and congestion management architectures have proved inadequate.  In
   some countries, fierce competition among Internet access providers
   has yielded low profit margins.  This has increased the pressure on
   operators to find effective ways to deal with high- consuming users
   who cost them more money than the bulk of their subscribers.
   Furthermore, some broadband networks (such as cable networks) may not
   have the ideal characteristics (routing topology, for example) to
   support high volumes of user-to-user traffic.

   Congestion and cost are closely related.  As stated in RFC 5594
   [RFC5594], "... congestion can be viewed merely as a manifestation of
   cost.  An ISP that invests in capacity could be considered to be
   paying to relieve congestion.  Or, if subscribers are charged for
   congesting the network, then cost and congestion could be viewed as
   one and the same.  The distinction between them may thus be
   artificial.".  The upshot for network operators is: those who produce
   a lot of traffic cost a lot.

   Operators are now facing a range of options for addressing this
   problem.  There are many factors to consider for each kind of
   solution, including how the solution performs, its cost, what the
   public relations impact of using a particular solution might be, and
   what legal framework exists to support the use of a particular
   solution.  The performance considerations must take into account the
   balance between device performance and forwarding performance (since
   many of the solution mechanisms slow down forwarding performance),
   and this determination is intimiately related to measuring a



Tschofenig & Cooper      Expires April 29, 2010                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft           Congestion Exposure PS             October 2009


   solution's overall cost.

   In some cases, the popularity of flat-rate pricing plans exacerbate
   the congestion problem because an individual's bandwidth usage is not
   tied to his or her monthly bill, creating an incentive to use as much
   bandwidth as possible and leaving operators to cover the costs of all
   their users with essentially equal payments from each.  Operators
   know that users appreciate the certainty of having the bill amount
   remain the same for each billing period, allowing users to plan their
   costs accordingly.  But while flat-rate pricing avoids billing
   uncertainty, it creates performance uncertainty: users cannot be sure
   that the performance of their connections is not being altered or
   degrated based on how the network operator manages congestion.
   Unfortunately, most of the solutions described below create some
   performance uncertainty, and thus users are unlikely to view them as
   ideal solutions, despite users' well known preference for flat-rate
   pricing.


































Tschofenig & Cooper      Expires April 29, 2010                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft           Congestion Exposure PS             October 2009


2.  State-of-the-Art Building Blocks

   Two means of learning about the resource consumption and the traffic
   traveling through the network that are in use today are accounting
   and deep packet inspection.

2.1.  Accounting

   RFC 2975 [RFC2975] describes accounting as "The collection of
   resource consumption data for the purposes of capacity and trend
   analysis, cost allocation, auditing, and billing.".

   Over the years the number of information elements that can be sent
   from an accounting client to an accounting server using standardized
   protocols, such as RADIUS (see [RFC2866] and [RFC2865]) and Diameter
   [RFC3588], has increased.  The existence of standardized protocols
   has allowed different AAA networks to interconnect.  These protocols
   are now used in almost every enterprise and operator network.  The
   initial accounting mechanisms envisioned a rather non-real time
   nature in reporting resource consumption but with mechanisms like
   like Diameter Credit Control [RFC4006] allowed real-time credit
   control checks.

   Although they are popular, RADIUS and Diameter are not the only
   protocols that can be used to collect usage information and to
   trigger responses.  Other approaches, as documented in
   [I-D.livingood-woundy-congestion-mgmt], lead to similar results.

2.2.  Deep Packet Inspection

   Deep packet inspection (DPI) refers to the observation and analysis
   of traffic that passes through operator networks up to the
   application layer.  This allows operators to determine the
   applications and/or application-layer protocols that subscribers are
   using and respond on a per-application or per-protocol basis.

   The process of inspecting traffic, particularly in real time, can be
   highly performance-intensive.  DPI equipment may also require
   continous software updates to ensure that the detection engine
   recognizes the latest protocol variants.

   There may be a number of other factors that contribute to a network
   operator's decision to use DPI, including potential user backlash,
   privacy impact, and legal concerns.

   Depending on the configuration of the device doing the inspection,
   packet dropping/blocking and other usages might be applied.  For
   example, content sharing p2p applications maintain many simultaneous



Tschofenig & Cooper      Expires April 29, 2010                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft           Congestion Exposure PS             October 2009


   TCP connections with other nodes for the purpose of simultaneous
   downloads.  An operator may, for example, limit .  Certain end user
   contracts may also allow operators to ban servers from residential
   access.















































Tschofenig & Cooper      Expires April 29, 2010                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft           Congestion Exposure PS             October 2009


3.  Network Operator Responses to Congestion

   Once they have collected congestion information using either of the
   techniques described above or others, network operators have a number
   of options for how to respond.  For all of these options, it is up to
   the operator to decide the breadth and depth of its response: which
   users will be affected, the time frame in which congestion will be
   managed, whether specific applications or protocols will be targeted,
   and so forth.  Operators can chose from both technical and pricing/
   contract-based options.  Technical options include:

   Wholistic traffic shaping:

      End user contracts often provide users with a certain threshold
      for baseline usage volume (which is typically quite high).
      Subsequently, if consumption goes beyond the threshold, all of the
      user's traffic is given reduced priority vis a vis other users on
      the network.  Some operators may only shape traffic during times
      of congestion or peak usage periods (even if a user has exceeded
      his or her baseline threshold).

   Per-application or per-protocol shaping:

      Network operators that can identify particular applications or
      protocols creating congestion may decide to throttle only those
      applications or protocols.  They may also take indirect steps that
      result in the shaping of only certain applications, such as
      limiting the number of simultaneous TCP connection setups from a
      single subscriber (to handle peer-to-peer traffic), or preventing
      users from hosting servers on residential connections.  An example
      of an ISP's fair usage policy describing how it manages specific
      protocols is included in Appendix A.

   Class-Based Assignment:

      In this technique users are classified into a set of classes
      depending on their past behavior.  Subsequently, their traffic is
      treated according to their associated classes.  This may prevent
      lightweight users from feeling the effects of sharing network
      capacity with heavy users.  This mechanism requires some form of
      packet marking to be able to differentiate light users from heavy
      users.

   Pricing/contract-based options include:







Tschofenig & Cooper      Expires April 29, 2010                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft           Congestion Exposure PS             October 2009


      Charging for Excessive Traffic:  Network operators may charge
         users differently for traffic that exeeds a certain threshold
         compared to the traffic that falls below the threshold.

      Suspending or Discontinuing Contracts:  In some rare cases ISPs
         may decide to suspend or terminate the contracts of heavy
         users.  In some cases this response may be associated with a
         security issue; when an operator recognizes a botnet-infected
         machine generating excessive traffic, it may hotline all the
         traffic of that particular machine to a separate network, and
         ultimately suspend or terminate the machine's connection.  In
         some cases the same technique has been applied to users engaged
         in heavy P2P usage, either intentionally or due to a false
         alarm caused by a statistical traffic analysis.





































Tschofenig & Cooper      Expires April 29, 2010                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft           Congestion Exposure PS             October 2009


4.  New Activities

   Following the IETF Workshop on Peer-to-Peer (P2P) Infrastructure in
   2008 (see [RFC5594]), two working groups and one research group were
   created that relate to the congestion issues created by peer-to-peer
   application usage: :

      LEDBAT (Low Extra Delay Background Transport) [ledbat] is designed
      to keep the latency across a congested bottleneck low even as it
      is saturated.  This allows applications that send large amounts of
      data, particularly upstream on home connections (such as peer-to-
      peer applications) to operate without destroying the user
      experience in interactive applications.

      LEDBAT holds substantial promise should P2P clients adopt it
      widely.  This solution has been focused on P2P applications, and
      its applicability to other applications, such as video using
      H.264, is unclear.

      ALTO (Application-Layer Traffic Optimization) [alto] aims to
      design and specify mechanisms that will provide applications,
      typically P2P applications, with information to perform better-
      than-random initial peer selection to increase their performance
      and at the same time to avoid excessive cross-domain traffic that
      tends to be more expensive for the operator.  ALTO services may
      take different approaches at balancing factors such as maximum
      bandwidth, minimum cross-domain traffic, or lowest cost to the
      user, but in all cases the goal is to expose information that can
      ameliorate the interactions between peer-to-peer usage and other
      usages of shared networks.

      Peer to Peer Research Group [p2prg] aims to provide a discussion
      forum for resarchers related to all sorts of challenges presented
      by P2P systems in general, such as P2P streaming, interconnecting
      distinct P2P application overlays, security and privacy.  Current
      work on exposing myths about peer-to-peer filesharing
      [I-D.irtf-p2prg-mythbustering] provides a number of references to
      support some of the claimed benefits of ALTO solutions mechanisms,
      such as the expected decrease in cross- domain traffic.












Tschofenig & Cooper      Expires April 29, 2010                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft           Congestion Exposure PS             October 2009


5.  Summary

   High-consuming users are a reality.  Operators that would like to
   counteract the impact of heavy users on their networks have a fair
   number of tools at their disposal.  These tools may allow operators
   to identify heavy users, collect performance and usage indications,
   and choose from a variety of mitigating steps depending on the
   operator's preferred business practices.  Subscriber-specific
   information, including policies, resource consumption information,
   and details about the current network attachment point, may be
   available in accounting servers.  Information about the network
   topology and the state of particular topology elements may be
   available in the network management infrastructure.  Solution
   approaches similar to [I-D.livingood-woundy-congestion-mgmt] have
   demonstrated one way of taking congestion information into
   consideration.

   The currently available mechanisms for identifying and mitigating
   congestion largely run wholly within an operator's network and
   without a lot of information exchange about congestion information to
   or from end hosts or other network operators.  Exposing this
   information may allow end devices to make more informed decisions
   (although policy enforcement would still be required by the
   operator).

   The collection of congestion information poses the challenge of
   deciding where in the network to put the metering agents to ensure
   that enough information is collected at the right point in time.
   Distributed collection and the correlation of the information across
   different nodes is a complex task.  An approach that collects this
   congestion information along the path of the data packet (via inband
   signaling) would simplify this task.  Regardless of the technical
   solution utilized for collecting information, certain users will
   undoubtedly observe the effects of decisions that operators make
   about how to handle congestion.  Allowing users to understand these
   decisions will be crucial and having a channel to send feedback to
   the end device and/or subscriber would be a helpful step towards
   increased transparency.













Tschofenig & Cooper      Expires April 29, 2010                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft           Congestion Exposure PS             October 2009


6.  Security Considerations

   This document highlights approaches for dealing with high-consuming
   network users and all of them raise security and privacy concerns.
   It does not introduce new mechanisms.  The security considerations
   for the existing mechanisms mentioned apply.













































Tschofenig & Cooper      Expires April 29, 2010                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft           Congestion Exposure PS             October 2009


7.  IANA Considerations

   This document does not require actions by IANA.
















































Tschofenig & Cooper      Expires April 29, 2010                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft           Congestion Exposure PS             October 2009


8.  Acknowledgments

   The authors would like to thank Alan DeKok, Jens-Peter Haack,
   Alexander Bachmutsky, Jonne Soininen, Joachim Charzinski, Hannu
   Flinck, Joachim Kross, Jouni Korhonen, Mayutan Arumaithurai, Richard
   Woundy, Daniel Correa Lobato, Luca Caviglione, Tommy Lindgren, Lars
   Eggert, for their time to discuss the topic.  Additionally, we would
   like to thank Marcin Matuszewski for his help with the P2P
   infrastructure workshop paper (since it was used as a starting point
   for the work on this memo).









































Tschofenig & Cooper      Expires April 29, 2010                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft           Congestion Exposure PS             October 2009


9.  References

9.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

9.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.irtf-p2prg-mythbustering]
              Marocco, E., Fusco, A., Rimac, I., and V. Gurbani,
              "Improving Peer Selection in Peer-to-peer Applications:
              Myths vs. Reality", draft-irtf-p2prg-mythbustering-00
              (work in progress), August 2009.

   [I-D.livingood-woundy-congestion-mgmt]
              Bastian, C., Klieber, T., Livingood, J., Mills, J., and R.
              Woundy, "Comcast's Protocol-Agnostic Congestion Management
              System", draft-livingood-woundy-congestion-mgmt-01 (work
              in progress), September 2009.

   [RFC2865]  Rigney, C., Willens, S., Rubens, A., and W. Simpson,
              "Remote Authentication Dial In User Service (RADIUS)",
              RFC 2865, June 2000.

   [RFC2866]  Rigney, C., "RADIUS Accounting", RFC 2866, June 2000.

   [RFC2975]  Aboba, B., Arkko, J., and D. Harrington, "Introduction to
              Accounting Management", RFC 2975, October 2000.

   [RFC3576]  Chiba, M., Dommety, G., Eklund, M., Mitton, D., and B.
              Aboba, "Dynamic Authorization Extensions to Remote
              Authentication Dial In User Service (RADIUS)", RFC 3576,
              July 2003.

   [RFC3588]  Calhoun, P., Loughney, J., Guttman, E., Zorn, G., and J.
              Arkko, "Diameter Base Protocol", RFC 3588, September 2003.

   [RFC4006]  Hakala, H., Mattila, L., Koskinen, J-P., Stura, M., and J.
              Loughney, "Diameter Credit-Control Application", RFC 4006,
              August 2005.

   [RFC5594]  Peterson, J. and A. Cooper, "Report from the IETF Workshop
              on Peer-to-Peer (P2P) Infrastructure, May 28, 2008",
              RFC 5594, July 2009.

   [alto]     "",
              <http://www.ietf.org/dyn/wg/charter/alto-charter.html>.



Tschofenig & Cooper      Expires April 29, 2010                [Page 14]

Internet-Draft           Congestion Exposure PS             October 2009


   [ledbat]   "",
              <http://www.ietf.org/dyn/wg/charter/ledbat-charter.html>.

   [p2prg]    "", <http://www.irtf.org/charter?gtype=rg&group=p2prg>.

   [traffic]  Cho, K., Fukuda, K., Kato, H., and A. Kato, "The impact
              and implications of the growth in residential user-to-user
              traffic", SIGCOMM Comput. Commun. Rev. 36, 2006.

   [traffic2]
              Cho, K., Fukuda, K., Esaki, H., and A. Kato, "Observing
              slow crustal movement in residential user traffic, in
              International Conference On Emerging Networking
              Experiments And Technologies, Proceedings of the 2008 ACM
              CoNEXT Conference, Madrid, Spain, Article No. 12",  ,
              2008.



































Tschofenig & Cooper      Expires April 29, 2010                [Page 15]

Internet-Draft           Congestion Exposure PS             October 2009


Appendix A.  Example Policy Statement

A.1.  Fair Usage Policy

A.1.1.  What is the Fair Usage Policy?

   The Fair Usage Policy is designed to ensure that the service received
   by the vast majority of our customers is not negatively impacted
   because of extremely heavy usage by a very small minority of
   customers.  This is why ISP X continuously monitors network
   performance and may restrict the speed available to very heavy users
   during peak time.  This applies to customers on all Options.  Note if
   you are a heavy user we will only restrict your speed, service will
   not be stopped so ability to upload and download remains.  No
   restrictions will be imposed outside of the peak times.  Only a very
   small minority of customers will ever be affected by this (less than
   1 %).

A.1.2.  How do I know I'm a very heavy user?

   There is no hard and fast usage limit that determines if you are a
   heavy user as the parameters that determine heavy use vary with the
   demands placed on the network at that given time.  If you have a
   query about fair usage related restrictions on your line please call
   us.

A.1.3.  I have Contract Option 3, does the Fair Usage Policy apply to
        me?

   Yes, the Fair Usage Policy applies to all customers on all Options,
   including Option 3.  Option 3 allows unlimited downloads and uploads
   inclusive of the monthly rental price, so you will not be charged for
   over-use, however this does not preclude ISP X from restricting your
   speed at peak times if you are a heavy user.  If you are an Option 3
   heavy user this does not prevent you from continuing to use your
   service, nor does it cost you any more but it ensures that you do not
   negatively impact the majority of our customers who share the
   available bandwidth with you.

A.1.4.  Peer to Peer (P2P)

A.1.4.1.  I'm noticing slower P2P speeds at peak times even though I'm
          not a very heavy user, why is this?

   P2P is the sharing and delivery of files amongst groups of people who
   are logged on to a file sharing network.  P2P consumes a significant
   and highly disproportionate amount of bandwidth when in use even by
   small numbers of users.



Tschofenig & Cooper      Expires April 29, 2010                [Page 16]

Internet-Draft           Congestion Exposure PS             October 2009


   This is why we have a peak time policy where we limit P2P speeds to
   manage the amount of bandwidth that is used by this application in
   particular.

   Without these limits all our customers using their broadband service
   at peak times would suffer, regardless of whether they are using P2P
   or not.  It's important to remember that P2P isn't a time-critical
   application so if you do need to download large files we advise you
   to do this at off-peak times when no restrictions are placed, not
   only will you be able to download faster but your usage will not
   negatively impact other users.

A.1.4.2.  Does this mean I can't use Peer-to-Peer (P2P) applications?

   No, we are not stopping you from using any P2P service, P2P will just
   be slowed down at peak times.  Again, P2P is not generally a time-
   sensitive application.


































Tschofenig & Cooper      Expires April 29, 2010                [Page 17]

Internet-Draft           Congestion Exposure PS             October 2009


Authors' Addresses

   Hannes Tschofenig
   Nokia Siemens Networks
   Linnoitustie 6
   Espoo  FIN-02600
   Finland

   Phone: +358 (50) 4871445
   Email: Hannes.Tschofenig@gmx.net
   URI:   http://www.tschofenig.priv.at


   Alissa Cooper
   Center for Democracy & Technology
   1634 I Street NW, Suite 1100
   Washington, DC
   USA

   Email: acooper@cdt.org































Tschofenig & Cooper      Expires April 29, 2010                [Page 18]


