


CONEX                                                      H. Tschofenig
Internet-Draft                                    Nokia Siemens Networks
Intended status: Informational                                 A. Cooper
Expires: April 22, 2010                           Center for Democracy &
                                                              Technology
                                                        October 19, 2009


                 Congestion Exposure Problem Statement
                    draft-tschofenig-conex-ps-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 22, 2010.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2009 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents in effect on the date of
   publication of this document (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info).
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.







Tschofenig & Cooper      Expires April 22, 2010                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft           Congestion Exposure PS             October 2009


Abstract

   The availability of broadband connections together with flat-rate
   pricing has made new types of peer-to-peer applications possible.
   From an Internet evolution and end user value point of view this is
   very exciting.  As a consequence, an increase of user-to-user traffic
   was observable all around the world over the last few years.  With
   the usage of p2p systems the observation can be made that a certain
   group of users, called high-consuming users, decided to use their
   flat-rate contract excessively.  This in turn seems to have caused
   network operators to take actions.

   This document illustrates a couple of techniques used by operators
   today to deal with excessive bandwidth usage.  More information can
   improve the decision making process.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  State-of-the-Art Building Blocks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     2.1.  Means of Identifying the Causes of Congestion  . . . . . .  5
     2.2.  Potential Actions Operators might take in Response . . . .  6
   3.  New Activities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   4.  Summary  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   5.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   6.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   7.  Acknowledgments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   8.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     8.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     8.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   Appendix A.  Example Policy Statement  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
     A.1.  Fair Usage Policy  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
       A.1.1.  What is the Fair Usage Policy? . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
       A.1.2.  How do I know I'm a very heavy user? . . . . . . . . . 15
       A.1.3.  I have Contract Option 3, does the Fair Usage
               Policy apply to me?  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
       A.1.4.  Peer to Peer (P2P) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17












Tschofenig & Cooper      Expires April 22, 2010                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft           Congestion Exposure PS             October 2009


1.  Introduction

   In 2006 K. Cho et al. [traffic] published a paper about the growth of
   residential user-to-user traffic in Japan that indicates '... a small
   number of users dictate the overall behavior; 4 % of high-consuming
   users account for 75 % of the inbound volume, and the fiber users
   account for 86 % of the inbound volume.'.  The same paper also
   indicates a substantial increase in traffic growth, namely 37 % per
   year according, and not just a different distribution of traffic
   among the users.  At that time 63 % of the residential traffic volume
   is contributed by user-to-user traffic.

   These numbers itself do not represent a problem as by themself and do
   not necessarily lead to congestion.  However, some operators very
   likely had different expectations about the growth rates and traffic
   consumption of individual users and statistics (used for their
   pricing models) did not work out too well for them.  The profit
   margins for Internet access are quite slim due to fierce competition.
   This puts a lot of pressure on operators to deal with these high-
   consuming users who cost them a lot of money.  Finally, some
   broadband networks may not have the ideal characteristics (such as
   the topology for routing traffic) for user-to-user traffic (e.g.,
   Cable Networks).

      Congestion is often mentioned in this context and as stated in RFC
      5594 [RFC5594] "... congestion can be viewed merely as a
      manifestation of cost.  An ISP that invests in capacity could be
      considered to be paying to relieve congestion.  Or, if subscribers
      are charged for congesting the network, then cost and congestion
      could be viewed as one and the same.  The distinction between them
      may thus be artificial.".

   To summarize in a simplistic way, those who produce a lot of traffic
   cost a lot.

   Operators are now facing a range of options, see sections below, that
   can be taken and there is a tradeoff between what is allowed (legally
   and from a public relation point of view) and what is useful from a
   performance point of view.  The latter aspect can be seen from the
   point of view of a device performance (as many of the mechanisms
   actually slow down the forwarding performance quite a bit) and
   consequently a cost challenge.

   The existence of flat rate pricing contributes to some of the
   problems since the bandwidth usage in total needs to be covered by
   the money obtained from broadband customers but the usage of
   individual users is not reflected in the amount.  As such, users that
   rarely utilize the network pay the same amount as someone who uses



Tschofenig & Cooper      Expires April 22, 2010                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft           Congestion Exposure PS             October 2009


   P2p filesharing excessively.

   However, from a psychological point of view humans tend to strive to
   avoid uncertainty and hence offerings that reduced uncertainty.  For
   a user there are essentially two aspects to worry about

   o  Uncertainty in the bill: unpredicable costs that make planning
      difficult.

   o  Uncertainty in the performance: performance degradation as part of
      the actions being taken

   True flat rate pricing avoids uncertainty in the bill.
   Unfortunately, most of the solutions described below lead to some
   uncertainty and thereby increase unhappyness of customers.




































Tschofenig & Cooper      Expires April 22, 2010                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft           Congestion Exposure PS             October 2009


2.  State-of-the-Art Building Blocks

2.1.  Means of Identifying the Causes of Congestion

   RFC 2975 [RFC2975] describes accounting as "The collection of
   resource consumption data for the purposes of capacity and trend
   analysis, cost allocation, auditing, and billing.".

   Over the years the number of information elements that can be sent
   from an accounting client to an accounting server using standardized
   protocols, such as RADIUS (see [RFC2866] and [RFC2865]) and Diameter
   [RFC3588], has increased.  The fact that standardized protocols have
   been available allowed different AAA networks to be interconnected
   and their usage can be found in almost every enterprise and operator
   network.  The initial accounting mechanisms envisioned a rather non-
   real time nature in reporting resource consumption but with
   mechanisms like like Diameter Credit Control [RFC4006] allowed real-
   time credit control checks.

   It has to be noted that RADIUS and Diameter are not the only
   protocols that can be used to collect usage information and to
   trigger certain actions, even they are fairly popular.  Other
   approaches, as documented in [I-D.livingood-woundy-congestion-mgmt],
   lead to similar results.

   Deep packet inspection refers to inspecting traffic that passes
   through the operators networks up to the application layer.
   Depending on the configuration of the device traffic shaping, packet
   dropping/blocking and other usages might be applied.  For example,
   content sharing p2p applications maintain many simultaneous TCP
   connections with other nodes for the purpose of simultaneous
   downloads.  An operator may, for example, limit the number of
   connection setups from a single subscriber.  Certain end user
   contracts may also allow operators to ban servers from residential
   access.

   Determining the type of application that a subscriber is running was
   seen as necessary to throttle only certain applications, instead of
   impacting the full range of traffic a subscriber is using.  A side-
   effect is the additional investment for the device and operational
   costs.  The process of inspecting traffic is performance intensive
   and continous software updates are necessary to ensure that the
   detection engine recognizes the latest protocol variants.
   Additionally, the attempt to selectively deal with applications (even
   though these applications might be the reason for the high traffic
   volume) has not been received well by the users.





Tschofenig & Cooper      Expires April 22, 2010                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft           Congestion Exposure PS             October 2009


2.2.  Potential Actions Operators might take in Response

   What actions are taken based on the collected information and in what
   time frame is largely left to the choice of those who run the
   infrastructure.  In the context of this discussion the collected
   information may be used to charge the user per volume, per time and
   in various different combinations.  Additionally, the RADIUS and
   Diameter allow the server side with a server-initiated message (see
   Change of Authorization in [RFC3576], and the functionality provided
   in the Diameter Base specification [RFC3588]) to push decisions to
   the AAA clients, typically edge nodes, acting as enforcement nodes.
   These decisions include actions like shaping or packet marking.

   Shaping:  End user contracts often offer a combination of 'flat-rate'
      scheme whereby a fixed price tariff is used up to a certain usage
      volume (typically quite high for regular usage).  Subsequently, if
      the consumption goes beyond a certain threshold then the entire
      traffic is given lower priority and potentially shaped.

         In many countries operators have to offer a clear description
         of the service they offer and since the term 'flat-rate' is
         already associated with a certain meaning the term 'Unlimited
         Data Rate' is often used for this type of service.  Contracts
         typically contain statements that allow certain actions to be
         taken.  An example of such a fair use statement can be found in
         Appendix A.

      Note that traffic shaping is often only applied to high-consuming
      users (since they are known based on the accounting procedures) or
      the effect becomes only visible during peak hours when the network
      fills up.

   Class-Based Assignment:  In this technique users are classified into
      a set of classes depending on their past behavior.  Subsequently,
      the traffic is treated according to the associated class.  It is
      ensured that the traffic of lightweight users, users that really
      rarely use their Internet connection, cannot be pushed away by
      heavy users.  This mechanism again requires some form of DiffServ
      marking to be in place.

   Charging for Excessive Traffic:  As a possible action a user might
      get charged differently for traffic that exeeds a certain
      threshold compared to the traffic that falls within the agreed
      limits.







Tschofenig & Cooper      Expires April 22, 2010                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft           Congestion Exposure PS             October 2009


   Discontinuing Contracts:  In some rare cases ISP also decided to cut
      connectivity under certain condition.  In fact this might be
      justified in certain cases.  For example, in case of new botnets
      malware distribution when the operator recognizes an infected
      machine and hotlines the entire traffic of that particular machine
      to a separate network and, like in WLAN hotspots, HTTP traffic is
      intercepted to display further information.  In some cases the
      same technique has been applied with excessive usage of P2P
      traffic, either intentionally or due to a false alarm caused by a
      statistical traffic analysis technique.

      In France the HADOPI law adopted in parliament that allowed an
      'independent authority' to punish copyright violators with a
      temporary suspension of their Internet access has raised
      discussions within Europe about the fundamental right to
      'communicate and express' and its applicability to the Internet
      access.  Although this discussion is still ongoing the French
      Supreme Court had striked down portions of the law arguing that
      any restriction of such a right can only be decided by a judge.
































Tschofenig & Cooper      Expires April 22, 2010                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft           Congestion Exposure PS             October 2009


3.  New Activities

   In response to the P2P infrastructure workshop in 2008 (with a
   summary documented [RFC5594]) two working groups and one research
   group has been created that focus on a certain area of the
   application space:

      LEDBAT (Low Extra Delay Background Transport) [ledbat] is designed
      to allow to keep the latency across the congested bottleneck low
      even as it is saturated.  This allows applications that send large
      amounts of data, particularly upstream on home connections, such
      as peer-to-peer application, to operate without destroying the
      user experience in interactive applications.

      LEDBAT is a promising approach when applied widely in P2P clients.
      This solution has been focused P2P applications, and its
      applicability to other applications, such as video using H.264, is
      unclear.

      ALTO (Application-Layer Traffic Optimization) [alto] aims to
      design and specify mechanisms that will provide applications,
      typically P2P applications, with information to perform better-
      than-random initial peer selection to increase their performance
      and at the same time to avoid excessive cross-domain traffic that
      tends to be more expensive for the operator.  For legal content
      ALTO mechanisms with the ability for ISPs to deploy proxies appear
      to be a viable solution.  However, a lot of the content being
      distributed in P2P filesharing networks today is not legal and
      caching such content by operators could turn out problematic for
      them.

      Peer to Peer Research Group [p2prg] aims to provide a discussion
      forum for resarchers related to all sorts of challenges of P2P
      systems in general, such as P2P streaming, interconnecting
      distinct P2P application overlays, security and privacy, etc.
      [I-D.irtf-p2prg-mythbustering] provides a number of literature
      references to support some of the claimed benefits of ALTO
      solutions mechanisms, such as the expected decrease in cross-
      domain traffic.












Tschofenig & Cooper      Expires April 22, 2010                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft           Congestion Exposure PS             October 2009


4.  Summary

   Heavy users are a reality.  Operators that would like to counteract
   the impact of heavy users on their networks have a fair number of
   tools at their disposal.  These tools may allow operators to identify
   heavy users, collect performance and usage indications, and choose
   from a variety of mitigating steps depending on the operator's
   preferred business practices.  Subscriber-specific information,
   including policies, resource consumption information, and details
   about the current network attachment point, may be available in
   accounting servers.  Information about the network topology and the
   state of particular topology elements may be available in the network
   management infrastructure.  Solution approaches similar to
   [I-D.livingood-woundy-congestion-mgmt] have demonstrated one way of
   taking congestion information into consideration.

   The currently available mechanisms for identifying and mitigating
   congestion largely run wholly within an operator's network and
   without a lot of information exchange about congestion information to
   or from end hosts or other network operators.  Exposing this
   information may allow end devices to make more informed decisions
   (although policy enforcement would still be required by the
   operator).

   The collection of congestion information poses the challenge of
   deciding where in the network to put the metering agents to ensure
   that enough information is collected at the right point in time.
   Distributed collection and the correlation of the information across
   different nodes is a complex task.  An approach that collects this
   congestion information along the path of the data packet (via inband
   signaling) would simplify this task.  Regardless of the technical
   solution utilized for collecting information, certain users will
   undoubtedly observe the effects of decisions that operators make
   about how to handle congestion.  Allowing users to understand these
   decisions will be crucial and having a channel to send feedback to
   the end device and/or subscriber would be a helpful step towards
   increased transparency.














Tschofenig & Cooper      Expires April 22, 2010                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft           Congestion Exposure PS             October 2009


5.  Security Considerations

   This document highlights approaches for dealing with heavy network
   usage and all of them raise security and privacy concerns.  This
   document does, however, not introduce new mechanism and hence the
   reader is referred to the description of the respective mechanism.













































Tschofenig & Cooper      Expires April 22, 2010                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft           Congestion Exposure PS             October 2009


6.  IANA Considerations

   This document does not require actions by IANA.
















































Tschofenig & Cooper      Expires April 22, 2010                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft           Congestion Exposure PS             October 2009


7.  Acknowledgments

   The authors would like to thank Alan DeKok, Jens-Peter Haack, Jouni
   Korhonen, Tommy Lindgren, Lars Eggert, for their time to discuss the
   topic.  Additionally, we would like to thank Marcin Matuszewski for
   his help with the P2P infrastructure workshop paper (as it was used
   as a starting point).












































Tschofenig & Cooper      Expires April 22, 2010                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft           Congestion Exposure PS             October 2009


8.  References

8.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

8.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.irtf-p2prg-mythbustering]
              Marocco, E., Fusco, A., Rimac, I., and V. Gurbani,
              "Improving Peer Selection in Peer-to-peer Applications:
              Myths vs. Reality", draft-irtf-p2prg-mythbustering-00
              (work in progress), August 2009.

   [I-D.livingood-woundy-congestion-mgmt]
              Bastian, C., Klieber, T., Livingood, J., Mills, J., and R.
              Woundy, "Comcast's Protocol-Agnostic Congestion Management
              System", draft-livingood-woundy-congestion-mgmt-01 (work
              in progress), September 2009.

   [RFC2865]  Rigney, C., Willens, S., Rubens, A., and W. Simpson,
              "Remote Authentication Dial In User Service (RADIUS)",
              RFC 2865, June 2000.

   [RFC2866]  Rigney, C., "RADIUS Accounting", RFC 2866, June 2000.

   [RFC2975]  Aboba, B., Arkko, J., and D. Harrington, "Introduction to
              Accounting Management", RFC 2975, October 2000.

   [RFC3576]  Chiba, M., Dommety, G., Eklund, M., Mitton, D., and B.
              Aboba, "Dynamic Authorization Extensions to Remote
              Authentication Dial In User Service (RADIUS)", RFC 3576,
              July 2003.

   [RFC3588]  Calhoun, P., Loughney, J., Guttman, E., Zorn, G., and J.
              Arkko, "Diameter Base Protocol", RFC 3588, September 2003.

   [RFC4006]  Hakala, H., Mattila, L., Koskinen, J-P., Stura, M., and J.
              Loughney, "Diameter Credit-Control Application", RFC 4006,
              August 2005.

   [RFC5594]  Peterson, J. and A. Cooper, "Report from the IETF Workshop
              on Peer-to-Peer (P2P) Infrastructure, May 28, 2008",
              RFC 5594, July 2009.

   [alto]     "",
              <http://www.ietf.org/dyn/wg/charter/alto-charter.html>.



Tschofenig & Cooper      Expires April 22, 2010                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft           Congestion Exposure PS             October 2009


   [ledbat]   "",
              <http://www.ietf.org/dyn/wg/charter/ledbat-charter.html>.

   [p2prg]    "", <http://www.irtf.org/charter?gtype=rg&group=p2prg>.

   [traffic]  Cho, K., Fukuda, K., Kato, H., and A. Kato, "The impact
              and implications of the growth in residential user-to-user
              traffic", SIGCOMM Comput. Commun. Rev. 36, 2006.











































Tschofenig & Cooper      Expires April 22, 2010                [Page 14]

Internet-Draft           Congestion Exposure PS             October 2009


Appendix A.  Example Policy Statement

A.1.  Fair Usage Policy

A.1.1.  What is the Fair Usage Policy?

   The Fair Usage Policy is designed to ensure that the service received
   by the vast majority of our customers is not negatively impacted
   because of extremely heavy usage by a very small minority of
   customers.  This is why ISP X continuously monitors network
   performance and may restrict the speed available to very heavy users
   during peak time.  This applies to customers on all Options.  Note if
   you are a heavy user we will only restrict your speed, service will
   not be stopped so ability to upload and download remains.  No
   restrictions will be imposed outside of the peak times.  Only a very
   small minority of customers will ever be affected by this (less than
   1 %).

A.1.2.  How do I know I'm a very heavy user?

   There is no hard and fast usage limit that determines if you are a
   heavy user as the parameters that determine heavy use vary with the
   demands placed on the network at that given time.  If you have a
   query about fair usage related restrictions on your line please call
   us.

A.1.3.  I have Contract Option 3, does the Fair Usage Policy apply to
        me?

   Yes, the Fair Usage Policy applies to all customers on all Options,
   including Option 3.  Option 3 allows unlimited downloads and uploads
   inclusive of the monthly rental price, so you will not be charged for
   over-use, however this does not preclude ISP X from restricting your
   speed at peak times if you are a heavy user.  If you are an Option 3
   heavy user this does not prevent you from continuing to use your
   service, nor does it cost you any more but it ensures that you do not
   negatively impact the majority of our customers who share the
   available bandwidth with you.

A.1.4.  Peer to Peer (P2P)

A.1.4.1.  I'm noticing slower P2P speeds at peak times even though I'm
          not a very heavy user, why is this?

   P2P is the sharing and delivery of files amongst groups of people who
   are logged on to a file sharing network.  P2P consumes a significant
   and highly disproportionate amount of bandwidth when in use even by
   small numbers of users.



Tschofenig & Cooper      Expires April 22, 2010                [Page 15]

Internet-Draft           Congestion Exposure PS             October 2009


   This is why we have a peak time policy where we limit P2P speeds to
   manage the amount of bandwidth that is used by this application in
   particular.

   Without these limits all our customers using their broadband service
   at peak times would suffer, regardless of whether they are using P2P
   or not.  It's important to remember that P2P isn't a time-critical
   application so if you do need to download large files we advise you
   to do this at off-peak times when no restrictions are placed, not
   only will you be able to download faster but your usage will not
   negatively impact other users.

A.1.4.2.  Does this mean I can't use Peer-to-Peer (P2P) applications?

   No, we are not stopping you from using any P2P service, P2P will just
   be slowed down at peak times.  Again, P2P is not generally a time-
   sensitive application.


































Tschofenig & Cooper      Expires April 22, 2010                [Page 16]

Internet-Draft           Congestion Exposure PS             October 2009


Authors' Addresses

   Hannes Tschofenig
   Nokia Siemens Networks
   Linnoitustie 6
   Espoo  FIN-02600
   Finland

   Phone: +358 (50) 4871445
   Email: Hannes.Tschofenig@gmx.net
   URI:   http://www.tschofenig.priv.at


   Alissa Cooper
   Center for Democracy & Technology
   1634 I Street NW, Suite 1100
   Washington, DC
   USA

   Email: acooper@cdt.org































Tschofenig & Cooper      Expires April 22, 2010                [Page 17]


