


Internet Engineering Task Force                                   Z. Cao
Internet-Draft                                                   H. Deng
Intended status: Informational                                    J. Zhu
Expires: September 3, 2012                                  China Mobile
                                                           March 2, 2012


              The Architecture of Open Security Capability
                         draft-cao-open-sec-00

Abstract

   This position paper introduces an architecture of opening the
   operator's security capability to third party smart object
   applications.  With this architecture, the authentication, integrity
   and encryption capabilities can be wrapped up as Application
   Programming Interfaces and provided to third party application
   developers.  So the third party applications do not have to spare
   energy on these basic security functionalities.  As a consequence,
   the barrier for new applications is lowered, and it avoids the need
   of providing security by multiple applications and hence saves the
   computing and communication resources on constrained nodes.

   Note: This document is submitted for the IAB Workshop on Smart Object
   Security on March 23, 2012, Paris.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 3, 2012.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2012 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.




Cao, et al.             Expires September 3, 2012               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                Open Sec Arch                   March 2012


   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Security Capability Opening Architecture  . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   3.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   4.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5

































Cao, et al.             Expires September 3, 2012               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                Open Sec Arch                   March 2012


1.  Introduction

   The trend of opening telecommunication capability is obvious.  There
   are many activities in the direction of opening voice, paging, SMS,
   localization capabilities to third parties.  Both the operator and
   application developers benefit from this.  First of all, the barrier
   for new application developers is lowered down.  Secondly, end users
   can enjoy the diversity of applications, both for communication and
   entertainment.  What's more, the operator can cultivated the
   developers' society, building up a mature industrial.  This is a win-
   win situation.

   Security capabilities can also be opened to third party applications.
   While developing their own security services such as authentication,
   integrity, and encryption, the application developers should do much
   work and these efforts are sometimes difficult to deploy.  The
   credential provisioning, the limit caused by the constrained device
   platform, and the overhead of security protocols are both problems
   that third party applications will encounter when they want to
   provide the security service.

   However, the operator's smart objects or M2M devices have already
   been embedded with credentials (SIM card or certificates), and the
   operator has network-side authentication platform for user
   authentication and key management.  In the open capability
   architecture, the third party applications could invoke the APIs for
   authentication, key management, and message integrity and
   confidentiality.  It will greatly benefit the industrial chain.


2.  Security Capability Opening Architecture

   This section introduced the open security capability architecture, as
   depicted in Figure 1.

   The operator controlled module is a component provided and controlled
   by the operator.  It contains a security module, which includes
   authentication module, but also contains a group of security features
   that provides key derivation, integrity, confidentiality and any
   other possible security features.  The operator controlled network
   side security platform is an entity that handles authentication,
   integrity and encryption keys management, for example, the existing
   HLR (Home Locator Registry) or AAA server, or other integrated
   platforms.

   The ways of opening security capabilities to third party applications
   can include, but not limited to the following items.




Cao, et al.             Expires September 3, 2012               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                Open Sec Arch                   March 2012


   o  Authentication.  The operator controlled module can open an API
      for authentication to the 3rd party application platform based on
      some authorization methods.  After invocation of this API, the
      operator controlled network-side security platform will give
      feedback by a success or failure message, by invoking callback
      functions with the 3rd Party Platfom.

   o  Key distribution.  After authentication, shared keys or group keys
      are shared between the two end of operator controlled module or
      operator controlled security platform.  Third party applications
      and their platform could derive their shared keys with the device
      based on the network side shared keys using the open APIs.
      [3GPP.33.220]has similar design.

   o  Information Integrity and Confidentiality.  The 3rd party
      application can delegate some security integrity and
      confidentiality protection to the network layer.  Operator
      controlled modules can delegate the security computing tasks from
      the third party applications and platforms.  For example, the
      module can generate a message authentication code (MAC) or the
      encrypted counterpart for communication needs.


    +--------------------+               +--------------------+
    | 3rd Party APPs     |               | 3rd Party Platform |
    +--------------------+               +--------------------+
      |     |     |     |                     |     |    |
     API   API   API   API                   API  or Callback
      |     |     |     |                     |     |    |
    +---------------------+        +-------------------------------+
    | Operator Controlled |========|      Operator Controlled      |
    | Module on M2M Dev   |========|Network-side Security Platform |
    +---------------------+        +-------------------------------+
   Note: Authentication capability of the API needs to be very careful.
         SIM card based authentication can only be invoked based on
         operator authorization

                   Figure 1: Open Security Architecture

   With this architecture, the applications do not have to design their
   own security protocols and providing security services.  All the
   security computings can be based on the operator's module, and
   interfaces between the security platforms and 3rd party platforms.
   The pain of credential provisioning, key management, encryption and
   authentication in the application layer can go away.






Cao, et al.             Expires September 3, 2012               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                Open Sec Arch                   March 2012


3.  Security Considerations

   The trust relationship between the operator and third party
   applications is the key to the success of this architecture.  For
   authentication, the 3rd party application should assume the one
   authenticated by the operator platform is also trusted by itself.  If
   this trust is broken or attacked, since the operators security
   capability has been opened by the API, then it could be abused by the
   attackers, they can know very well about the operators security
   capability and pry into the security parameters.  So this usage of
   the open security capability by the 3rd party must be authorized by
   the operators Further considerations of secure delegation will be
   discussed in future.


4.  Informative References

   [3GPP.33.220]
              3GPP, "Generic Authentication Architecture (GAA); Generic
              Bootstrapping Architecture (GBA)", 3GPP TS 33.220 10.0.0,
              October 2010.


Authors' Addresses

   Zhen Cao
   China Mobile
   Xuanwumenxi Ave No.32
   Beijing,   100053
   China

   Phone:
   Email: zehn.cao@gmail.com, caozhen@chinamobile.com


   Hui Deng
   China Mobile
   Xuanwumenxi Ave No.32
   Beijing,   100053
   China

   Phone:
   Fax:
   Email: denghui@chinamobile.com
   URI:






Cao, et al.             Expires September 3, 2012               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                Open Sec Arch                   March 2012


   Judy Zhu
   China Mobile
   Xuanwumenxi Ave No.32
   Beijing,   100053
   China

   Phone:
   Fax:
   Email: zhuhongru@chinamobile.com
   URI:









































Cao, et al.             Expires September 3, 2012               [Page 6]
