


Network Working Group                                          M. Bhatia
Internet-Draft                                            Alcatel-Lucent
Intended status: Standards Track                              S. Hartman
Expires: September 8, 2011                             Painless Security
                                                                D. Zhang
                                                                  Huawei
                                                           March 7, 2011


 A Generic Mechanism to solve Inter-Session Replay Attacks for Routing
                        and Signaling Protocols
                 draft-bhz-karp-inter-session-replay-00

Abstract

   This draft proposes a common solution for routing protocols to
   enhance their capability in tolerating inter-session replay attacks
   when using manual keys for securing their protocol packets.

Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 8, 2011.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal



Bhatia, et al.          Expires September 8, 2011               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft    Solving Inter-Session Replay Attacks        March 2011


   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Existing Mechanisms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   3.  Inter-Session Replay Attacks  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   4.  Proposal  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   5.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   6.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   7.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   8.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
     8.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
     8.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9




























Bhatia, et al.          Expires September 8, 2011               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft    Solving Inter-Session Replay Attacks        March 2011


1.  Introduction

   A replay attack is a network attack where an adversary intercepts a
   valid message transmission and retransmits it sometime later.  In
   certain types of replay attacks, the retransmitted message may also
   be carefully tampered with.  [RFC6039] demonstrates that nearly all
   the routing protocols and their security mechanisms are vulnerable to
   replay attacks to some extent.  These attacks permit attackers
   multiple capabilities.  Often, by replaying packets, attackers can
   create a disruption, causing routing information to be removed or
   signaling to fail because of the attack.  Other replays permit an
   attacker to mask network failures.  For example an attacker can
   maintain an adjacency even when a link or router has failed, allowing
   the attacker to observe traffic or forcing traffic to be blackholed.
   Another class of replay attacks permits an attacker to inject old
   routing information, possibly in place of routing information from a
   router that is currently down.  Successful replay attacks on routing
   protocols can introduce incorrect routing information into the
   victims' routing tables, can break their adjacencies, and can
   eventually disrupt network communication.

   Replays may be effective even with very little effort on the part of
   an attacker.  For instance, replaying an OSPF Hello packet with an
   empty neighbor list can cause all the neighbor adjacencies with the
   router which originally sent the packet to be reset.  All the
   existing security mechanisms for routing protocols use a non-
   decreasing cryptographic sequence number to deal with replay attacks.
   However, this leaves the routers still vulnerable to inter-connection
   replay attacks where the packets from one session are re-sent and
   accepted during a later session.  None of the existing authentication
   mechanisms in the routing protocols can prevent this without the
   assistance of automatic key management mechanisms.

   Providing routing protocols with an inter-session replay protection
   is one of the threats that has been recognized in scope for the work
   being done in the KARP WG and has been documented in
   [I-D.ietf-karp-threats-reqs].  This document proposes to provide a
   generic solution that can be implemented as part of the KARP
   framework that can be used by all routing and signaling protocols to
   prevent inter-session replay attacks.

   This document proposes introducing a boot count, denoted as the KARP
   Boot Count (KBC), to enhance the capability of routing protocols in
   tolerating inter-session replay attacks.  KBC is used to record the
   number of times a router has cold-booted.  As a part of the KARP
   infrastructure, the value of this count must be maintained by all the
   implementations compliant to this standard in their non-volatile
   memory.



Bhatia, et al.          Expires September 8, 2011               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft    Solving Inter-Session Replay Attacks        March 2011


   The following sections explain why the existing security and
   authentication mechanisms cannot protect the routing and the
   signaling protocols against inter-session replay attacks.  The
   proposed solution is then introduced and we explain how unlike the
   existing anti-replay mechanisms, this solution will also work well
   with automated key management techniques.


2.  Existing Mechanisms

   Most routing protocols (e.g., OSPF, BFD, and RIP) and signaling
   protocols (LDP, RSVP, etc) include a non-decreasing cryptographic
   sequence number within the authentication data of each new packet
   that a router originates.  The receivers keep track of this sequence
   number and only accept a protocol packet if it carries a
   cryptographic sequence number that is greater than or equal to the
   cryptographic sequence number carried in the last valid protocol
   packet.  Using this mechanism, receivers can trivially protect the
   router against simple replay attacks.

   [RFC2328] uses a 32-bit non-decreasing crypto sequence number for
   every OSPFv2 packet.  Once a router has increased its sequence
   number, an attacker cannot replay an old packet to a neighbor that
   has an active adjacency without being detected.  Note that the
   sequence numbers are not required to increase for each packet.
   Additionally, OSPFv2 provides a per-LSA sequence number to prevent an
   old LSA from being installed.

   OSPFv3 [RFC5340] relies on the IP Authentication Header (AH)
   [RFC4302] and the IP Encapsulating Security Payload (ESP) [RFC4303]
   to cryptographically sign routing information passed between routers.

   [RFC4552] describes the authentication mechanism that OSPFv3 uses.
   It discusses, at length, the reasoning behind using manually
   configured keys, rather than some automated key management protocol
   such as IKEv2 [RFC4306].  The primary problem is the lack of a
   suitable key management mechanism, as OSPFv3 adjacencies are formed
   on a one-to-many basis and most key management mechanisms are
   designed for a one-to-one communication model.  Since [RFC4552] uses
   manual keying it clearly states that it provides no protection
   against replay attacks.  This can be exploited in several ways as
   described in [RFC6039].

   The OSPF WG is currently working on an alternate mechanism
   [I-D.ietf-ospf-auth-trailer-ospfv3] to protect OSPFv3 protocol
   packets that does not depend upon IPsec for authentication.  This
   draft proposes a new mechanism that works similar to OSPFv2 [RFC5709]
   for providing authentication to the OSPFv3 packets and as a side



Bhatia, et al.          Expires September 8, 2011               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft    Solving Inter-Session Replay Attacks        March 2011


   effect also solves the replay protection problems that exists in
   OSPFv3.

   As part of the solution OSPFv3 routers append a special data block,
   referred to as, the authentication trailer to the end of the OSPFv3
   packets.  It contains a 32-bit non decreasing cryptographic sequence
   number that is used to protect against the replay attacks.

   Bidirectional Forwarding Detection (BFD) is specified in [RFC5880].
   There is a 32-bit cryptographic sequence number associated with every
   BFD packet that is used to protect against replay attacks.  Note that
   the sequence number is incremented for each successive packet
   transmitted within a session for Meticulous Keyed (MD5 or SHA-1)
   Authentication.  When using Keyed (MD5 or SHA-1) Authentication (the
   non-meticulous variant), the receiver of a packet only requires the
   sequence number of the packet to be greater than or equal to the last
   sequence number received.

   In order to improve the anti-replay capability of RSVP, a 64-bit
   monotonically increasing sequence number is associated with every
   RSVP packet[RFC2747].


3.  Inter-Session Replay Attacks

   In the security mechanisms where the per-packet sequence numbers only
   need to be updated occasionally, replay attacks can be quite
   intuitive.  For instance, an attacker can replay the last OSPFv2
   packet without being detected since a router executing OSPFv2 accepts
   packets with sequence number greater than or equal to what they had
   last received.  Of course, this issue can be easily addressed by
   mandating that protocols must only accept protocol packets if they
   come with a sequence number that is greater than what they have
   received till now.  However, even if the sequence numbers are
   monotonically increased, the security mechanisms for routing
   protocols are still vulnerable to "inter-session" replay attacks if
   automatic key management mechanisms are unavailable.  In normal
   conditions, it will take a very long period for a sequence number to
   reach its maximum.  However, on many occasions (e.g., reboot), a
   router may re-initialize its sequence number.  In this case, the
   sequence number of new packets is less than the sequence number of
   packets previously sent on the link.  If an adversary replays the
   packets intercepted before the re-initialization, it is difficult for
   the victims to distinguish a replayed packet from the valid ones.







Bhatia, et al.          Expires September 8, 2011               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft    Solving Inter-Session Replay Attacks        March 2011


4.  Proposal

   The basic idea of the proposed solution is to guarantee that the
   sequence number of a router will always monotonically increase even
   after a cold reboot.  The first part of the solution requires that
   the sequence numbers increase for every packet, updating the
   requirement of protocols such as OSPFv2 that only require non-
   decreasing behavior.  This also means that BFD should use the
   meticulous version of the authentication mechanism as against the
   regular, since the former requires the cryptographic sequence number
   to increase for each successive packet that is transmitted for a
   session.  It is insufficient to update the behavior of senders in
   this regard: receivers MUST check that sequence numbers increase for
   every packet.

   The second part of the solution requires routing protocol
   implementations to maintain a KARP boot count (KBC) that records the
   number of times the router has cold booted in a non-volatile storage,
   similar to how it is done in the SNMPv3 security architecture.  In
   fact, the same boot count MAY also be shared by SNMPv3 and the KARP
   infrastructure.  Before sending out a packet, the routing protocols
   can request for this count value and can append it before the
   sequence space that it maintains.  How each routing protocol achieve
   this is an implementation specific issue and beyond the scope of this
   document.

   If the sequence number of a routing protocol (e.g., RSVP) is 64 bits,
   the sequence space is then broken down to two halves.  The most
   significant 32-bits would indicate the KARP boot count.  The least
   significant 32-bits is a counter that increases for every packet
   sent.

   If the cryptographic sequence number of a routing protocol is 32
   bits, it is recommended to extend the sequence number space to 64
   bits.  The most significant 32-bits would indicate the KARP boot
   count.  The least significant 32-bits would carry the current
   sequence number that protocols maintain, which increases with each
   successive packet transmitted within a session.  Upon receiving a
   packet, the receiver MUST verify that the sequence number in the
   packet is strictly greater than the sequence number of the previous
   packets received.

   In the later case, if an implementation does not intend to expand the
   length of the sequence number, it could divide this 32-bit
   cryptographic sequence number space into a 7-bit and a 25-bit field.
   The most significant 7-bits could then indicate the KARP boot count.
   The least significant 25-bits is a counter that increases for every
   packet sent.



Bhatia, et al.          Expires September 8, 2011               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft    Solving Inter-Session Replay Attacks        March 2011


   This solution assumes that boot counts never wrap within the lifetime
   of a particular encryption key.  Also, the solution assumes that
   nonvolatile storage is always updated on a boot.  Under these
   assumptions, a sequence number will not be re-used.  This is
   sufficient to guarantee that while two routers are exchanging
   communications, packets from an old session cannot be replayed.
   However it does not demonstrate freshness.  Many routing protocols
   discard replay state when an adjacency is dropped or when a router
   reboots.  Once this state is discarded, an attacker can successfully
   replay packets from an old session.  See the discussion in Section 5.


5.  Security Considerations

   This solution does not try to provide guarantees of freshness: it
   does not protect against the replay of an antique session while a
   router is down.  For instance, if an OSPF router is taken out of
   service for some reason, an attacker can replay packets as soon as
   the adjacencies with the router time out.  Actually, this issues is a
   common problem encountered by all existing anti-replay solutions for
   routing protocols.  To address this issue, the liveliness of routers
   would need to be checked before the generation of any adjacency.  The
   challenge/response solution is proposed
   in[I-D.bhatia-karp-ospf-ip-layer-protection] to address this issue.

   Updates to routing protocols that use this solution need to discuss
   residual attacks, particularly those resulting from the lack of
   freshness guarantees.  For example this solution would likely be
   insufficient for RIPv2 because as soon as a router goes down, old
   packets from that router could be used to inject routing information.
   However attacks against a link-state protocol may be quite limited
   and this solution may be appropriate.

   The security of this solution depends on the boot count always
   increasing for each new boot unless the key changes.  This creates
   significant operational requirements.  If equipment is replaced but
   its router identity (an IP address for several protocols) is re-used,
   then the key MUST be changed or the boot count preserved from the old
   equipment.  Failure to take one of these steps permits attackers to
   replay packets from the old equipment until the boot count of the new
   equipment catches up with that of the old equipment.  This will very
   likely permit an attacker to disrupt adjacencies between the new
   equipment and other routers.  More serious attacks may be possible as
   well.







Bhatia, et al.          Expires September 8, 2011               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft    Solving Inter-Session Replay Attacks        March 2011


6.  IANA Considerations

   The implementations that decide to extend their sequence space from
   32 bits to 64 bits need to require a new Auth Type from IANA as this
   will be incompatible with the earlier authentication mechanisms.


7.  Acknowledgements

   The funding for Sam Hartman's work on this draft is provided by
   Huawei.


8.  References

8.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2082]  Baker, F., Atkinson, R., and G. Malkin, "RIP-2 MD5
              Authentication", RFC 2082, January 1997.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC2328]  Moy, J., "OSPF Version 2", STD 54, RFC 2328, April 1998.

   [RFC2747]  Baker, F., Lindell, B., and M. Talwar, "RSVP Cryptographic
              Authentication", RFC 2747, January 2000.

   [RFC4552]  Gupta, M. and N. Melam, "Authentication/Confidentiality
              for OSPFv3", RFC 4552, June 2006.

   [RFC5340]  Coltun, R., Ferguson, D., Moy, J., and A. Lindem, "OSPF
              for IPv6", RFC 5340, July 2008.

   [RFC5880]  Katz, D. and D. Ward, "Bidirectional Forwarding Detection
              (BFD)", RFC 5880, June 2010.

8.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.bhatia-karp-ospf-ip-layer-protection]
              Bhatia, M., Hartman, S., and D. Zhang, "Security Extension
              for OSPFv2 when using Manual Key Management",
              draft-bhatia-karp-ospf-ip-layer-protection-03 (work in
              progress), February 2011.

   [I-D.ietf-karp-threats-reqs]
              Lebovitz, G., Bhatia, M., and R. White, "The Threat
              Analysis and Requirements for Cryptographic Authentication



Bhatia, et al.          Expires September 8, 2011               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft    Solving Inter-Session Replay Attacks        March 2011


              of Routing Protocols' Transports",
              draft-ietf-karp-threats-reqs-01 (work in progress),
              October 2010.

   [I-D.ietf-ospf-auth-trailer-ospfv3]
              Bhatia, M., Manral, V., and A. Lindem, "Supporting
              Authentication Trailer for OSPFv3",
              draft-ietf-ospf-auth-trailer-ospfv3-03 (work in progress),
              February 2011.

   [RFC4302]  Kent, S., "IP Authentication Header", RFC 4302,
              December 2005.

   [RFC4303]  Kent, S., "IP Encapsulating Security Payload (ESP)",
              RFC 4303, December 2005.

   [RFC4306]  Kaufman, C., "Internet Key Exchange (IKEv2) Protocol",
              RFC 4306, December 2005.

   [RFC5709]  Bhatia, M., Manral, V., Fanto, M., White, R., Barnes, M.,
              Li, T., and R. Atkinson, "OSPFv2 HMAC-SHA Cryptographic
              Authentication", RFC 5709, October 2009.

   [RFC6039]  Manral, V., Bhatia, M., Jaeggli, J., and R. White, "Issues
              with Existing Cryptographic Protection Methods for Routing
              Protocols", RFC 6039, October 2010.


Authors' Addresses

   Manav Bhatia
   Alcatel-Lucent
   India

   Email: manav.bhatia@alcatel-lucent.com


   Sam Hartman
   Painless Security
   USA

   Email: hartmans@painless-security.com









Bhatia, et al.          Expires September 8, 2011               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft    Solving Inter-Session Replay Attacks        March 2011


   Dacheng Zhang
   Huawei
   China

   Email: zhangdacheng@huawei.com














































Bhatia, et al.          Expires September 8, 2011              [Page 10]


