


Network Working Group                                           J. Arkko
Internet-Draft                                                  Ericsson
Intended status: Informational                              July 9, 2012
Expires: January 10, 2013


              Experiences from Cross-Area Work at the IETF
                     draft-arkko-iesg-crossarea-01

Abstract

   This memo discusses the reasons for IETF work on topics that cross
   area boundaries.  Such cross-area work presents challenges for the
   organization of the IETF as well as on how interested parties can
   participate the work.  The memo also provides some suggestions on
   managing these challenges.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 10, 2013.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2012 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.



Arkko                   Expires January 10, 2013                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft               Cross-Area Work                   July 2012


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Examples of Cross-Area Work  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   3.  Rationale for Cross-Area Work  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   4.  Challenges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   5.  Recommendations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   6.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   Appendix A.  Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10









































Arkko                   Expires January 10, 2013                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft               Cross-Area Work                   July 2012


1.  Introduction

   This memo discusses IETF work that crosses area boundaries.  Some
   examples about such work are given in Section 2.  The reasons for
   initiating work that involves cross-area aspects are discussed in
   Section 3.  From the perspective of a participant interested in a
   specific effort, the area designations matter little.  If the work is
   interesting, the necessary people come to the meetings and work on
   the specifications.  However, cross-area work does present some
   challenges for the organization of the IETF as well as on how
   interested parties can participate the work.  These issues are
   discussed in Section 4.  Finally, Section 5 provides some suggestions
   on managing these challenges in an effective way.


2.  Examples of Cross-Area Work

   Many IETF efforts cross area boundaries.  Some recent examples of
   such work include:

   o  The development of a routing-protocol based bridging model.  This
      work has been going on in the TRILL WG on the Internet Area and in
      parallel in the ISIS WG on the Routing Area.

   o  The work that started in 2008-2009 to address impending IPv4
      address runout and remaining needs for transition mechanisms to
      support IPv6 deployment.  This was worked on in the V6OPS WG on
      the Operations and Management Area, in the BEHAVE WG on the
      Transport Area, and in the SOFTWIRE WG on the Internet Area.

   o  The HOMENET WG is developing automatic provisioning tools for home
      networks and will require assistance from, for instance, Routing
      Area WGs to build the necessary routing protocol zero-
      configuration extensions.

   o  The RENUM WG on the Operations and Management Area is addressing
      renumbering issues, but will have to work with other areas if
      changes or extensions to specific protocols are required.

   o  The allocation of a new private address space to employ a shared
      address for multiple subscribers in networks employing NAT44 was
      discussed in the INTAREA, OPSAREA, BEHAVE, and V6OPS WGs.

   o  The LWIG WG on the Internet Area is documenting existing practices
      for creating lightweight implementations of the TCP/IP stack and
      application protocols.  Specific recommendations on transport and
      application protocols obviously need participation from those
      areas, however.



Arkko                   Expires January 10, 2013                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft               Cross-Area Work                   July 2012


   o  The Routing Area, Transport Area, and Security Area have worked
      together on security mechanisms and key management tools necessary
      to secure BGP sessions carried on top of TCP.  For instance, the
      KARP working group is in the Routing Area, but is clearly focused
      on topics more generally found in the Security Area.

   o  Many IETF topics involve operational aspects as well as protocol
      development.  For instance, issues with address selection policies
      have been discussed in the V6OPS WG on the Operations and
      Management Area, and solutions for these problems were taken up by
      the 6MAN WG on the Internet Area.


3.  Rationale for Cross-Area Work

   From an IETF participant's point of view, it is important that there
   is a working group where the technical topic that he or she is
   interested in can be discussed.  The area and the management
   structure matters little for this, as long as the working group can
   work on all the relevant aspects.  These aspects, may, however,
   involve different types of expertise or topics commonly handled in
   different groups of people at the IETF.  Cross-area work is needed,
   of course, in any situation where a particular technical problem does
   not cleanly map to one organization.  For instance, some problems may
   be more about the entire system than any individual node or protocol
   layer.  The work done in the RENUM and LWIG WGs falls into this
   category, for instance.

   In other cases different organizations may have specific expertise
   that is helpful to solve a problem.  For instance, some models of
   interworking between IPv4 and IPv6 required expertise both from the
   specialists on IPv6 on the Internet Area and the specialists on
   translation tools on the Transport Area.  A common form of providing
   expertise from multiple areas involves operational aspects and
   protocol development.  Such work often happens in a sequential
   manner.  The operators first discuss practical problems, then provide
   suggestions for operational ways to contain the problems, and
   eventually may ask for new solutions to reduce these problems.  The
   actual solution work is then taken up by the relevant technical
   community that works on the protocol that needs to be extended.

   Another common example of a situation where two different areas of
   expertise are needed is developing security features for a protocol.
   The protocol specialists are needed to understand the application and
   its requirements and the security specialists are needed to help with
   understanding the possible security issues and potential solutions.
   Such work is commonly not organized as cross-area work, however.
   Typically, a "security advisor" is assigned to a protocol working



Arkko                   Expires January 10, 2013                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft               Cross-Area Work                   July 2012


   group.  The advisor and other security experts merely attend the
   group.  The same model is used, for instance, with MIB doctors and is
   also often used to provide routing area expertise.  However, in some
   cases the need to work together goes beyond such individual
   participation.  For instance, the security mechanisms and their key
   management tools necessary to secure BGP sessions carried on top of
   TCP have led to the creation of significant efforts both in the
   Routing and Security Areas.

   Sometimes a large body of work is split into different parts merely
   to share the workload.  The IPv6 transition topic has been so big for
   the IETF that part of the reason for splitting the work to three
   areas was to ensure there was enough participants, chairs, and area
   directors to handle the workload.


4.  Challenges

   Cross-area work does present some challenges, however.  Apart from
   the advisor model there are no established practices and the
   processes and division of responsibility differs from case to case
   [RFC2026].

   Some of the issues include:

   Fuzzy Hot Topics

      Many recently proposed "hot" areas of work for the IETF have been
      on vaguely defined topics that cover many possible areas.  For
      instance, work on new technologies for data centers or cloud
      computing.  In many cases it is unclear if the topic is truly a
      cross-area topic through some fundamental reason, or if the IETF
      has just not succeeded yet in teasing out concrete tasks from this
      topic.  For instance, while data center networking in general is a
      very broad topic, specific improvements on ARP performance
      discussed in the ARMD WG is a clearly identifiable topic that
      falls on the Internet Area as soon as it becomes clear that there
      is operational evidence for the need to make ARP modifications.

   Area Shopping

      If the IESG does not manage the process in an coordinated manner,
      this can lead to "area shopping" where a particular topic is being
      discussed in several areas and working groups and may be taken up
      in one area even if if dismissed in others.  This may be fine, if
      the decision is made due to the topic fitting better an area.  But
      it is also possible that concerns raised in one forum are not
      understood in another, and this can lead to an effort going



Arkko                   Expires January 10, 2013                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft               Cross-Area Work                   July 2012


      forward after finding the "lowest bar" forum to take it up.

   Lack of Common IESG Vision

      In many of the complex cross-area topics, the IESG has initially
      had no strategy on how the work shall be divided, or even on the
      goals.  The IESG has also had several internal arguments over some
      topics.  Clearly, establishing a common vision between the
      relevant ADs for how to proceed with a given topic is essential
      for a successful outcome.  Part of the problem here is that IESG
      does not normally develop a master plan, but rather individual
      documents and charter proposals are brought to the IESG in a
      piecemeal fashion, one by one.  This can cause surprises.
      Similarly, the yearly changes to the people on the IESG may change
      the position that IESG members have on a topic, which again can
      lead to surprises to the community.

      These problems exist both for specific efforts and the general
      strategies for handling cross-area work.  IESG members have had
      varying opinions on whether to create specific, formally
      recognized cross-area working groups or handle them in some other
      way.

   Problem Ownership

      A more common issue is that the different organizations typically
      have different motivations.  A group of developers may be very
      interested in solving, say, a bridging problem in a particular way
      and funded full time by their employers to do this work.  If this
      group is dependent on some other people on making changes to a
      technology that they are in charge of, it is likely that there is
      no similar level of commitment.  The other people are unlikely to
      be able to spend all their time on this project, for instance.
      This creates an eventual tussle between different interests and
      may lead to frustration and different expectations on the
      timelines necessary for the work.

      Of course, the other side of the issue is that in most cases it
      would not be a good idea to let the first group develop the
      necessary changes by themselves either.  Often the second group is
      the true expert on the technology and needs to be involved in
      order for a change to be done so that it does not cause breakage
      elsewhere.

   Rigid Topic Ownership

      A related issue is that topic ownership should not necessarily be
      static over time.  Sometimes it makes sense to review and change



Arkko                   Expires January 10, 2013                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft               Cross-Area Work                   July 2012


      the area that is responsible for a particular topic.  Many working
      groups and topics have moved back and forth between Internet and
      Routing or Applications and Transport areas, for instance.  A
      periodic review and re-assessment is encouraged.

   Attention Focus

      It is natural for the leaders of an organization to develop a
      closer relationship with work within their own part of the
      organization.  An AD may make a status check with his own WG
      chairs, for instance, but not with those on neighboring areas
      working on another half of some common topic.

   Scheduling

      Current IETF scheduling principle is centered around a sequences
      of meetings of working groups in the same area.  This makes it
      possible for someone to follow all meetings in his or hers area,
      and enables the ADs to attend all the meetings they have to.
      Cross-area work breaks this principle, as, for instance, technical
      experts on some commonly used technology now may have to attend a
      meeting from another area.  The same applies to ADs and chairs.
      This has been a practical problem for Internet Area ADs, for
      instance, as they have to attend V6OPS and BEHAVE WG meetings in
      addition to their own, but this is not readily apparent to the
      people who perform scheduling.

   Process vs. Substance

      Finally, in recent years there has been a tendency to take up
      organizational discussions in the precious few hours that we have
      for face-to-face discussions at the IETF.  The author believes
      that it would be most useful to reserve the face-to-face
      discussion time for the difficult technical topics, and the
      relevant chairs and ADs should decide organizational matters off-
      line after a consultation with the list.

      Cross-area and cross-WG work, duplicated presentations in multiple
      forums, and formal messages between groups are usually not good
      signs about the health of a standards organization.  Too much time
      may be spent on internal discussions, and too little on technical
      substance, running code, and customer or user input.


5.  Recommendations

   There are no hard and fast rules for complex development efforts that
   span multiple areas of expertise.  However, the author believes that



Arkko                   Expires January 10, 2013                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft               Cross-Area Work                   July 2012


   experience has shown the following guidelines can improve the
   situation in many cases.

   1.   Complex organizational structure should not be initiated
        lightly.  It should be reserved for situations that truly demand
        it.  Re-organization and moving responsibilities to one place
        should be considered as alternatives.

   2.   People matter, organizations do not.  The essence of most cross-
        area work is getting the right expertise to the room and to the
        list.  This does not happen through mere organizational forms,
        people have to be interested about the problem.

           Example: The IPv6 transition problem has been such an
           interesting issue for a large class of IETF contributors that
           a significant number of key participants appear in the
           relevant meetings no matter what area or working group they
           are under.

   3.   Chair and advisor selection.  Given that people matter, many
        cross-area issues can be solved through assigning suitable
        people to act as chairs and technical advisors.  For instance,
        many groups have one chair focused on protocol aspects and
        another one focused on operational aspects.  Typically, the
        first type of a chair has protocol design and implementation
        experience in the topic, and the second one may be operating
        networks and may have an Operations and Management Area
        background.

   4.   Cross-area review.  Similarly, expertise is not brought in by an
        area designation, it is brought through the right people
        actually reading the specifications.  Encouraging cross-area
        review is therefore helpful, for instance through directorates
        assigned to review important documents from other areas.

   5.   Ensure that the IESG has a clear understanding of the topic area
        and the plan ahead.  It is recommended that the IESG discusses
        the division of responsibilities and the plan for any major
        cross-area effort upfront, and documents the agreed plan in
        writing.  Plans may naturally have to be revisited, as
        understanding the needs for further work is a continuous
        process.  In addition, as the membership of the IESG evolves, it
        is necessary to ensure that the new members are happy with the
        plan.

   6.   As with every topic, the management (IESG and working group
        chairs) need to make it clear to participants what the work plan
        is.  Who is responsible for what?  What is in scope for a



Arkko                   Expires January 10, 2013                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft               Cross-Area Work                   July 2012


        working group?  Can additional items outside this scope be taken
        elsewhere, and if so, where?  When a working group closes, where
        are remaining items and maintenance topics expected to be
        handled?

   7.   The best examples of successful cross-area work involve
        combining two pieces of expertise, with both parties having an
        incentive to complete the work.

   8.   One good model that has been used in the Internet Area employs a
        protocol detail working group and a consumer working group.

        This model has been used with work that touches upon the DHCP
        protocol, for instance.  There are always two working groups:
        the protocol working group and the consumer working group.  The
        DHC WG is not chartered to develop any extensions except for
        maintaining the DHCP infrastructure itself.  Extensions for a
        specific application purpose (such as delivering location
        information) must be owned by some other working group that is
        chartered to develop those applications (such as the GEOPRIV WG
        in the Real-Time Applications Area).  The role of this consumer
        working group is to drive the development of the entire
        application where a DHCP option may play a small role.

        The role of the DHC WG is to ensure that the DHCP aspects of
        these extensions are properly designed.  It is often easy to see
        how the DHCP experts are clearly better at designing the right
        container and behavior model for the DHCP part, and how the
        consumer working group experts clearly understand the semantics
        and needs for the actual data much better.

        Division of responsibilities in this manner is encouraged in
        other situations as well.

   9.   Scheduling models for the IETF should take cross-area work into
        account in a better way.  Possible tools to improve this include
        ability to specify ADs from multiple areas as interested in a
        working group or the ability to specify entire areas as
        conflicts in the meeting request tool.

   10.  In general, the ability to associate work with all the areas
        that it relates to will be helpful not just for scheduling, but
        also for participants following an area of work, review teams,
        and so on.







Arkko                   Expires January 10, 2013                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft               Cross-Area Work                   July 2012


6.  Informative References

   [RFC2026]  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision
              3", BCP 9, RFC 2026, October 1996.


Appendix A.  Acknowledgments

   The author would like to thank the rest of the IESG for inspiring
   discussions around the IETF processes.  In particular, Dan Romascanu,
   Adrian Farrell, Russ Housley, Lars Eggert, David Harrington, Ron
   Bonica, Ralph Droms, Brian Haberman, Robert Sparks, and Stewart
   Bryant provided input.  Nothing in this draft should be interpreted
   as an IESG opinion, however, as the draft is the author's opinion
   only.

   The author would also like to thank Joel Halpern, Keith Moore, Paul
   Hoffman, Samita Chakrabarti, Melinda Shore, Barry Leiba, JW Atwood,
   Tom Petch, Wesley George, Thomas Narten, and Dan Wing for feedback.


Author's Address

   Jari Arkko
   Ericsson
   Jorvas  02420
   Finland

   Email: jari.arkko@piuha.net






















Arkko                   Expires January 10, 2013               [Page 10]

