CCAMP Working Group  
Internet Draft                                      
                                                           Zafar Ali 
                                               Jean-Philippe Vasseur 
                                                         Anca Zamfir 
                                                 Cisco Systems, Inc. 
                                                     Jonathan Newton 
                                                  Cable and Wireless 
                                                                     
Category: Informational 
Expires: July 19, 2010                              January 20, 2010 
 
                                   
           draft-ietf-ccamp-mpls-graceful-shutdown-13.txt 
 
           Graceful Shutdown in MPLS and Generalized MPLS  
                    Traffic Engineering Networks 
 
 
Status of this Memo 

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance
   with the provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79. This document may
   contain material from IETF Documents or IETF Contributions
   published or made publicly available before November 10, 2008.
   The person(s) controlling the copyright in some of this material
   may not have granted the IETF Trust the right to allow
   modifications of such material outside the IETF Standards
   Process.  Without obtaining an adequate license from the
   person(s) controlling the copyright in such materials, this
   document may not be modified outside the IETF Standards Process,
   and derivative works of it may not be created outside the IETF
   Standards Process, except to format it for publication as an RFC
   or to translate it into languages other than English.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet
   Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working
   groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute working
   documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other
   documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-
   Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than as "work
   in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on July 19, 2010.

                        Expires July 2010                   [Page 1]   
 
      draft-ietf-ccamp-mpls-graceful-shutdown-13.txt      

Copyright

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors. All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document. Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with
   respect to this document. Code Components extracted from this
   document must include Simplified BSD License text as described
   in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided
   without warranty as described in the Simplified BSD License.

Abstract 
 
   MPLS-TE Graceful Shutdown is a method for explicitly notifying 
   the nodes in a Traffic Engineering (TE) enabled network that the 
   TE capability on a link or on an entire Label Switching Router 
   (LSR) is going to be disabled. MPLS-TE graceful shutdown 
   mechanisms are tailored toward addressing planned outage in the 
   network.  
    
   This document provides requirements and protocol mechanisms to 
   reduce/eliminate traffic disruption in the event of a planned 
   shutdown of a network resource. These operations are equally 
   applicable to both MPLS-TE and its Generalized MPLS (GMPLS) 
   extensions.  
 
Table of Contents 
 
1. Introduction....................................................2 
2. Terminology.....................................................3 
3. Requirements for Graceful Shutdown..............................4 
4. Mechanisms for Graceful Shutdown................................5 
 4.1 OSPF/ ISIS Mechanisms for graceful shutdown...................5 
 4.2 RSVP-TE Signaling Mechanisms for graceful shutdown............6 
5. Manageability Considerations....................................7
6. Security Considerations.........................................8 
7. IANA Considerations.............................................8 
8. Acknowledgments.................................................8 
9. Reference.......................................................8 
 9.1 Normative Reference...........................................8 
 9.2 Informative Reference.........................................8 
10. Authors' Address:..............................................9 

1. Introduction 
 
   When outages in a network are planned (e.g., for maintenance 
   purposes), some mechanisms can be used to avoid traffic 
   disruption. This is in contrast with unplanned network element 
   failure, where traffic disruption can be minimized thanks to 
   recovery mechanisms, but may not be avoided. Therefore, a Service   
                                                           
                         Expires July 2010                  [Page 2]
 
      draft-ietf-ccamp-mpls-graceful-shutdown-13.txt      

   Provider may desire to gracefully (temporarily or indefinitely) 
   remove a TE Link, a group of TE Links or an entire node for 
   administrative reasons such as link maintenance, 
   software/hardware upgrade at a node or significant TE 
   configuration changes. In all these cases, the goal is to 
   minimize the impact on the traffic carried over TE LSPs in the 
   network by triggering notifications so as to gracefully reroute 
   such flows before the administrative procedures are started. 
 
   These operations are equally applicable to both MPLS-TE [RFC3209] 
   and its Generalized MPLS (GMPLS) extensions [RFC3471], [RFC3473]. 
    
   This document describes the mechanisms that can be used to 
   gracefully shutdown MPLS-TE/ GMPLS Traffic Engineering on a 
   resource such as a TE link, a component link within a bundled TE 
   link, a label resource or an entire TE node.  
    
   Graceful shutdown of a resource may require several steps. These 
   steps can be broadly divided into two sets: disabling the 
   resource in the control plane and disabling the resource in the 
   data plane. The node initiating the graceful shutdown condition 
   introduces a delay between the two sets to allow the control 
   plane to gracefully divert the traffic away from the resource 
   being gracefully shutdown. The trigger for the graceful shutdown 
   event is a local matter at the node initiating the graceful 
   shutdown. Typically, graceful shutdown is triggered for 
   administrative reasons, such as link maintenance or 
   software/hardware upgrade.  
    
2. Terminology 
  
   LSR: Label Switching Router. The terms node and LSR are used 
   interchangeably in this document.  
    
   GMPLS: The term GMPLS is used in this document to refer to packet 
   MPLS-TE, as well as GMPLS extensions to MPLS-TE.  
    
   TE Link: The term TE link refers to single or a bundle of 
   physical links or FA-LSPs (see below) on which traffic 
   engineering is enabled. 
    
   TE LSP: A Traffic Engineered Label Switched Path. 
    
   S-LSP: A segment of a TE LSP 
    
   FA-LSP (Forwarding Adjacency LSP): An LSP that is announced as a 
   TE link into the same instance of the GMPLS control plane as the 
   one that was used to create the LSP [RFC4206]. 
    
   ISIS-LSP: Link State Packets generated by ISIS routers and that 
   contain routing information. 
    
   LSA: Link State Advertisements generated by OSPF routers and that 
   contain routing information. 
                                                             
                         Expires July 2010                  [Page 3] 
 
      draft-ietf-ccamp-mpls-graceful-shutdown-13.txt      
 
   TE-LSA/ TE-ISIS-LSP: The traffic engineering extensions to OSPF/ 
   ISIS. 

   Head-end node: Ingress LSR that initiated signaling for the Path. 
    
   Border node: Ingress LSR of a TE LSP segment (S-LSP).   

   PCE (Path Computation Element): An entity that computes the 
   routes on behalf of its clients (PCC) [RFC4655]. 
 
    
   Last resort resource: If a path to a destination from a given 
   head-end node cannot be found upon removal of a resource (e.g., 
   TE link, TE node), the resource is called last resort to reach 
   that destination from the given head-end node.  
 
3. Requirements for Graceful Shutdown 
 
   This section lists the requirements for graceful shutdown in the 
   context of GMPLS. 
 
   - Graceful shutdown is required to address graceful removal of 
   one TE link, one component link within a bundled TE link, a set 
   of TE links, a set of component links, label resources, or an 
   entire node.  
    
   - Once an operator has initiated graceful shutdown of a network 
   resource, no new TE LSPs may be set up that use the resource. 
   Any signaling message for a new TE LSP that explicitly specifies 
   the resource, or that would require the use of the resource due 
   to local constraints, is required to be rejected as if the 
   resource were unavailable. 
    
   - It is desirable for new TE LSP setup attempts that would be 
   rejected because of graceful shutdown of a resource (as described 
   in the previous requirement) to avoid any attempt to use the 
   resource by selecting an alternate route or other resources. 
 
   - If the resource being shut down is a last resort resource, 
   based on a local decision, the node initiating the graceful 
   shutdown procedure can cancel the shutdown operation.
     
   - It is required to give the ingress node the opportunity to take 
   actions in order to reduce/eliminate traffic disruption on the TE 
   LSPs that are using the network resources which are about to be 
   shut down.  
 
   - Graceful shutdown mechanisms are equally applicable to intra-
   domain and TE LSPs spanning multiple domains, as defined in 
   [RFC4726]. Examples of such domains include IGP areas and 
   Autonomous Systems.  
    
   - Graceful shutdown is equally applicable to packet and non-
   packet networks. 
                                                             
                         Expires July 2010                  [Page 4] 
 
      draft-ietf-ccamp-mpls-graceful-shutdown-13.txt      

 
   - In order to make rerouting effective, it is required that when 
     a node initiates the graceful shutdown of a resource, it 
     identifies to all other network nodes the TE resource under 
     graceful shutdown. 
   - Depending on switching technology, it may be possible to shut 
     down a label resource, e.g., shutting down a lambda in a Lambda 
     Switch Capable (LSC) node.  
 
 
4. Mechanisms for Graceful Shutdown 
 
   An IGP only solution based on [RFC3630], [RFC5305], [RFC4203] and 
   [RFC5307] is not applicable when dealing with inter-area and 
   inter-AS traffic engineering, as IGP flooding is restricted to 
   IGP areas/levels. An RSVP based solution is proposed in this 
   document to handle TE LSPs spanning multiple domains. 
   In addition, in order to prevent LSRs in a domain to use the 
   resource being shut down. 
   In addition, in order to discourage nodes from establishing new 
   TE LSPs through the resources being shutdown, existing IGP 
   mechanisms are used for the shutdown notification.  
    
   A node where a link or the whole node is being shutdown first 
   triggers the IGP updates as described in Section 4.1 and then, 
   with some delay to allow network convergence, uses the signaling 
   mechanism described in Section 4.2. 
    
 
4.1 OSPF/ ISIS Mechanisms for graceful shutdown 
 
   This section describes the use of existing OSPF and ISIS 
   mechanisms for the graceful shutdown in GMPLS networks. 
 
   The OSPF and ISIS procedures for graceful shutdown of TE links 
   are similar to the graceful restart of OSPF and ISIS as described 
   in [RFC4203] and [RFC5307], respectively. Specifically, the node 
   where graceful shutdown of a link is desired originates the TE 
   LSA/ISIS-LSP containing a Link TLV for the link under graceful 
   shutdown with Traffic Engineering metric set to 0xffffffff, 0 as 
   unreserved bandwidth, and if the TE link has LSC or FSC as its 
   Switching Capability then also with 0 in the "Max LSP Bandwidth" 
   field of the Interface Switching Capability Descriptor (ISCD) 
   sub-TLV. A node may also specify a value which is greater than 
   the available bandwidth in the "Minimum LSP bandwidth" field of 
   the same ISCD sub-TLV. This would discourage new TE LSP 
   establishment through the link under graceful shutdown.  
    
   If graceful shutdown procedure is performed for a component link 
   within a TE Link bundle and it is not the last component link 
   available within the TE link, the link attributes associated with 
   the TE link are recomputed. Similarly, If graceful shutdown 
   procedure is performed on a label resource within a TE Link, the 
                                                             
                         Expires July 2010                  [Page 5] 
 
      draft-ietf-ccamp-mpls-graceful-shutdown-13.txt    
 

   link attributes associated with the TE link are recomputed. If 
   the removal of the component link or label resource results in a 
   significant bandwidth change event, a new LSA is originated with 
   the new traffic parameters. If the last component link is being 
   shut down, the routing procedure related to TE link removal is 
   used.  
 
   Neighbors of the node where graceful shutdown procedure is in 
   progress continue to advertise the actual unreserved bandwidth of 
   the TE links from the neighbors to that node, without any routing 
   adjacency change.  
 
   When graceful shutdown at node level is desired, the node in 
   question follows the procedure specified in the previous section 
   for all TE Links.  
 
 
4.2 RSVP-TE Signaling Mechanisms for graceful shutdown 
 
   As discussed in Section 3, one of the requirements for the 
   signaling mechanism for graceful shutdown is to carry information 
   about the resource under graceful shutdown. For this purpose the 
   Graceful Shutdown uses TE LSP rerouting mechanism as defined in 
   [RFC5710].  
    
   Specifically, the node where graceful shutdown of an unbundled TE 
   link or an entire bundled TE link is desired triggers a PathErr 
   message with the error code "Notify" and error value "Local link 
   maintenance required", for all affected TE LSPs. Similarly, the 
   node that is being gracefully shut down triggers a PathErr 
   message with the error code "Notify" and error value "Local node 
   maintenance required", for all TE LSPs. For graceful shutdown of 
   a node, an unbundled TE link or an entire bundled TE link, the 
   PathErr message may contain either an [RFC2205] format ERROR_SPEC 
   object, or an IF_ID [RFC3473] format ERROR_SPEC object. In either 
   case, it is the address and TLVs carried by the ERROR_SPEC object 
   and not the error value that indicates the resource that is to be 
   gracefully shut down. 
    
   MPLS TE Link Bundling [RFC4201] requires that an TE LSP is pinned 
   down to a component link. Consequently, graceful shutdown of a 
   component link in a bundled TE link differs from graceful 
   shutdown of unbundled TE link or entire bundled TE link. 
   Specifically, in the former case, when only a subset of component 
   links and not the entire bundled TE link is being shutdown, the 
   remaining component links of the bundled TE link may still be 
   able to admit new TE LSPs. The node where graceful shutdown of a 
   component link is desired triggers a PathErr message with the 
   error code "Notify" and error value of "Local link maintenance 
   required". The rest of the ERROR_SPEC object is constructed using 
   Component Reroute Request procedure defined in [RFC5710].  

                         Expires July 2010                  [Page 6]
 
      draft-ietf-ccamp-mpls-graceful-shutdown-13.txt      


   If graceful shutdown of a label resource is desired, the node 
   initiating this action triggers a PathErr message with the error 
   codes and error values of "Notify/Local link maintenance 
   required". The rest of the ERROR_SPEC object is constructed using 
   Label Reroute Request procedure defined in [RFC5710].   
 
   When a head-end node, a transit node or a border node receives a 
   PathErr message with the error code "Notify" and error value 
   "Local link maintenance required" or "Local node maintenance 
   required", it follows the procedures defined in [RFC5710] to 
   reroute the traffic around the resource being gracefully 
   shutdown. When performing path computation for the new TE LSP, 
   the head-end node, or border node avoids using the TE resources 
   identified by the ERROR_SPEC object. If PCE is used for path 
   computation, head-end (or border) node acting as PCC specifies in 
   its requests to the PCE that path computation should avoid the 
   resource being gracefully shutdown. The amount of time the head-
   end node, or border node avoids using the TE resources identified 
   by the IP address contained in the PathErr is based on a local 
   decision at head-end node or border node.  
    
   If the node initiating the graceful shutdown procedure receives a 
   path setup request for a new tunnel using resource being 
   gracefully shutdown, it sends a Path Error message with "Notify" 
   error code in the ERROR SPEC object and an error value consistent 
   with the type of resource being gracefully shut down. However, 
   based on a local decision, if an existing tunnel continues to use 
   the resource being gracefully shutdown, the node initiating the 
   graceful shutdown procedure may allow resource being gracefully 
   shutdown to be used as a "last resort". The node initiating the 
   graceful shutdown procedure can distinguish between new and 
   existing tunnels by inspecting the SENDER TEMPLATE and SESSION 
   objects.  

   If the resource being shut down is a last resort resource, it 
   can be used, i.e., based on a local decision the node initiating 
   the graceful shutdown procedure can cancel the shutdown operation.
   Similarly, based on a local decision the node initiating 
   the graceful shutdown procedure can delay the actual removal of 
   resource for forwarding. This is to give time to network to move 
   traffic from the resource being shutdown. For this purpose, the 
   node initiating graceful shutdown procedure follows the Reroute 
   Request Timeout procedure defined in [RFC5710].  
   
5. Manageability Considerations

   When a TE link is being showdown, a linkDown trap as defined in 
   [RFC2863] should be generated for the TE link. Similarly, if a 
   bundled TE links is being showdown, a linkDown trap as defined 
   in [RFC2863] should be generated for the bundled TE link, as well 
   as for each of its component links. If a TE node is being  
   shutdown, a linkDown trap as defined in [RFC2863] should be 
   generated for all TE links at the node. 
                                                             
                         Expires July 2010                  [Page 7]
 
      draft-ietf-ccamp-mpls-graceful-shutdown-13.txt      

6. Security Considerations 
 
   This document introduces no new security considerations as this  
   document describes usage of existing formats and mechanisms. This 
   document relies on existing procedures for advertisement of TE 
   LSA/ISIS-LSP containing Link TLV. Tampering with TE LSAs/ISIS-
   LSPs may have an effect on traffic engineering computations, and 
   it is suggested that any mechanisms used for securing the 
   transmission of normal LSAs/ISIS-LSPs be applied equally to all 
   Opaque LSAs/ISIS-LSPs this document uses.  Existing security 
   considerations specified in [RFC3630], [RFC5305], [RFC4203], 
   [RFC5307] and [MPLS-GMPLS-SECURITY] remain relevant and suffice. 
   Furthermore, security considerations section in [RFC5710] and 
   section 9 of [RFC4736] should be used for understanding the 
   security considerations related to the formats and mechanisms 
   used in this document. 
 
7. IANA Considerations 
    
   This document has no IANA actions. 
 
8. Acknowledgments 
 
   The authors would like to thank Adrian Farrel for his detailed 
   comments and suggestions. The authors would also like to 
   acknowledge useful comments from David Ward, Sami Boutros, and 
   Dimitri Papadimitriou.  
 
9. Reference 
 
9.1 Normative Reference 
 
   [RFC2205] Braden, R. Ed. et al, "Resource ReSerVation Protocol 
   (RSVP) Version 1, Functional Specification", RFC 2205.  
    
   [RFC5710] Berger, L., Papadimitriou, D., and J. Vasseur, 
   "PathErr Message Triggered MPLS and GMPLS LSP Reroute", 
   RFC5710. 
 
9.2 Informative Reference 
 
   [RFC3209] Awduche D., Berger, L., Gan, D., Li T., Srinivasan, V., 
   Swallow, G., "RSVP-TE: Extensions to RSVP for LSP Tunnels", RFC 
   3209. 
 
   [RFC4736] Jean-Philippe Vasseur, et al "Reoptimization of MPLS 
   Traffic Engineering loosely routed LSP paths", RFC 4736.  
     
   [RFC3630] Katz D., Kompella K., Yeung D., "Traffic Engineering 
   (TE) Extensions to OSPF Version 2", RFC 3630.  
    
   [RFC5305] Smit, H. and T. Li, "Intermediate System to 
   Intermediate System (IS-IS) Extensions for Traffic Engineering 
   (TE)", RFC 5305. 
                                                             
                         Expires July 2010                  [Page 8]
 
      draft-ietf-ccamp-mpls-graceful-shutdown-13.txt      

    
   [RFC4203] Kompella, K., Ed., and Y. Rekhter, Ed., "OSPF 
   Extensions in Support of Generalized Multi-Protocol Label 
   Switching (GMPLS)", RFC 4203.  
    
   [RFC5307]  Kompella, K., Ed., and Y. Rekhter, Ed., "Intermediate 
   System to Intermediate System (IS-IS) Extensions in Support of 
   Generalized Multi-Protocol Label Switching (GMPLS)", RFC 5307. 

   [RFC3471]  Berger, L., "Generalized Multi-Protocol Label 
   Switching (GMPLS) Signaling Functional Description", RFC 3471. 
    
   [RFC3473]  Berger, L., "Generalized Multi-Protocol Label 
   Switching (GMPLS) Signaling Resource ReserVation Protocol-Traffic 
   Engineering (RSVP-TE) Extensions", RFC 3473. 
    
     
   [RFC4726] Farrel A, Vasseur, J.-P., Ayyangar A., "A Framework for 
   Inter-Domain MPLS Traffic Engineering", RFC 4726, November 2006.  
     
   [RFC4201] Kompella, K., Rekhter, Y., Berger, L., "Link Bundling 
   in MPLS Traffic Engineering", RFC 4201. 
    
   [RFC4206] Kompella K., Rekhter Y., "Label Switched Paths (LSP) 
   Hierarchy with Generalized Multi-Protocol Label Switching (GMPLS) 
   Traffic Engineering (TE)", RFC 4206.  
    
   [RFC4655] A. Farrel, J.-P. Vasseur, J. Ash, "A Path Computation 
   Element (PCE)-Based Architecture", RFC 4655.

   [RFC2863] McCloghrie K., Kastenholz F., "The Interfaces Group 
   MIB", RFC 2863. 

   [MPLS-GMPLS-SECURITY] Luyuan F., Ed. "Security Framework for 
   MPLS and GMPLS Networks", draft-ietf-mpls-mpls-and-gmpls-
   security-framework, work in progress. 

 
10. Authors' Address: 
 
   Zafar Ali 
   Cisco systems, Inc., 
   2000 Innovation Drive         
   Kanata, Ontario, K2K 3E8 
   Canada.  
   Email: zali@cisco.com    

                         Expires July 2010                  [Page 9]
 
      draft-ietf-ccamp-mpls-graceful-shutdown-13.txt          
                                                             
   Jean Philippe Vasseur 
   Cisco Systems, Inc. 
   300 Beaver Brook Road 
   Boxborough , MA - 01719 
   USA 
   Email: jpv@cisco.com 
    
   Anca Zamfir 
   Cisco Systems, Inc.  
   2000 Innovation Drive  
   Kanata, Ontario, K2K 3E8  
   Canada 
   Email: ancaz@cisco.com  
    
   Jonathan Newton 
   Cable and Wireless 
   jonathan.newton@cw.com 
    

 
 
 

























                                                             
                         Expires July 2010                  [Page 10] 