Network Working Group                                            Y. Lee
Internet Draft                                                   Huawei
Intended status: Standards Track                           G. Bernstein
Expires: March 2012                                   Grotto Networking





                                                     September 14, 2011

    GMPLS OSPF Enhancement for Signal and Network Element Compatibility
                 for Wavelength Switched Optical Networks


          draft-ietf-ccamp-wson-signal-compatibility-ospf-06.txt


Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html

   This Internet-Draft will expire on March 14, 2007.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.






Lee and Bernstein       Expires March 14, 2012                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft OSPF Enhancement for WSON Signal Compatibility  September
2011


   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document. Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Abstract

   This document provides GMPLS OSPF routing enhancements to support
   signal compatibility constraints associated with WSON network
   elements. These routing enhancements are required in common optical
   or hybrid electro-optical networks where not all of the optical
   signals in the network are compatible with all network elements
   participating in the network.

   This compatibility constraint model is applicable to common optical
   or hybrid electro optical systems such as OEO switches, regenerators,
   and wavelength converters since such systems can be limited to
   processing only certain types of WSON signals.

Conventions used in this document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [RFC2119].

Table of Contents


   1. Introduction...................................................3
      1.1. Revision History..........................................3
   2. The Optical Node Property TLV..................................4
      2.1. Sub-TLV Details...........................................5
         2.1.1. Resource Block Information...........................5
         2.1.2. Resource Pool Accessibility..........................6
         2.1.3. Resource Block Wavelength Constraints................6
         2.1.4. Resource Pool State..................................6
         2.1.5. Block Shared Access Wavelength Availability..........6
   3. WSON Specific Scalability and Timeliness.......................7
      3.1. Different Sub-TLVs into Multiple LSAs.....................7
      3.2. Separating a Sub-TLV into Multiple LSAs...................8



Lee and Bernstein       Expires March 14, 2012                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft OSPF Enhancement for WSON Signal Compatibility  September
2011


         3.2.1. Sub-Division by Sets.................................8
         3.2.2. Sub-Division by Options..............................9
   4. Security Considerations.......................................10
   5. IANA Considerations...........................................10
   6. References....................................................12
      6.1. Normative References.....................................12
   7. Authors and Contributors......................................13
   Authors' Addresses...............................................13
   Intellectual Property Statement..................................14
   Disclaimer of Validity...........................................14

1. Introduction

   The documents [RFC6163, WSON-Info, WSON-Encode] explain how to extend
   the wavelength switched optical network (WSON) control plane to allow
   both multiple WSON signal types and common hybrid electro optical
   systems as well hybrid systems containing optical switching and
   electro-optical resources. In WSON, not all of the optical signals in
   the network are compatible with all network elements participating in
   the network. Therefore, signal compatibility is an important
   constraint in path computation in a WSON.

   This document provides GMPLS OSPF routing enhancements to support
   signal compatibility constraints associated with general WSON network
   elements. These routing enhancements are required in common optical
   or hybrid electro-optical networks where not all of the optical
   signals in the network are compatible with all network elements
   participating in the network.

   This compatibility constraint model is applicable to common optical
   or hybrid electro optical systems such as OEO switches, regenerators,
   and wavelength converters since such systems can be limited to
   processing only certain types of WSON signals.

   1.1. Revision History

   From 00 to 01: The details of the encodings for compatibility moved
   from this document to [WSON-Encode].

   From 01 to 02: Editorial changes.

   From 02 to 03: Add a new Top Level Node TLV, Optical Node Property
   TLV to carry WSON specific node information.





Lee and Bernstein       Expires March 14, 2012                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft OSPF Enhancement for WSON Signal Compatibility  September
2011


   From 03 to 04: Add a new sub-TLV, Block Shared Access Wavelength
   Availability TLV to be consistent with [WSON-Encode] and editorial
   changes.

   From 04 to 05: Add a new section that discusses OSPF scalability and
   timeliness and editorial changes.

   From 05 to 06: Change the title of the draft to "GMPLS OSPF
   Enhancement" from "OSPF Enhancement" to make sure the changes apply
   to the GMPLS OSPF rather than the base OSPF. Add specific OSPF
   procedures on how sub-TLVs are packaged per [RFC3630] and editorial
   changes.







2. The Optical Node Property TLV

   [RFC3630] defines OSPF TE LSA using an opaque LSA. This document adds
   a new top level TLV for use in the OSPF TE LSA: the Optical Node
   Property TLV. The Optical Node property TLV describes a single node.
   It is constructed of a set of sub-TLVs. There are no ordering
   requirements for the sub-TLVs. Only one Optical Node TLV shall be
   advertised in each LSA.

   The Optical Node Property TLV contains all WSON-specific node
   properties and signal compatibility constraints. The detailed
   encodings of these properties are defined in [WSON-Encode].

   The following sub-TLVs of the Optical Node Property TLV are defined:

   Value       Length      Sub-TLV Type

   TBA         variable    Resource Block Information
   TBA         variable    Resource Pool Accessibility
   TBA         variable    Resource Block Wavelength Constraints
   TBA         variable    Resource Pool State
   TBA         variable    Block Shared Access Wavelength Availability

   The detail encodings of these sub-TLVs are found in [WSON-Encode] as
   indicated in the table below.




Lee and Bernstein       Expires March 14, 2012                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft OSPF Enhancement for WSON Signal Compatibility  September
2011


   Sub-TLV Type                           Section [WSON-Encode]

   Resource Block Information                      4.1
   Resource Pool Accessibility                     3.1
   Resource Block Wavelength Constraints           3.2
   Resource Pool State                             3.3
   Block Shared Access Wavelength Availability     3.4





   All sub-TLVs defined here may occur at most once in any given Optical
   Node TLV. These restrictions need not apply to future sub-TLVs.
   Unrecognized sub-TLVs are ignored.

   2.1. Sub-TLV Details

   Among the sub-TLVs defined above, the Resource Pool State sub-TLV and
   Block Shared Access Wavelength Availability are dynamic in nature
   while the rest are static. As such, they can be separated out from
   the rest and be advertised with multiple TE LSAs per OSPF router, as
   described in [RFC3630] and [RFC5250].

   2.1.1. Resource Block Information

   Resource Block Information sub-TLVs are used to convey relatively
   static information about individual resource blocks including the
   resource block properties and the number of resources in a block.

   There are seven nested sub-TLVs defined in the Resource Block
   Information sub-TLV.

   Value          Length      Sub-TLV Type

   TBA            variable    Input Modulation Format List
   TBA            variable    Input FEC Type List
   TBA            variable    Input Bit Range List
   TBA            variable    Input Client Signal List
   TBA            variable    Processing Capability List
   TBA            variable    Output Modulation Format List
   TBA            variable    Output FEC Type List






Lee and Bernstein       Expires March 14, 2012                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft OSPF Enhancement for WSON Signal Compatibility  September
2011


   The detail encodings of these sub-TLVs are found in [WSON-Encode] as
   indicated in the table below.

   Name                             Section [WSON-Encode]

   Input Modulation Format List                 4.2
   Input FEC Type List                          4.3
   Input Bit Range List                         4.4
   Input Client Signal List                     4.5
   Processing Capability List                   4.6
   Output Modulation Format List                4.7
   Output FEC Type List                         4.8

   2.1.2. Resource Pool Accessibility

   This sub-TLV describes the structure of the resource pool in relation
   to the switching device. In particular it indicates the ability of an
   ingress port to reach a resource block and of a resource block to
   reach a particular egress port.

   2.1.3. Resource Block Wavelength Constraints

   Resources, such as wavelength converters, etc., may have a limited
   input or output wavelength ranges. Additionally, due to the structure
   of the optical system not all wavelengths can necessarily reach or
   leave all the resources. Resource Block Wavelength Constraints sub-
   TLV describe these properties.

   2.1.4. Resource Pool State

   This sub-TLV describes the usage state of a resource that can be
   encoded as either a list of 16 bit integer values or a bit map
   indicating whether a single resource is available or in use. This
   information can be relatively dynamic, i.e., can change when a
   connection is established or torn down.

   2.1.5. Block Shared Access Wavelength Availability

   Resources blocks may be accessed via a shared fiber. If this is the
   case then wavelength availability on these shared fibers is needed to
   understand resource availability.







Lee and Bernstein       Expires March 14, 2012                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft OSPF Enhancement for WSON Signal Compatibility  September
2011


3. WSON Specific Scalability and Timeliness

   This document has defined five sub-TLVs specific to WSON. The
   examples given in [WSON-Encode] show that very large systems, in
   terms of channel count, ports, or resources, can be very efficiently
   encoded. However there has been concern expressed that some possible
   systems may produce LSAs that exceed the IP Maximum Transmission Unit
   (MTU) and that methods be given to allow for the splitting of WSON
   specific LSA into smaller LSA that are under the MTU limit. This
   section presents a set of techniques that can be used for this
   purpose.

   3.1. Different Sub-TLVs into Multiple LSAs

   Five sub-TLVs are defined in this document:

     1. Resource Block Information
     2. Resource Pool Accessibility
     3. Resource Block Wavelength Constraints
     4. Resource Pool State
     5. Block Shared Access Wavelength Availability


   All these are carried in an Optical Node Property TLV (see Section 2
   for detail) of which there can be at most one in an LSA. Of these
   sub-TLVs the first three are relatively static, i.e., only would
   change with hardware changes or significant system reconfiguration.
   While the fourth and fifth are dynamic, meaning that they may change
   with LSP setup or teardown through the system. The most important
   technique for scalability and OSPF bandwidth reduction is to separate
   the dynamic information sub-TLVs from the static information sub-TLVs
   and advertise them in OSPF TE LSAs, each with the Optical Node
   Property TLV at the top level ([RFC3630 and RFC5250]).

   For LSA overhead reduction it is recommended to group as many of the
   three static sub-TLVs into the same LSA (within the Optical Node
   Property TLV). If the size of this LSA is greater than the MTU, then
   these sub-TLV can be packed into separate LSAs. From the point of
   view of path computation, the presence of the Resource Block
   Information sub-TLV indicates that resources exist in the system and
   may have signal compatibility or other constraints. The other four
   sub-TLVs indicate constraints on access to, and availability of those
   resources.





Lee and Bernstein       Expires March 14, 2012                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft OSPF Enhancement for WSON Signal Compatibility  September
2011


   Hence the "synchronization" procedure from a path computation point
   of view is quite simple. Until a Resource Block Information sub-TLV
   is received for a system path cannot make use of the other four sub-
   TLVs since it does not know the nature of the resources, e.g., are
   the resources wavelength converters, regenerators, or something else.
   Once this sub-TLV is received path computation can proceed with
   whatever of the additional types of sub-TLVs it may have received
   (there use is dependent upon the system type). If path computation
   proceeds with out of date or missing information from these sub-TLVs
   then there is the possibility of either (a) path computation
   computing a path that does not exist in the network, (b) path
   computation failing to find a path through the network that actually
   exists. Both situations are currently encountered with GMPLS, i.e.,
   out of date information on constraints or resource availability.

   Note that the connection establishment mechanism (signaling or
   management) is ultimately responsible for the establishment of the
   connection, and this implies that such mechanisms must insure signal
   compatibility.

   3.2. Separating a Sub-TLV into Multiple OSPF TE LSAs

   In the highly unlikely event that a WSON sub-TLV by itself would
   result in an LSA exceeding the MTU, all five WSON specific sub-TLVs
   in this document provide mechanisms that allow them to be subdivided
   into smaller sub-TLVs that can be sent in separate OSPF TE LSAs.

   Sub-Division by Sets

   All five sub-TLVs currently make use of one or more RB Set Fields
   [WSON-Encode] or Link Set Fields [Gen-Encode]. Long set fields can be
   decomposed into multiple smaller set fields resulting in multiple
   sub-TLVs that can be sent in multiple OSPF TE LSAs. The
   interpretation of the separate pieces is quite natural and reviewed
   in the following:













Lee and Bernstein       Expires March 14, 2012                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft OSPF Enhancement for WSON Signal Compatibility  September
2011


   Resource Block Information
     Information about different resources of similar types would get
     sent separately (LSAs). Path computation would not know a resource
     exists until it receives the instance of a sub-TLV that mentions
     that instance.

   Resource Pool Accessibility
     Information about accessibility to resources to/from ports would be
     in as separate pieces base on port or resource set separation. All
     pieces are combined to give complete resource/port accessibility
     view. Late/missing pieces would imply resources are not accessible
     to/from given ports.

   Resource Block Wavelength Constraints
     Information about resource wavelength constraints can be sent in
     separate pieces based on resource sub-sets. Late/missing pieces
     (LSAs) would imply resources accessible when they might not be.

   Resource Pool State
     Information about resource state can be sent in separate pieces
     based on resource sub-sets. Late/missing pieces (LSAs) could imply
     incorrect resources availability.

   Block Shared Access Wavelength Availability
     Information about resource shared access wavelength can be sent in
     separate pieces based on resource sub-sets. Late/missing pieces
     (LSAs) could imply incorrect shared wavelength availability.


   Due to the reliability mechanisms in OSPF the phenomena of late or
   missing pieces for relatively static information (first three types
   of sub-TLVs) would be relatively rare.

   3.2.1. Sub-Division by Options

   The Resource Block Information sub-TLV contains a number of optional
   fields. If this sub-TLV becomes too long it may also be sub-divided
   into multiple OSPF TE LSAs each containing a disjoint assembly of the
   sub-TLVs optional fields [WSON-Encode].









Lee and Bernstein       Expires March 14, 2012                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft OSPF Enhancement for WSON Signal Compatibility  September
2011


4. Security Considerations

   This document does not introduce any further security issues other
   than those discussed in [RFC3630], [RFC4203].

5. IANA Considerations

   This document introduces a new Top Level Node TLV (Optical Node
   Property TLV) under the OSPF TE LSA defined in [RFC3630].

   Value    TLV Type

   TBA      Optical Node Property

   IANA is to allocate a new TLV Type and its Value for this Top Level
   Node TLV.

   This document also introduces the following sub-TLVs associated with
   the Optical Node Property TLV as defined in Section 2.1 as follows:

   Value       Length      Sub-TLV Type

   TBA         variable    Resource Block Information
   TBA         variable    Resource Pool Accessibility
   TBA         variable    Resource Block Wavelength Constraints
   TBA         variable    Resource Pool State
   TBA         variable    Block Shared Access Wavelength Availability


   IANA is to allocate new sub-TLV Types and their Values for these sub-
   TLVs defined under the Optical Node Property TLV.



   There are seven nested sub-TLVs defined in the Resource Block
   Information sub-TLV as follows:

   Value          Length      Sub-TLV Type

   TBA            variable    Input Modulation Format List
   TBA            variable    Input FEC Type List
   TBA            variable    Input Bit Range List
   TBA            variable    Input Client Signal List
   TBA            variable    Processing Capability List
   TBA            variable    Output Modulation Format List



Lee and Bernstein       Expires March 14, 2012                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft OSPF Enhancement for WSON Signal Compatibility  September
2011


   TBA            variable    Output FEC Type List


   IANA is to allocate new Sub-TLV Types and their Values for these Sub-
   TLVs defined under the Resource Block Information Sub-TLV.











































Lee and Bernstein       Expires March 14, 2012                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft OSPF Enhancement for WSON Signal Compatibility  September
2011




6. References

   6.1. Normative References

   [RFC2119] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
             Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC3630] Katz, D., Kompella, K., and Yeung, D., "Traffic
             Engineering (TE) Extensions to OSPF Version 2", RFC
             3630, September 2003.

   [G.694.1] ITU-T Recommendation G.694.1, "Spectral grids for WDM
             applications: DWDM frequency grid", June, 2002.

   [RFC4203] Kompella, K., Ed., and Y. Rekhter, Ed., "OSPF Extensions in
             Support of Generalized Multi-Protocol Label Switching
             (GMPLS)", RFC 4203, October 2005.



   [WSON-Encode]  G. Bernstein, Y. Lee, D. Li, W. Imajuku, "Routing and
             Wavelength Assignment Information Encoding for Wavelength
             Switched Optical Networks", draft-ietf-ccamp-rwa-wson-
             encode, work in progress.

   [Gen-Encode] G. Bernstein, Y. Lee, D. Li, W. Imajuku, "General
             Network Element Constraint Encoding for GMPLS Controlled
             Networks", draft-ietf-ccamp-general-constraint-encode,
             work in progress.

   6.2. Informative References

   [WSON-Info] Y. Lee, G. Bernstein, D. Li, W. Imajuku, "Routing and
             Wavelength Assignment Information Model for Wavelength
             Switched Optical Networks", draft-ietf-ccamp-rwa-info, work
             in progress.

   [RFC6250] T. Otani, Ed., D. Li, Ed., "Generalized Labels for G.694
             Lambda-Switching Capable Label Switching Routers", RFC
             6250, March 2011.






Lee and Bernstein       Expires March 14, 2012                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft OSPF Enhancement for WSON Signal Compatibility  September
2011


   [RFC6163] Y. Lee, G. Bernstein,  W. Imajuku, "Framework for GMPLS and
             PCE Control of Wavelength Switched Optical Networks", RFC
             6163, April 2011.

   [RFC5250] Berger, L., et al., "The OSPF Opauqe LSA option", RFC 5250,
             July 2008.













7. Authors and Contributors




Authors' Addresses

   Young Lee (ed.)
   Huawei Technologies
   1700 Alma Drive, Suite 100
   Plano, TX 75075
   USA

   Phone: (972) 509-5599 (x2240)
   Email: ylee@huawei.com


   Greg M. Bernstein (ed.)
   Grotto Networking
   Fremont California, USA

   Phone: (510) 573-2237
   Email: gregb@grotto-networking.com






Lee and Bernstein       Expires March 14, 2012                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft OSPF Enhancement for WSON Signal Compatibility  September
2011


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF Trust takes no position regarding the validity or scope of
   any Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be
   claimed to pertain to the implementation or use of the technology
   described in any IETF Document or the extent to which any license
   under such rights might or might not be available; nor does it
   represent that it has made any independent effort to identify any
   such rights.

   Copies of Intellectual Property disclosures made to the IETF
   Secretariat and any assurances of licenses to be made available, or
   the result of an attempt made to obtain a general license or
   permission for the use of such proprietary rights by implementers or
   users of this specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR
   repository at http://www.ietf.org/ipr

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   any standard or specification contained in an IETF Document. Please
   address the information to the IETF at ietf-ipr@ietf.org.

Disclaimer of Validity

   All IETF Documents and the information contained therein are provided
   on an "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE
   REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE
   IETF TRUST AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL
   WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY
   WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION THEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE
   ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS
   FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.










Lee and Bernstein       Expires March 14, 2012                [Page 14]

