A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3546

        Title:      Transport Layer Security (TLS) Extensions
        Author(s):  S. Blake-Wilson, M. Nystrom, D. Hopwood,
                    J. Mikkelsen, T. Wright
        Status:     Standards Track
        Date:       June 2003
        Mailbox:    sblakewilson@bcisse.com, magnus@rsasecurity.com,
                    david.hopwood@zetnet.co.uk,
                    janm@transactionware.com,
                    timothy.wright@vf.vodafone.co.uk
        Pages:      29
        Characters: 63437
        Obsoletes:  2246

        I-D Tag:    draft-ietf-tls-extensions-06.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3546.txt


This document describes extensions that may be used to add
functionality to Transport Layer Security (TLS).  It provides both
generic extension mechanisms for the TLS handshake client and server
hellos, and specific extensions using these generic mechanisms.

The extensions may be used by TLS clients and servers.  The extensions
are backwards compatible - communication is possible between TLS 1.0
clients that support the extensions and TLS 1.0 servers that do not
support the extensions, and vice versa.

This document is a product of the Transport Layer Security Working
Group of the IETF.

This is now a Proposed Standard Protocol.

This document specifies an Internet standards track protocol for
the Internet community, and requests discussion and suggestions
for improvements.  Please refer to the current edition of the
"Internet Official Protocol Standards" (STD 1) for the
standardization state and status of this protocol.  Distribution
of this memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.

