

NETEXT Working Group                                             T. Tian
Internet-Draft                                                    W. Yan
Intended status: Informational                                    Y. Wei
Expires: April 24, 2012                                              ZTE
                                                        October 22, 2011


             Problem Statement of Flow Mobility Triggering
             draft-tian-netext-flow-mobility-trigger-ps-00

Abstract

   This document is a contribution draft which summaries the potential
   approaches for flow mobility triggering and gives analysis of these
   trigger methods based on the long-standing active discussion in the
   mailing list, which aims to achieve a common consensus on the issues
   and the working scope related to flow mobility trigger in Netext WG.

Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119[RFC2119].

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 24, 2012.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2012 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents



Tian, et al.            Expires October 22, 2012                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft              Abbreviated-Title                 April 2012


   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Flow mobility trigger Summary  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     2.1.  Host-based triggering  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     2.2.  Network-based triggering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   3.  Other main issues  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.1.  MN capability discovery  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.2.  Policy synchronization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   4.  Discussion for Decision  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   5.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   6.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     6.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     6.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10



























Tian, et al.            Expires October 22, 2012                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft              Abbreviated-Title                 April 2012


1.  Introduction

   With the rapid growth of wireless network technology and the terminal
   technology, a mobile node that is equipped with various access
   modules has the ability to simultaneously connect to different access
   technologies.  A definition of flow mobility is quoted from the
   mailing list:" In the context of Proxy MIP6 is the switching of a
   flow by the LMA from MAGx to MAGy when the MN is attached to the LMA
   via multiple interfaces through different MAGs."  Flow mobility is
   now becoming an important issue to increase the availability of
   different network resources and to help to provide better user
   experience.

   There has been lot of work focusing on supporting flow mobility in
   Netext WG, i.e., [I-D.ietf-netext-logical-interface-support], the
   "logical interface" defined in this draft makes all physical
   interfaces to hide from the network layer and above, which is a
   fundamental dependency for flow mobility.  Flow mobility depends on
   the existence of a logical interface on the host.

   "Proxy Mobile IPv6 Extensions to Support Flow Mobility"
   [I-D.ietf-netext-pmipv6-flowmob-ob] , this draft defines PMIP6
   extensions to support follow mobility over multiple physical
   interfaces.  It describes how LMA excuses flow mobility based on the
   enhanced PMIP6 protocol;

   "Multi-access Indicator for Mobility"
   [I-D.koodli-netext-multiaccess-indicator], this draft defines a new
   EAP attribute to indicate to the network the MN's capability of
   simultaneous multil-access and supporting of flow mobility.

   But without making the trigger for flow mobility clear, the execution
   of flow mobility will be a castle in the air.  The triggering issue
   has been discussed actively in the mailing list for a long time.
   This document summarizes the main ideas, the related analysis and
   relevant issues based on the discussion in mailing list, which aims
   to achieve a common consensus and make progress for the further work.


2.  Flow mobility trigger Summary

   The trigger solutions are broadly grouped into two categories,
   namely: Host-based triggering and Network-based triggering.

2.1.  Host-based triggering






Tian, et al.            Expires October 22, 2012                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft              Abbreviated-Title                 April 2012


   1.  L3-signaling trigger

          An example of L3-signaling solution is proposed in
          [I-D.ietf-netext-logical-interface-support] section 7.3
          regards: "As an example of mobile-based triggers, the LMA
          could receive input (e.g.by means of a layer 2.5 function via
          L3 signaling [RFC5677]) from the MN detecting changes in the
          mobile wireless environment (e.g. weak radio signal, new
          network detected, etc.).  Upon receiving these triggers, the
          LMA can initiate the flow mobility procedures.  For instance,
          when the mobile node only supports single-radio operation
          (i.e. one radio transmitting at a time), only sequential(i.e.
          not simultaneous) attachment to different MAGs over different
          media is possible.  In this case layer 2.5 signaling can be
          used to perform the inter-access technology handover and
          communicate to the LMA the desired target access technology,
          MN-ID, Flow-ID and prefix."

          However, specifying a MN/host to a MAG signaling related
          to flow mobility at layer 3 has been put explicitly out of the
          charter of this WG.

   2.  Explicit flow trigger

          Another host-based solution was proposed in the mailing list:
          "The MN can decide (based on policies) to change the flow and
          send packets over a new interface.  The MAG would forward the
          packet with no problem and upon receiving this packet the LMA
          would implicitly know that the MN has performed a flow
          movement (again, based on policies).  At this point the LMA
          would just need to change its routing table accordingly and
          start sending packets for this flow over the new interface
          (similar rule to the one already specified for the mobile)."

          This is a lightweight host-centric solution which is suitable
          for the cases that the MN sends the UL flow and the MN itself
          decides and triggers the flow movement.  No extensions to the
          existing RFC 5213 are needed, i.e. neither the modification of
          data structures nor the addition of new signaling.  But for
          the case that the network decides the flow mobility based on
          the network conditions, this solution is not suitable.

       In 3GPP the work TS 23.261 [TS23261] of host-based model for flow
       mobility based on MIP6 has been solved, which specifies the Stage
       2 system description for IP flow mobility between a 3GPP and a
       WLAN.  As PMIP6 is a network-based mobility support protocol and
       it does not require MNs to be involved in the mobility support
       signaling, and there is also requirement to enable network



Tian, et al.            Expires October 22, 2012                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft              Abbreviated-Title                 April 2012


       controlled flow mobility, for example, to release the traffic
       pressure in the network based on network load conditions, the
       preference is to develop a network centric (i.e.  MAG/LMA
       entities) flow mobility solution.

2.2.  Network-based triggering

   1.  L2-signaling trigger (MAG trigger)

          This approach is when a MN attaches to a new MAG, the MN uses
          the L2 signaling to indicate the attachment is for flow
          mobility , for example, with a new HI=FM value, then the MAG
          sends the PBU with HI=FM, and the LMA updates an existing
          session with the new interface and the new MAG.  The old and
          new prefixes are shared for the session.

          This approach keeps the existing RFC 5213[RFC5213] model.
          Advantage of this approach is that, with indication of the
          specific L2 signaling, the network will be able to have
          knowledge of the MN's capability of supporting flow mobility.
          Concern is that, the L2 signaling needs to be extended for
          flow mobility trigger purpose.  However, L2 signaling is
          specified for specific link types in relevant SDOs, the
          extension work of specific L2 signaling is out of scope of
          IETF and should be done in other relevant SDOs.  For example,
          3GPP is one of the important potential customers; 3GPP owns
          the specific L2 used to access their system.  It is possible
          that 3GPP may need to add extensions to make this solution
          work in their architecture, but even though, relying on
          modification of specific layer 2 protocols will let the
          solution only works with some technologies.  As we are not
          chartered to come up with the 3GPP-only solution, both the
          cases when either new L2 signaling is available or L2
          signaling is unavailable need to be included in our solution.

   2.  LMA trigger

          This approach is now regarded as a pure network-centric
          trigger based on the network condition, and it is just up to
          the LMA that decides and triggers the flow mobility without
          involvement of the MN.  Lots of concerns about this approach
          are raised on the mailing list.

          Firstly, how does the network know whether the MN has the
          capability to support flow mobility or not.  This issue will
          be discussed detailed in the later section.





Tian, et al.            Expires October 22, 2012                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft              Abbreviated-Title                 April 2012


          Secondly, how does the LMA actually decide to route flows on
          one access or the other?  This is another major concern raised
          on the mailing list is related to how flow mobility would work
          when an MN attaches to a wifi access and the LMA switches a
          flow(s) to the MAG serving the MN via that wifi.  In cellular
          networks, the handovers are controlled by the network because
          the network always knows the link condition of the MN by the
          measurement reports provided by the MN.  But in WLAN there is
          a huge difference.  Others than the MN measurement report
          mechanism in the cellular network, the MN has no way of report
          the LMA about its connectivity/link status , e.g. the
          congestion, or other state of its attachment to a AP.  Flows
          forwarded by the LMA to the MN via the wifi-MAG could be
          dropped if the MN has moved out of that wifi coverage or the
          link is congested.  There are no existing protocols which can
          be used for the external interface between LMA and MN, the LMA
          only knows that the MN has attached via a MAG.  It also
          mentioned in the mailing list that, there are solutions which
          allow the owner of the WLAN to know of the quality and status
          of the network.  Even though, the lack of providing relevant
          information to the LMA is still an issue.

          One view in the mailing list thought the intent of this work
          is on specifying how the traffic associated with a session is
          switched to an alternate MAG, the above points are outside the
          scope.  But without knowing the information and feedback from
          the MN side, the LMA is hard to make a correct decision for
          flow mobility.

          Thirdly, where does the LMA would receive the policies related
          to flow mobility, should there be a solution to have policies
          in the LMA, should the policy synchronization between LMA and
          MN be considered?  This will be discussed in the later
          section.


3.  Other main issues

3.1.  MN capability discovery

   The network only offers flow mobility to the MN that indicates its
   support for the feature.  Actually the capability discovery can be
   achieved by layer2, 3 or even 7, but within the restriction of
   current charter of this work, if this should be done, it has to be
   done at layer 2.

   Following assumptions are summarized in the mailing list:




Tian, et al.            Expires October 22, 2012                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft              Abbreviated-Title                 April 2012


   1.  MN capabilities are known;

          assumption that the indication of capability is achieved by
          Layer 3 or Layer 7 which is out of scope here;

   2.  Possible existence of layer 2 signaling to provide hints (HI =
       Flow Mobility);

          "Multi-access Indicator for
          Mobility"[I-D.koodli-netext-multiaccess-indicator] provides
          one way to achieve this; it defines a new EAP attribute which
          can be used to indicate the MN's capability during the EAP-AKA
          procedure.  The purpose of the multi-access indicator ID is
          twofold: to enable the MN to indicate its capability and
          willingness for flow mobility (through the AT_MA_IND
          attribute).  Second, to enable AAA to authorize the user for
          flow mobility.  So, it's the MN which is indicating the device
          capability, and the AAA providing the authorization for the
          flow mobility service.

   3.  Possible non-existence of layer-2 signaling to provide hints (HI
       = Unknown)

3.2.  Policy synchronization

   There is a need of policy synchronization between the MN side and the
   network side.  In [I-D.ietf-netext-pmipv6-flowmob-ob] , it states
   that:

   "As described in[I-D.ietf-netext-logical-interface-support] , there
   should be a local policy in place that ensures that packets are
   forwarded coherently.  This SHOULD be enforced by the logical
   interface engine [I-D.ietf-netext-logical-interface-support].  For
   unidirectional outbound communications, there SHOULD also be a policy
   at the mobile node defining which physical interface is used to send
   the traffic.  For bidirectional outbound communications, there SHOULD
   be also such a policy, but its content must be consistent with the
   policy at the network-side (the details about how this consistency is
   ensured are out of the scope of this document)."

   The simplest way to do is to statically configure the same policies
   on the MN and the LMA, but this is not flexible and not unrealistic
   in the practical deployment.

   For dynamic configuration of policies, ANDSF defined by 3GPP is
   proposed in the mailing list as one solution to help to achieve
   policy synchronization between the MN and the network.  ANDSF is
   designed specific to be a MN-centric solution where policies are



Tian, et al.            Expires October 22, 2012                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft              Abbreviated-Title                 April 2012


   provisioned in the MN and the MN decides which network technologies
   and access networks it needs to connect to, under what conditions,
   and which IP traffic needs to be routed on such accesses.  ANDSF has
   the interface with MN, for example the push model in 3GPP, ANDSF can
   send SMS to UE via S14 interface to request MN to update it policy.
   The same policies in ANDSF delivered to the MN can be also offered to
   the network nodes, i.e. the MAG/LMA.  There is neither MN-AR
   interface nor ANDSF-MAG/LMA interface in the existing specifications.
   To support this ANDSF approach, additional interfaces may be needed.
   Alternatively, policies delivery from PCRF to MAG\LMA is another
   suggestion.  However, PCRF does not have the information to tell the
   LMA which policies are used for flow mobility, if the solution may be
   used, enhancement of PCC functionality will be needed.

   Moreover, a scenario raise on the mailing list shows that, ANDSF
   policies may be based also on location of the MN.  For example the MN
   should prefer WLAN only in a given location.  When the MN is attached
   over WLAN there is no way for the LMA to verify the location of the
   MN and therefore to verify MN actions based on policies.  In this
   case, this is another reason for the LMA to know the information of
   MN in WLAN.  The lack of MN-AR interface is surely an issue for
   supporting some flow policies.


4.  Discussion for Decision

   The feature of no involvement of the MN of PMIP6 decides it would not
   have the same degree of control in terms of handover flows or the
   granularity compared with MIP6.  The PMIP6 based flow mobility would
   be applicable in deployments which leverage network based mobility,
   and the scope of this work is NOT intended to provide the same set of
   capabilities that exist in the host-based flow mobility solution.

   Could we work on the flow mobility trigger in this WG?  If the
   solution is related to the common protocol (e.g.  EAP) which is used
   in specific L2 signaling, could it be discussed in this WG?  There is
   strong reason for the LMA to obtain the information of MN in access
   networks, such as connectivity status, link characteristics and even
   the location information, either for the LMA to make a correct
   decision for flow mobility or to support some complex flow policies.
   Where could the LMA get the policies for flow mobility, and how the
   policies are synchronized with the MN's, are these issues still
   needed to be considered?

   One option suggested in the mailing list is that low mobility for
   PMIP6 is applicable only in those access networks wherein the access
   network elements are aware of the state of the MNs connection and
   congestion state.  The MAG can use this information to signal to an



Tian, et al.            Expires October 22, 2012                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft              Abbreviated-Title                 April 2012


   LMA attachment state and potentially cause flows to be switched to an
   alternative MAG.  It may be okay to have specific statements about
   the limitations of flow mobility for PMIP6 documented as a sort of
   disclaimer.

   This document aims to make clear about what is in scope of this work
   and some of the limitations as well.


5.  IANA Considerations

   This document makes no request of IANA.


6.  References

6.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC5213]  Gundavelli, S., Leung, K., Devarapalli, V., Chowdhury, K.,
              and B. Patil, "Proxy Mobile IPv6", RFC RFC 5213,
              August 2008.

6.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.ietf-netext-logical-interface-support]
              Melia, T. and S. Gundavelli, "Logical Interface Support
              for multi-mode IP Hosts",
              draft-ietf-netext-logical-interface-support-03 (work in
              progress), September 2011.

   [I-D.ietf-netext-pmipv6-flowmob-ob]
              Bernardos, CJ., "Proxy Mobile IPv6 Extensions to Support
              Flow Mobility", draft-ietf-netext-pmipv6-flowmob-01 (work
              in progress), September 2011.

   [I-D.koodli-netext-multiaccess-indicator]
              Koodli, Rajeev. and Jouni. Korhonen, "Multi-access
              Indicator for Mobility",
              draft-koodli-netext-multiaccess-indicator-02 (work in
              progress), August 2011.

   [RFC5677]  Melia, T., Bajko, G., Das, S., Golmie, N., and JC. Zuniga,
              "IEEE 802.21 Mobility Services Framework Design (MSFD)",
              RFC RFC 5677, December 2009.




Tian, et al.            Expires October 22, 2012                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft              Abbreviated-Title                 April 2012


   [TS23261]  "3rd Generation Partnership Project; Technical
              Specification Group Services and System Aspects;IP flow
              mobility and seamless Wireless Local Area Network (WLAN)
              offload;", 3GPP 3GPP TS 23.261, September 2010.


Authors' Addresses

   Tian Tian
   ZTE
   No.68 Zijinghua Rd
   Nanjing, Yuhuatai District  210012
   China.P.R

   Phone: +86-25-5287-1267
   Email: tian.tian1@zte.com.cn


   Wei Yan
   ZTE
   No.68 Zijinghua Rd
   Nanjing, Yuhuatai District  210012
   China.P.R

   Phone: +86-25-5287-0503
   Email: yan.wei8@zte.com.cn


   Yuan Wei
   ZTE
   No.68 Zijinghua Rd
   Nanjing, Yuhuatai District  210012
   China.P.R

   Phone: +86-25-5287-1091
   Email: wei.yuan2@zte.com.cn














Tian, et al.            Expires October 22, 2012               [Page 10]

