
A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3046

        Title:      DHCP Relay Agent Information Option
        Author(s):  M. Patrick
        Status:     Standards Track
        Date:       January 2001
        Mailbox:    michael.patrick@motorola.com
        Pages:      14
        Characters: 30633
        Updates/Obsoletes/SeeAlso:  None

        I-D Tag:    draft-ietf-dhc-agent-options-12.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3046.txt


Newer high-speed public Internet access technologies call for a
high-speed modem to have a local area network (LAN) attachment to one
or more customer premise hosts.  It is advantageous to use the Dynamic
Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP) as defined in RFC 2131 to assign
customer premise host IP addresses in this environment.  However, a
number of security and scaling problems arise with such "public" DHCP
use.  This document describes a new DHCP option to address these
issues.  This option extends the set of DHCP options as defined in RFC
2132.
 
The new option is called the Relay Agent Information option and is
inserted by the DHCP relay agent when forwarding client-originated
DHCP packets to a DHCP server.  Servers recognizing the Relay Agent
Information option may use the information to implement IP address or
other parameter assignment policies.  The DHCP Server echoes the
option back verbatim to the relay agent in server-to-client replies,
and the relay agent strips the option before forwarding the reply to
the client.

The "Relay Agent Information" option is organized as a single DHCP
option that contains one or more "sub-options" that convey
information known by the relay agent.  The initial sub-options are
defined for a relay agent that is co-located in a public circuit
access unit.  These include a "circuit ID" for the incoming circuit,
and a "remote ID" which provides a trusted identifier for the remote
high-speed modem.

This document is a product of the Dynamic Host Configuration Working
Group of the IETF.

This is now a Proposed Standard Protocol.

This document specifies an Internet standards track protocol for
the Internet community, and requests discussion and suggestions
for improvements.  Please refer to the current edition of the
"Internet Official Protocol Standards" (STD 1) for the
standardization state and status of this protocol.  Distribution
of this memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.

