A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3527

        Title:      Link Selection sub-option
                    for the Relay Agent Information Option for DHCPv4
        Author(s):  K. Kinnear, M. Stapp, R. Johnson, J. Kumarasamy
        Status:     Standards Track
        Date:       April 2003
        Mailbox:    kkinnear@cisco.com, mjs@cisco.com, jayk@cisco.com,
                    raj@cisco.com
        Pages:      9
        Characters: 16831
        Updates/Obsoletes/SeeAlso:  None

        I-D Tag:    draft-ietf-dhc-agent-subnet-selection-04.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3527.txt


This document describes the link selection sub-option of the
relay-agent-information option for the Dynamic Host Configuration
Protocol (DHCPv4).  The giaddr specifies an IP address which
determines both a subnet, and thereby a link on which a Dynamic Host
Configuration Protocol (DHCP) client resides as well as an IP address
that can be used to communicate with the relay agent.  The
subnet-selection option allows the functions of the giaddr to be split
so that when one entity is performing as a DHCP proxy, it can specify
the subnet/link from which to allocate an IP address, which is
different from the IP address with which it desires to communicate
with the DHCP server.  Analogous situations exist where the relay
agent needs to specify the subnet/link on which a DHCP client resides,
which is different from an IP address that can be used to communicate
with the relay agent.

This document is a product of the Dynamic Host Configuration Working
Group of the IETF.

This is now a Proposed Standard Protocol.

This document specifies an Internet standards track protocol for
the Internet community, and requests discussion and suggestions
for improvements.  Please refer to the current edition of the
"Internet Official Protocol Standards" (STD 1) for the
standardization state and status of this protocol.  Distribution
of this memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.

