A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3396

        Title:      Encoding Long Options in the Dynamic Host
                    Configuration Protocol (DHCPv4)
        Author(s):  T. Lemon, S. Cheshire
        Status:     Standards Track
        Date:       November 2002
        Mailbox:    mellon@nominum.com, rfc@stuartcheshire.org
        Pages:      9
        Characters: 18779
        Updates:    2131
                         
        I-D Tag:    draft-ietf-dhc-concat-05.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3396.txt


This document specifies the processing rules for Dynamic Host
Configuration Protocol (DHCPv4) options that appear multiple times in
the same message.  Multiple instances of the same option are generated
when an option exceeds 255 octets in size (the maximum size of a
single option) or when an option needs to be split apart in order to
take advantage of DHCP option overloading.  When multiple instances of
the same option appear in the options, file and/or sname fields in a
DHCP packet, the contents of these options are concatenated together
to form a single option prior to processing.

This document is a product of Dynamic Host Configuration Working Group
of the IETF.

This is now a Proposed Standard Protocol.

This document specifies an Internet standards track protocol for
the Internet community, and requests discussion and suggestions
for improvements.  Please refer to the current edition of the
"Internet Official Protocol Standards" (STD 1) for the
standardization state and status of this protocol.  Distribution
of this memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.

