A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3315

        Title:      Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol for IPv6
                    (DHCPv6)
        Author(s):  R. Droms, Ed., J. Bound, B. Volz, T. Lemon,
                    C. Perkins, M. Carney
        Status:     Standards Track
        Date:       July 2003
        Mailbox:    rdroms@cisco.com, Jim.Bound@hp.com,
                    volz@metrocast.net, Ted.Lemon@nominum.com,
                    charliep@iprg.nokia.com, michael.carney@sun.com
        Pages:      101
        Characters: 231402
        Updates/Obsoletes/SeeAlso:  None

        I-D Tag:    draft-ietf-dhc-dhcpv6-28.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3315.txt


The Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol for IPv6 (DHCP) enables
DHCP servers to pass configuration parameters such as IPv6 network
addresses to IPv6 nodes.  It offers the capability of automatic
allocation of reusable network addresses and additional configuration
flexibility.  This protocol is a stateful counterpart to "IPv6
Stateless Address Autoconfiguration" (RFC 2462), and can be used
separately or concurrently with the latter to obtain configuration
parameters.

This document is a product of the Dynamic Host Configuration Working
Group of the IETF.

This is now a Proposed Standard Protocol.

This document specifies an Internet standards track protocol for
the Internet community, and requests discussion and suggestions
for improvements.  Please refer to the current edition of the
"Internet Official Protocol Standards" (STD 1) for the
standardization state and status of this protocol.  Distribution
of this memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.

