
A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3074

        Title:      DHC Load Balancing Algorithm
        Author(s):  B. Volz, S. Gonczi, T. Lemon, R. Stevens
        Status:     Standards Track
        Date:       February 2001
        Mailbox:    bernie.volz@ericsson.com,
                    steve.gonczi@networkengines.com,
                    ted.lemon@nominum.com, robs@join.com 
        Pages:      10
        Characters: 19374
        Updates/Obsoletes/SeeAlso:  None

        I-D Tag:    draft-ietf-dhc-loadb-03.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3074.txt


This document proposes a method of algorithmic load balancing.  It
enables multiple, cooperating servers to decide which one should
service a client, without exchanging any information beyond initial
configuration.
 
The server selection is based on the servers hashing client Media
Access Control (MAC) addresses when multiple Dynamic Host
Configuration Protocol (DHCP) servers are available to service DHCP
clients.  The proposed technique provides for efficient server
selection when multiple DHCP servers offer services on a network
without requiring any changes to existing DHCP clients.  The same
method is proposed to select the target server of a forwarding agent
such as a Bootstrap Protocol (BOOTP) relay.

This document is a product of the Dynamic Host Configuration Working
Group of the IETF.

This is now a Proposed Standard Protocol.

This document specifies an Internet standards track protocol for
the Internet community, and requests discussion and suggestions
for improvements.  Please refer to the current edition of the
"Internet Official Protocol Standards" (STD 1) for the
standardization state and status of this protocol.  Distribution
of this memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.

