A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3495

        Title:      Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP) Option
                    for CableLabs Client Configuration
        Author(s):  B. Beser, P. Duffy, Ed.
        Status:     Standards Track
        Date:       March 2003
        Mailbox:    burcak@juniper.net, paduffy@cisco.com
        Pages:      13
        Characters: 26817
        Updates/Obsoletes/SeeAlso:  None

        I-D Tag:    draft-ietf-dhc-packetcable-06.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3495.txt


This document defines a Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP)
option that will be used to configure various devices deployed within
CableLabs architectures.  Specifically, the document describes DHCP
option content that will be used to configure one class of CableLabs
client device: a PacketCable Media Terminal Adapter (MTA).  The option
content defined within this document will be extended as future
CableLabs client devices are developed.

This document is a product of the Dynamic Host Configuration Working
Group of the IETF.

This is now a Proposed Standard Protocol.

This document specifies an Internet standards track protocol for
the Internet community, and requests discussion and suggestions
for improvements.  Please refer to the current edition of the
"Internet Official Protocol Standards" (STD 1) for the
standardization state and status of this protocol.  Distribution
of this memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.