


Network Working Group                                         D. Quigley
Internet-Draft                                                       NSA
Intended status: Standards Track                               J. Morris
Expires: August 27, 2010                                   Red Hat, Inc.
                                                                   J. Lu
                                                        Sun Microsystems
                                                       February 23, 2010


                       Labeled NFSv4 Impact Study
                 draft-quigley-nfsv4-lnfs-impact-00.txt

Abstract

   To consider the Labeled NFS work for addition to the NFSv4 working
   group charter the working group has requested an impact study be
   drafted for the security label extensions to NFSv4 and the RPC layer.
   This document describes the impact, usecases, customers, and scope of
   the work to be performed.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 27, 2010.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.




Quigley, et al.          Expires August 27, 2010                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft         Labeled NFSv4 Impact Study          February 2010


   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Protocol Impact . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Usecases  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
     2.1.  Full MAC labeling support for remotely mounted
           filesystems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
     2.2.  MAC labeling of virtual machine images stored on the
           network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
     2.3.  Simple security label storage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
     2.4.  Regulatory Compliance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   3.  Scope of Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   4.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   5.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6


























Quigley, et al.          Expires August 27, 2010                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft         Labeled NFSv4 Impact Study          February 2010


1.  Protocol Impact

   Labeled NFS makes relatively few modifications to NFSv4 and its
   supporting components.  These changes consist of two components one
   existing in the NFSv4 protocol and the other in the RPCSECGSS
   framework employed by NFSv4.

   The first component is a method for transporting and storing security
   label data on NFSv4 file objects.  Security labels have several
   semantics that are met by NFSv4 recommended attributes such as the
   ability to set the label value upon object creation.  Named
   attributes were explored to handle this functionality however as they
   lack the required semantics that are present in recommended
   attributes that method was abandoned.  Access control on these
   attributes are done through a combination of two mechanisms.  As with
   other recommended attributes on file objects the usual DAC checks
   (ACLs and permission bits) will be performed to ensure that proper
   file ownership is enforced.  In addition a Mandatory Access Control
   (MAC) system MAY be employed on the client, server, or both to
   enforce additional policy on what subjects may modify security label
   information.  Recommended attributes are straight forward to add to
   NFSv4 requiring just a new number and a description of the attribute
   semantics.

   The second component is a modification to the RPC layer used in NFSv4
   in the form of a new version of the RPCSECGSS framework.  In order
   for an NFS server to apply MAC checks it must obtain additional
   information from the client.  Several methods were explored for
   performing this and it was decided that the best approach was to
   incorporate the ability to make security attribute assertions through
   the RPC mechanism.  The RPCSECGSSv3 document published by Nico
   Williams outlines a method to assert additional security information
   such as security labels on gss context creation and have that data
   bound to all RPC requests that make use of that context.  As this is
   a modification for the RPC layer for NFSv4 this work falls under the
   working groups domain.  Luckily due to how RPCSECGSSv3 is designed no
   changes to prior versions of RPCSECGSS are necessary.  Version 3 can
   be built on top of an existing version 1 or two implementation.


2.  Usecases

   XXX:Use cases, customers.  Option feature sounds like only path.  So,
   who would implement it?  For exactly what use?  One thing that would
   help here is two other authors besides yourself producing the
   informational spec.





Quigley, et al.          Expires August 27, 2010                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft         Labeled NFSv4 Impact Study          February 2010


2.1.  Full MAC labeling support for remotely mounted filesystems

   In this case, we assume a local networked environment where the
   servers and clients are under common administrative control.  All
   systems in this network have the same MAC implementation and
   semantically identical MAC security labels for objects (i.e. labels
   mean the same thing on different systems, even if the policies on
   each system may differ to some extent).  Clients will be able to
   apply fine-grained MAC policy to objects accessed via NFS mounts, and
   thus improve the overall consistency of MAC policy application within
   this environment.

   An example of this case would be where user home directories are
   remotely mounted, and fine-grained MAC policy is implemented to
   protect, for example, private user data from being read by malicious
   web scripts running in the user's browser.  With Labeled NFS, fine-
   grained MAC labeling of the user's files will allow the local MAC
   policy to be implemented and provide the desired protection.

2.2.  MAC labeling of virtual machine images stored on the network

   Virtualization is now a commonly implemented feature of modern
   operating systems, and there is a need to ensure that MAC security
   policy is able to to protect virtualized resources.  A common
   implementation scheme involves storing virtualized guest filesystems
   on a networked server, which are then mounted remotely by guests upon
   instantiation.  In this case, there is a need to ensure that the
   local guest kernel is able to access fine-grained MAC labels on the
   remotely mounted filesystem so that its MAC security policy can be
   applied.

2.3.  Simple security label storage

   In this case, a mixed and loosely administered network is assumed,
   where nodes may be running a variety of operating systems with
   different security mechanisms and security policies.  It is desired
   that network file servers be simply capable of storing and retrieving
   MAC security labels for clients which use such labels.  The Labeled
   NFS protocol would be implemented here solely to enable transport of
   MAC security labels across the network.  It should be noted that in
   such an environment, overall security can not be as strongly enforced
   as in case (a), and that this scheme is aimed at allowing MAC-capable
   clients to function with local MAC security policy enabled rather
   than perhaps disabling it entirely.







Quigley, et al.          Expires August 27, 2010                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft         Labeled NFSv4 Impact Study          February 2010


2.4.  Regulatory Compliance

   XXX:Insert text here


3.  Scope of Work

   XXX:Scope: What does it depend on?  What are the external
   dependencies of the opaque encapsulated data?

   Labeled NFS consists of four documents three of which fall under the
   jurisdiction of the NFSv4 working group.  These documents consist of
   a requirements document, a specification document for the MAC
   recommended attribute, and a document outlining RPCSECGSSv3 which
   enables security information assertions from the client.  The last
   document which falls under the security area but is required for
   Labeled NFS is the label format specifier document which provides a
   method for enabling the use various MAC mechanisms by the MAC
   recommended attribute and RPCSECGSSv3.

   The requirements document for Labeled NFS has been published as
   draft-quigley-nfsv4-sec-label-requirements-01.  This document
   describes the problem space that Labeled NFS is addressing,
   requirements for security labeling and several operating modes that
   make use of the new security label data.  This document has gone
   through two public revisions so far and will continue to be revised
   as the need arises.

   The MAC recommended attribute specification document describes the
   protocol changes to NFSv4 in the form of a new optional to implement
   recommended attribute.  This document is currently published as
   draft-quigley-nfsv4-sec-label-00.  The initial round of review for
   this document has taken place and suggestions have been incorporated
   into the next version of the document.  If new requirement manifest
   through the design process they will be incorporated into this
   document.

   The RPCSEC_GSS version 3 specification document is currently
   published as draft-williams-rpcsecgssv3-00 and is a normative
   reference for the work.  This new version adds the ability for
   clients supporting Labeled NFSv4 to provide security attributes for a
   Labeled NFS server to use in access control decisions.  For example
   when a Labeled NFS client and server pair both running SELinux make a
   filesystem access the following happens.  Using RPCSEC_GSS v3 the
   client will assert the security label of the process issuing the
   request.  Once received the server will use that label to check it's
   local policy against the remote application.  This functionality is
   useful for building more robust systems using Labeled NFS.  While the



Quigley, et al.          Expires August 27, 2010                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft         Labeled NFSv4 Impact Study          February 2010


   modifications to the NFSv4 protocol do not require it this
   functionality for label storage it is listed as a requirement for
   Labeled NFS.

   The MAC recommended attribute document makes reference to a Label
   Format Specifier(LFS) that is used to determine the format of
   security labels being transmitted.  This document will exist in the
   security area as it is a document describing the use of security
   labels in general.  The document will contain how label formats
   should be specified and registered, who is responsible for the
   registry, and general semantics of their use.  While this document is
   a normative reference for the work individual labels formals should
   not be.  If one particular label format is chosen for
   interoperability purposes it will be added as a normative reference
   to both the MAC attribute specification and RPCSECGSSv3 documents.


4.  Security Considerations

   XXX:I don't know if we need this section but it seems to be required


5.  Normative References

   [I-D.ietf-nfsv4-minorversion1]
              Shepler, S., Eisler, M., and D. Noveck, "NFS Version 4
              Minor Version 1", draft-ietf-nfsv4-minorversion1-29 (work
              in progress), December 2008.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.


Authors' Addresses

   David P. Quigley
   National Security Agency
   9800 Savage Rd.
   Suite 6534
   Ft. Meade, MD  20755-6534

   Email: dpquigl@tycho.nsa.gov









Quigley, et al.          Expires August 27, 2010                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft         Labeled NFSv4 Impact Study          February 2010


   James Morris
   Red Hat, Inc.

   Email: jmorris@namei.org


   Jarrett Lu
   Sun Microsystems

   Email: jarrett.lu@sun.com









































Quigley, et al.          Expires August 27, 2010                [Page 7]

