


Internet Engineering Task Force                                H. Asaeda
Internet-Draft                                           Keio University
Intended status: Informational                                M. Eubanks
Expires: August 19, 2012                                  AmericaFree.TV
                                                                 T. Tsou
                                               Huawei Technologies (USA)
                                                               S. Venaas
                                                           Cisco Systems
                                                       February 16, 2012


                     Multicast Transition Overview
              draft-eubanks-mboned-transition-overview-02

Abstract

   IPTV providers must serve content to their customers during the
   period of transition from IPv4 to IPv6.  During this period, the
   content provider may support only one version of IP while the
   customer supports only the other.  Likewise, the network between the
   provider and its customer may include segments supporting only one
   version of IP or another.

   This document provides an overview of the multicast transition
   problem.  It also provides an overview of the solution space.  The
   solution space is characterized by an adaptation function (AF) that
   provides an interface between IPv4 and IPv6 multicast domains.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 19, 2012.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2012 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the



Asaeda, et al.           Expires August 19, 2012                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft        Multicast Transition Overview        February 2012


   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  A Look At the Multicast Transition Problem Space  . . . . . . . 3
   3.  A Look At the Solution Space For Multicast Transition . . . . . 4
     3.1.  AF Forwarding Plane Operation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
     3.2.  AF Control Plane Operation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
     3.3.  Source Discovery  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
     3.4.  Transitional Multicast Path Optimization  . . . . . . . . . 5
   4.  Requirements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   5.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   6.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   7.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   8.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7























Asaeda, et al.           Expires August 19, 2012                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft        Multicast Transition Overview        February 2012


1.  Introduction

   IPTV providers must serve content to their customers during the
   period of transition from IPv4 to IPv6.  During this period, the
   content provider may support only one version of IP while the
   customer supports only the other.  Likewise, the network between the
   provider and its customer may include segments supporting only one
   version of IP or another.

   This document provides an overview of the multicast transition
   problem.  It also provides an overview of the solution space.  The
   solution space is characterized by an adaptation function (AF) that
   provides an interface between IPv4 and IPv6 multicast domains.

   Section 2 describes the problem space in detail.  This section
   describes an environment that includes a content provider a customer
   and an intervening network.  Any component of that environment may
   support only one version of IP or the other.  At points where IPv4-
   only devices interface with IPv6-only devices, an adaptation function
   is required.

   Section 3 defines formal requirements for any proposed solution.
   Section 4 proposes a framework for the solution.


2.  A Look At the Multicast Transition Problem Space

   Historically, IPTV providers have served IPv4 content to consumers
   over IPv4 multicast networks.  CPE has supported IPv4 only.  As the
   Internet transitions to IPv6, IPv6-capable equipment will be deployed
   by content providers and consumers, as well as the networks that
   connect them to one another.  So long as all of the newly deployed
   gear supports both IPv4 and IPv6, the transition to IPv6 may not
   require new IETF protocol specifications.  However, if some of the
   newly deployed gear supports IPv6 only, incompatibilities will be
   introduced.

   An incompatibility occurs when two IP-adjacent devices do not support
   a common version of IP (i.e., one device supports IPv4 only and the
   other supports IPv6 only).  For the purposes of this document, we
   will call these points of incompatibility "IP version boundaries".
   The communication path between provider and consumer (which includes
   both endpoints) can include zero or more IP version boundaries.

   IP version boundaries may be introduced at any point along the path.
   These IP version boundaries may reside in the subscriber premises, at
   the CPE, in the intervening network etc.  In addition, the Set Top
   Box (STB) and Electronic Program Guides (EPG) may have differnt IP



Asaeda, et al.           Expires August 19, 2012                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft        Multicast Transition Overview        February 2012


   versions.

   In order to maintain multicast connectivity, an adaptation function
   (AF) is required at each IP version boundary.  The AF operates in
   both the forwarding and control planes.  Because it provides an
   interface between the IPv4 and IPv6 domain, it must be both IPv4-
   capable and IPv6-capable.

   In most cases, the adaptation function will translate between IPv4
   and IPv6 on both the control and forwarding planes.  However, in
   scenarios where the path between provider and consumer contains
   multiple IP version boundaries, adaptation function instances may
   tunnel traffic between one another.


3.  A Look At the Solution Space For Multicast Transition

   The AF operates on both the forwarding and control planes.  On the
   forwarding plane, the AF inserts itself into the forwarding path
   translating multicast packets from one IP version to the other.  On
   the control plane, the AF translates routing and signaling messages
   from one protocol to another.

   On both the forwarding and control plane, the AF can be viewed as a
   bump-in-the-wire that provides translation services.  It provides no
   services other than translation.

3.1.  AF Forwarding Plane Operation

   The AF accepts packets from one IP version, removes the IP header,
   and replaces it with an IP Header of the other version.  A
   significant portion of that task is address translation.  The address
   translation strategy used by AF must be algorithmic, stateless and
   reversible.  This is to say that given a particular IPv4 address, any
   two AF instances will translate it to the same IPv6 address.
   Furthermore, because the algorithm is reversible, both AF instances
   can translate the IPv6 address back into the original IPv4 address.

   [RFC6052] provides an algorithm for translating unicast addresses
   between IPv4 and IPv6.  Likewise [I-D.mboned-64-mcast-addr-fmt]
   provides an algorithm for multicast address conversion between IPv4
   and IPv6.

   Other issues associated with IP version translation may arise (e.g.,
   fragmentation).  The scope of these issues is wider than that of
   multicast transition.  As such issues are identified, they will be
   resolved in conjunction with appropriate IETF working groups.




Asaeda, et al.           Expires August 19, 2012                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft        Multicast Transition Overview        February 2012


3.2.  AF Control Plane Operation

   On the control plane, the AF performs the following translations:

   o  IGMPv3 [RFC3376] to MLDv2 [RFC3810];

   o  PIM [RFC4601] to PIM;

   o  IGMPv3 to PIM;

   o  MLD to PIM;

   The IGMP-to-MLD translation may be configured to use only IGMPv2
   features.  It is defined in [draft to come].

   The PIM-to-PIM translation translates a PIM message populated with
   addresses of one IP version to a similar PIM message populated with
   addresses of the other version.  This translation is defined in
   [draft to come].

3.3.  Source Discovery

   Multicast requires a mechanism through which a receiver can associate
   a multicast stream with a multicast group address.  The Session
   Announcement Protocol (SAP, [RFC2974]) is such a mechanism which is
   still in use in academic environments.  AF translation rules for this
   protocol are also described in [draft to come].  For commercial
   purposes, different standards development organizations have
   specified protocols for transmission of electronic program guides.
   [ID.tsou-multrans-addr-acquisition] specifies the operation of the AF
   in such an environment [... in a future version of the draft which
   comes to a conclusion on the best way forward].

3.4.  Transitional Multicast Path Optimization

   A mechanism to optimize the path to the multicast source for a
   combination of IPv4 and IPv6 networks is not immediately required,
   but is a topic for future work.


4.  Requirements

   From the description above, we can distill the following
   requirements:

      REQ 1: It must be possible for the receiver to acquire the
      multicast group address and, where applicable, the unicast source
      address of the target stream in the IP version that the receiver



Asaeda, et al.           Expires August 19, 2012                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft        Multicast Transition Overview        February 2012


      supports.

      REQ 2: It must be possible for the receiver to join the multicast
      distribution tree for the target stream even if the IP version
      used in the interior of the network to which the receiver is
      attached is different from the version supported by the receiver.

      REQ 3: Where local policy permits, it must be possible to extend
      the multicast distribution tree for a given stream across a
      network boundary where different IP versions are supported in the
      two networks separated by that boundary.

      REQ 4: When the multicast distribution tree for a given stream is
      extended across multiple network boundaries across one or more of
      which the IP version changes, it must be possible to avoid
      multicast routing loops.

      REQ 5: It must be possible to pass packets belonging to a given
      multicast stream to all joined receivers, regardless of changes in
      IP version encountered along the way.

      REQ 6: Both ASM and SSM technology must be supported.

      REQ 7: The solution(s) should allow operators to minimize the
      total incremental cost (investment plus operations during the
      transitional period)) due to multicast transition.

      REQ 8: The solution(s) should provide a clear evolutionary path to
      all-IPv6 operation.


5.  Acknowledgements

   Ron Bonica inspired the writing of this memo and shaped its content.
   Michael McBride provided useful comments on an intermediate version
   of this document.


6.  IANA Considerations

   This memo includes no request to IANA.


7.  Security Considerations

   To come.





Asaeda, et al.           Expires August 19, 2012                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft        Multicast Transition Overview        February 2012


8.  Informative References

   [I-D.mboned-64-mcast-addr-fmt]
              Boucadair, M., Qin, J., Lee, Y., Venaas, S., Li, X., and
              M. Xu, "IPv4-Embedded IPv6 Multicast Address Format (Work
              in Progress)", February 2012.

   [ID.tsou-multrans-addr-acquisition]
              Tsou, T., "Address Acquisition For Multicast Content When
              Source and Receiver Support Differing IP Versions (Work in
              Progress)", December 2011.

   [RFC2974]  Handley, M., Perkins, C., and E. Whelan, "Session
              Announcement Protocol", RFC 2974, October 2000.

   [RFC3376]  Cain, B., Deering, S., Kouvelas, I., Fenner, B., and A.
              Thyagarajan, "Internet Group Management Protocol, Version
              3", RFC 3376, October 2002.

   [RFC3810]  Vida, R. and L. Costa, "Multicast Listener Discovery
              Version 2 (MLDv2) for IPv6", RFC 3810, June 2004.

   [RFC4601]  Fenner, B., Handley, M., Holbrook, H., and I. Kouvelas,
              "Protocol Independent Multicast - Sparse Mode (PIM-SM):
              Protocol Specification (Revised)", RFC 4601, August 2006.

   [RFC6052]  Bao, C., Huitema, C., Bagnulo, M., Boucadair, M., and X.
              Li, "IPv6 Addressing of IPv4/IPv6 Translators", RFC 6052,
              October 2010.


Authors' Addresses

   Hitoshi Asaeda
   Keio University
   Graduate School of Media and Governance
   5322 Endo
   Fujisawa, Kanagawa  252-0882
   Japan

   Email: asaeda@wide.ad.jp
   URI:   http://www.sfc.wide.ad.jp/~asaeda/









Asaeda, et al.           Expires August 19, 2012                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft        Multicast Transition Overview        February 2012


   Marshall Eubanks
   AmericaFree.TV
   P.O. Box 141
   Clifton, VA  20124
   USA

   Phone:
   Email: marshall.eubanks@gmail.com


   Tina Tsou
   Huawei Technologies (USA)
   2330 Central Expressway
   Santa Clara, CA  95050
   USA

   Phone: +1 408 330 4424
   Email: Tina.Tsou.Zouting@huawei.com


   Stig Venaas
   Cisco Systems
   Tasman Drive
   San Jose, CA  95134
   USA

   Phone:
   Email: stig@cisco.com























Asaeda, et al.           Expires August 19, 2012                [Page 8]

