


Internet Engineering Task Force                                H. Asaeda
Internet-Draft                                           Keio University
Intended status: Informational                                M. Eubanks
Expires: August 5, 2012                                   AmericaFree.TV
                                                                 T. Tsou
                                               Huawei Technologies (USA)
                                                               S. Venaas
                                                           Cisco Systems
                                                        February 2, 2012


                     Multicast Transition Overview
              draft-eubanks-mboned-transition-overview-01

Abstract

   The transition from IPv4 to IPv6 raises issues for multicast
   signaling and multicast content distribution.  This memo describes
   the problem and briefly surveys the solution space.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 5, 2012.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2012 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must



Asaeda, et al.           Expires August 5, 2012                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft        Multicast Transition Overview        February 2012


   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
     1.1.  Requirements Language . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  A Look At the Multicast Transition Problem Space  . . . . . . . 3
   3.  Requirements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   4.  A Look At the Solution Space For Multicast Transition . . . . . 6
   5.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   6.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   7.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   8.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9


































Asaeda, et al.           Expires August 5, 2012                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft        Multicast Transition Overview        February 2012


1.  Introduction

   The transition from IPv4 to IPv6 presents challenges for the
   operation of multicast networks.  In particular, different versions
   of IP may be available along the path between the source and the
   receivers.  Also some nodes may support only IPv4, and some only
   IPv6.  This may be true for both unicast and multicast.
   Additionally, for a given source, the desired receivers may have
   different requirements.  [ID.jaclee-behave-v4v6-mcast-ps] illustrates
   the different end-to-end configurations that can occur during
   transition (and identifies the most likely ones) while exploring the
   problem of multicast transition for IPTV applications in particular.
   The reason that that draft concentrates on IPTV is that this
   application is encountering multicast transition issues in the
   present and these are likely to intensify in the near future.

   In this document, "multicast transition" will specifically refer to
   transitions between IPv4 and IPv6 or vice versa, including networks
   with multiple transitions say from IPv4 to IPv6 and back to IPv4, and
   a "multicast domain" will refer to a network or sub-network
   supporting one or both variants of Internet multicast.  Note that
   networks may support both versions of the Internet protocol without
   supporting multicast in both versions, and so multicast transitions
   may be required even in cases where end-to-end unicast transport is
   supported.

   The present memo provides a quick survey of the problem space and the
   possible solutions, as an aid to further discussion of the topic of
   multicast transition.

1.1.  Requirements Language

   This document contains no requirements language.


2.  A Look At the Multicast Transition Problem Space

   As [ID.jaclee-behave-v4v6-mcast-ps] points out, in common practice
   multicast video transport actually happens in three stages.  First,
   the receiver has to acquire the address(es) that it needs to request
   a particular multicast stream.  It always needs to learn the
   multicast group address or addresses.  Both any-source multicast
   (ASM) and specific-source multicast (SSM) support are necessary with
   these transitional mechanisms.  Due to the wide deployment of IGMPv2-
   only CPEs and ASM-only applications, ASM support is required.  If
   source-specific multicast (SSM) is deployed, the receiver also needs
   to learn the associated unicast source address for each multicast
   group address.  Existing arrangements to support this acquisition



Asaeda, et al.           Expires August 5, 2012                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft        Multicast Transition Overview        February 2012


   process will in some cases need modification to ensure that the
   receiver acquires the address(es) in the IP version that it
   understands.

   Following address acquisition, the receiver uses multicast signaling
   to request delivery of the user-selected multicast stream or streams.
   The key issue at this stage is that each time the multicast signaling
   crosses a boundary between a network supporting one IP version and a
   network supporting the other, the address(es) designating the
   requested multicast stream need to be remapped to the new version.
   This is required in all case for the group addresses, and also for
   unicast source addresses for SSM.  In addition, in the particular
   case where there is a transition at the receiver itself, protocol
   interworking between IGMP ([RFC2236], [RFC3376], [RFC5790]) and MLD
   ([RFC2710], [RFC3810], and again [RFC5790]) may be necessary.  Even
   in the case where the receiver shares a link with a (dual stack)
   multicast router, such interworking may be considered to occur
   internally in the multicast router as an intermediate step.

   The creation of multicast trees in response to multicast signaling
   relies on the use of reverse path forwarding (RPF) to avoid the
   creation of routing loops; this is also required in networks
   performing transitions between multicast domains.  In the face of
   address remapping, it has been suggested that each network along the
   path from source to receiver needs to know the ultimate source
   address for RPF to work.  In any event, one of the challenges
   presented by multicast transition is to find a way to avoid routing
   loops without requiring end to end source discovery.

   The final stage of multicast acquisition is the actual delivery of
   packets of multicast content, i.e., the flooding of data down the
   multicast trees.  Again, address mapping is required across each IP
   version boundary.  Both the unicast source and multicast group
   addresses appearing in the packet header in one network must be
   replaced by corresponding source and group addresses in the other IP
   version before the packet can be forwarded for its next stage of
   travel.  That means that unicast mapping is always required, even in
   the absence of SSM.  It may be advantageous to coordinate this
   mapping for multicast packets with the mapping used for unicast
   traffic.

   Address remapping across IP version boundaries is required in all
   three stages of acquisition of a multicast stream.
   [ID.venaas-behave-v4v6mc-framework] examines the issue of translation
   between IPv4 and IPv6 multicast addresses in various scenarios.  In
   many cases of practical interest, stateless mapping is possible.

   A key point is that address mapping requires coordination both in



Asaeda, et al.           Expires August 5, 2012                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft        Multicast Transition Overview        February 2012


   space and in time.  To ensure that the multicast stream requested is
   the one delivered, the same address(es), or a unique mapping of those
   addresses, must be used to designate the stream at any given point,
   whether at the stage of address acquisition, multicast signaling, or
   multicast content delivery.  Moreover, coordination between
   successive multicast domains in the path is required to ensure that
   the address(es) requested by the receiver are mapped in the source
   network to the stream that the user wishes to acquire.  In stateless
   mapping, the network must ensure that two streams that might be
   requested by a given user are not given the same address(es) at the
   same time; this is more difficult when transitioning into an IPv4
   domain given the smaller range of address space available in IPv4.

   In some unicast transition scenarios, part of the solution is to use
   dual stack networks.  However, if the same stream is broadcast as
   both IPv4 and IPv6 packets, bandwidth consumption to carry that
   stream increases substantially.  Some operators will thus choose to
   transmit multicast content through the network in just one IP
   version, even if the network implements dual stack for unicast
   traffic.  Technically, the same consideration does not apply to
   multicast signaling, but address remapping is unavoidable even so.


3.  Requirements

   From the description above, we can distill the following
   requirements:

      REQ 1: It must be possible for the receiver to acquire the
      multicast group address and, where applicable, the unicast source
      address of the target stream in the IP version that the receiver
      supports.

      REQ 2: It must be possible for the receiver to join the multicast
      distribution tree for the target stream even if the IP version
      used in the interior of the network to which the receiver is
      attached is different from the version supported by the receiver.

      REQ 3: Where local policy permits, it must be possible to extend
      the multicast distribution tree for a given stream across a
      network boundary where different IP versions are supported in the
      two networks separated by that boundary.

      REQ 4: When the multicast distribution tree for a given stream is
      extended across multiple network boundaries across one or more of
      which the IP version changes, it must be possible to avoid
      multicast routing loops.




Asaeda, et al.           Expires August 5, 2012                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft        Multicast Transition Overview        February 2012


      REQ 5: It must be possible to pass packets belonging to a given
      multicast stream to all joined receivers, regardless of changes in
      IP version encountered along the way.

      REQ 6: Both ASM and SSM technology must be supported.

      REQ 7: The solution(s) should allow operators to minimize the
      total incremental cost (investment plus operations during the
      transitional period)) due to multicast transition.

      REQ 8: The solution(s) should provide a clear evolutionary path to
      all-IPv6 operation.


4.  A Look At the Solution Space For Multicast Transition

   Consistently with the problem space overview, the multicast
   transition problem divides naturally into three parts:

   1.  providing a multicast group and possibly unicast source address
       to the receiver in the IP version supported by the receiver;

   2.  mediating the exchange of multicast signaling and content between
       the receiver and its network when the two support different IP
       versions;

   3.  mediating the exchange of multicast signaling and content between
       two networks supporting different IP versions along the path
       between the source and the receiver.

   Problem 1 is addressed in [ID.tsou-multrans-addr-acquisition].  In
   the IPTV case, the key element in the solution for address
   acquisition (discovery or announcement) is the processing of the
   electronic program guide (EPG) that provides the receiver with the
   multicast group and possibly the unicast source addresses it needs to
   request specific program instances.  Three possible strategies are
   considered:

   o  recognition and conversion of unsupported-IP-version addresses at
      the receiver after it receives the EPG, through a protocol
      exchange with a mapping function in the network;

   o  interception and remapping of addresses in the EPG as necessary by
      the network to which the receiver is attached, before the receiver
      receives information from the EPG;

   o  administrative modification of the EPG in advance of acquisition,
      either to provide the specific version required by each receiver



Asaeda, et al.           Expires August 5, 2012                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft        Multicast Transition Overview        February 2012


      or to carry addresses in both versions in a form that allows the
      receiver to select the version it supports.

   Problem 2 is addressed in [ID.zhou-multrans-af1-specification].  That
   draft uses the term "Type 1 Adaptation Function" (AF1) for a
   mediating function between the receiver and the network.  This
   function has two parts: translating the multicast access signaling
   (IGMP or MLD) to the signaling appropriate to the other IP version
   (MLD or IGMP respectively), and modifying incoming packets of content
   to the version supported by the receiver.  These packets may need
   either header translation or decapsulation, depending on the
   deployment.  Difficulties in evolution of the decapsulation option
   with the transition to all-IPv6 operation are noted.

   Problem 3 is addressed in [ID.taylor-multrans-af2-specification].
   Here the term "Type 2 Adaptation Function" (AF2) is used for the
   function required.  Again, this function operates both on multicast
   signaling and multicast content.  On the signaling side, the function
   maps the addresses contained in PIM messages from one IP version to
   the other.  With respect to content, depending on deployment, the AF2
   either encapsulates or translates the headers of incoming packets of
   multicast content before forwarding them toward the receiver.

   A basic tool required for all of these problems is a method to map
   consistently between IPv4 and IPv6 versions of the source and group
   addresses.  [RFC6052] provides the necessary mapping for the unicast
   source addresses, if present.
   [ID.boucadair-behave-64-multicast-address-format] provides a
   stateless solution for the mapping between IPv4 and IPv6 multicast
   addresses.

   [ID.softwire-dslite-multicast] is essentially an applicability
   statement, showing the application of the AF1, AF2, and address
   mapping to the particular case where DS-Lite is deployed.  AF1 is
   located in the "multicast B4" (mB4), along with the unicast DS-Lite
   B4 function, at the customer edge.  AF2 is located in the "multicast
   AFTR" at the border between the IPv6 network to which the customer is
   attached and the IPv4 network containing the source.  The draft
   specifies the use of encapsulation of multicast content across the
   IPv6 network.

   [ID.xu-softwire-mesh-multicast] deals with the particular case where
   a multicast-capable network provides a transit service between other
   multicast-capable networks of differing IP versions.  Its interaction
   with the proposed AF2 functionality requires further study.






Asaeda, et al.           Expires August 5, 2012                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft        Multicast Transition Overview        February 2012


5.  Acknowledgements

   Ron Bonica inspired the writing of this memo and shaped its content.
   Michael McBride inspired the text regarding dual stack networks and
   added some text regarding the need for ASM support in Section 2.


6.  IANA Considerations

   This memo includes no request to IANA.


7.  Security Considerations

   To come.


8.  Informative References

   [ID.boucadair-behave-64-multicast-address-format]
              Boucadair, M., Qin, J., Lee, Y., Venaas, S., Li, X., and
              M. Xu, "IPv4-Embedded IPv6 Multicast Address Format (Work
              in progress)", October 2011.

   [ID.jaclee-behave-v4v6-mcast-ps]
              Jacquenet, C., Boucadair, M., Lee, Y., Qin, J., and T.
              Tsou, "IPv4-IPv6 Multicast: Problem Statement and Use
              Cases (Work in progress)", November 2011.

   [ID.softwire-dslite-multicast]
              Wang, Q., Qin, J., Boucadair, M., Jacquenet, C., and Y.
              Lee, "Multicast Extensions to DS-Lite Technique in
              Broadband Deployments (Work in progress)", October 2011.

   [ID.taylor-multrans-af2-specification]
              Taylor, T. and C. Zhou, "Specification of an Adaptation
              Function Between Two Multicast Networks Supporting
              Different IP Versions (Work in progress)", December 2011.

   [ID.tsou-multrans-addr-acquisition]
              Tsou, T., "Address Acquisition For Multicast Content When
              Source and Receiver Support Differing IP Versions (Work in
              progress)", December 2011.

   [ID.venaas-behave-v4v6mc-framework]
              Venaas, S., Li, X., and C. Bao, "Framework for IPv4/IPv6
              Multicast Translation (Work in progress)", June 2011.




Asaeda, et al.           Expires August 5, 2012                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft        Multicast Transition Overview        February 2012


   [ID.xu-softwire-mesh-multicast]
              Xu, M., Cui, Y., Yang, S., Metz, C., and G. Shepherd,
              "Softwire Mesh Multicast (Work in progress)", July 2011.

   [ID.zhou-multrans-af1-specification]
              Zhou, C. and T. Taylor, "Specification of a Provider-
              Managed Adaptive Function Between a Multicast Receiver and
              a Provider Network Supporting a Different IP Version (Work
              in progress)", December 2011.

   [RFC2236]  Fenner, W., "Internet Group Management Protocol, Version
              2", RFC 2236, November 1997.

   [RFC2710]  Deering, S., Fenner, W., and B. Haberman, "Multicast
              Listener Discovery (MLD) for IPv6", RFC 2710,
              October 1999.

   [RFC3376]  Cain, B., Deering, S., Kouvelas, I., Fenner, B., and A.
              Thyagarajan, "Internet Group Management Protocol, Version
              3", RFC 3376, October 2002.

   [RFC3810]  Vida, R. and L. Costa, "Multicast Listener Discovery
              Version 2 (MLDv2) for IPv6", RFC 3810, June 2004.

   [RFC5790]  Liu, H., Cao, W., and H. Asaeda, "Lightweight Internet
              Group Management Protocol Version 3 (IGMPv3) and Multicast
              Listener Discovery Version 2 (MLDv2) Protocols", RFC 5790,
              February 2010.

   [RFC6052]  Bao, C., Huitema, C., Bagnulo, M., Boucadair, M., and X.
              Li, "IPv6 Addressing of IPv4/IPv6 Translators", RFC 6052,
              October 2010.


Authors' Addresses

   Hitoshi Asaeda
   Keio University
   Graduate School of Media and Governance
   5322 Endo
   Fujisawa, Kanagawa  252-0882
   Japan

   Email: asaeda@wide.ad.jp
   URI:   http://www.sfc.wide.ad.jp/~asaeda/






Asaeda, et al.           Expires August 5, 2012                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft        Multicast Transition Overview        February 2012


   Marshall Eubanks
   AmericaFree.TV
   P.O. Box 141
   Clifton, VA  20124
   USA

   Phone:
   Email: marshall.eubanks@gmail.com


   Tina Tsou
   Huawei Technologies (USA)
   2330 Central Expressway
   Santa Clara, CA  95050
   USA

   Phone: +1 408 330 4424
   Email: Tina.Tsou.Zouting@huawei.com


   Stig Venaas
   Cisco Systems
   Tasman Drive
   San Jose, CA  95134
   USA

   Phone:
   Email: stig@cisco.com























Asaeda, et al.           Expires August 5, 2012                [Page 10]

