


MPLS                                                  C. Villamizar, Ed.
Internet-Draft                                    Outer Cape Cod Network
Intended status: Informational                                Consulting
Expires: April 11, 2013                                      K. Kompella
                                                        Contrail Systems
                                                         October 8, 2012


        MPLS Forwarding Compliance and Performance Requirements
                  draft-villamizar-mpls-forwarding-00

Abstract

   This document provides guidelines for implementors regarding MPLS
   forwarding and a basis for evaluations of forwarding implementations.
   Guidelines cover basic MPLS forwarding, forwarding when a deep MPLS
   label stack is encountered, MPLS UHP operations which require one or
   more label POP plus a PUSH, guidelines for hashing an MPLS stack and
   payload for multipath, and conformance and performance requirements
   for recent pseudowire and MPLS standards.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 11, 2013.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2012 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect



Villamizar & Kompella    Expires April 11, 2013                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft               MPLS Forwarding                October 2012


   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.1.  Apparent Misconceptions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.2.  Target Audience  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.  Forwarding Issues  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     2.1.  Forwarding Basics  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
       2.1.1.  Early Uses of Multiple Label Stack Entries . . . . . .  5
       2.1.2.  MPLS Link Bundling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
       2.1.3.  MPLS Hierarchy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     2.2.  Packet Rates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     2.3.  MPLS Multipath Techniques  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
       2.3.1.  Pseudowire Control Word  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
       2.3.2.  Pseudowire Flow Label  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
       2.3.3.  MPLS Entropy Label . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     2.4.  MPLS-TP and UHP  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   3.  Questions for Suppliers  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   4.  Forwarding Compliance and Performance Testing  . . . . . . . . 11
   5.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   6.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   7.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
     7.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
     7.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17





















Villamizar & Kompella    Expires April 11, 2013                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft               MPLS Forwarding                October 2012


1.  Introduction

   The document addresses concerns raised on the MPLS WG mailing list
   about shortcomings in implementations of MPLS forwarding.

   Although this document is informational, the key words "MUST", "MUST
   NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT",
   "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" are used.  For those who wish to
   take the advice of this document, these keywords SHOULD be
   interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].  Similarly, the
   References section is split into Normative and Informative
   subsections.  In this case references which are normative for
   forwarding are listed as normative.  References which describe
   signaling only, though normative with respect to signaling, are
   listed as informative here, as they are informative with respect to
   MPLS forwarding.

1.1.  Apparent Misconceptions

   In early generations of forwarding silicon (which may now be behind
   us), there apparently were some misconceptions about MPLS.  The
   following statements may clear up some of these misconceptions.

   1.  There are practical reasons to have more than one or two labels
       in an MPLS label stack.  Under some circumstances the label stack
       can become quite deep.  See Section 2.1.

   2.  The label stack must be considered to be arbitrarily deep.  If a
       the bottom of the label stack cannot be found, but sufficient
       number of labels exist to forward, an LSR MUST forward the
       packet.  An LSR MUST NOT assume the packet is malformed unless
       the end of packet is found before bottom of stack.  See
       Section 2.1.

   3.  In networks where deep label stacks are encountered, they are not
       rare.  Full packet rate performance is required regardless of
       label stack depth, except where multiple POP operations are
       required.  See Section 2.1.

   4.  Research has shown that long bursts of short packets with 40 byte
       or 44 byte common IP payload sizes in these bursts.  This is due
       to TCP ACK compression [ACK-compression].

       A.  A forwarding engine SHOULD, if practical, be able to sustain
           an arbitarily long sequence of small packets arriving at full
           interface rate.





Villamizar & Kompella    Expires April 11, 2013                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft               MPLS Forwarding                October 2012


       B.  If indefinite full packet rate for small packets is not
           practical, a forwarding engine MUST be able to buffer a long
           sequence of small packets inbound to the decision engine and
           sustain full interface rate for some reasonable average
           packet rate.

       See Section 2.2.

   5.  For practical reasons, support for pseudowire control word SHOULD
       be considered mandatory by the implementor and system designer.
       Deployment of pseudowire control word MAY be considered optional.
       See Section 2.3.1.

   6.  For practical reasons, support for adding a pseudowire Flow Label
       [RFC6391] SHOULD be considered mandatory by the implementor and
       system designer.  Deployment of this features MAY be considered
       optional.  See Section 2.3.2.

   7.  For practical reasons, support for adding a MPLS Entropy Label
       [I-D.ietf-mpls-entropy-label] SHOULD be considered mandatory by
       the implementor and system designer.  Deployment of this features
       MAY be considered optional.  See Section 2.3.3.

1.2.  Target Audience

   This document is intended for multiple audiences: implementor
   (implementing MPLS forwarding in silicon or in software); systems
   designer (putting together a MPLS forwarding systems); deployer
   (running an MPLS network).  These guidelines are intended to serve
   the following purposes:

   1.  Explain what to do and what not to do when a deep label stack is
       encountered. (audience: implementor)

   2.  Highlight pitfalls to look for when implementing an MPLS
       forwarding chip. (audience: implementor)

   3.  Provide a checklist of features and performance specificiations
       to request. (audience: systems designer, deployer)

   4.  Provide a set of tests to perform. (audience: systems designer,
       deployer).

   The implementor, systems designer, and deployer have a transitive
   supplier customer relationship.  It is in the best interest of the
   supplier to review their product against their customer's checklist
   and customer's customer's checklist if applicable.




Villamizar & Kompella    Expires April 11, 2013                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft               MPLS Forwarding                October 2012


2.  Forwarding Issues

   A brief review of forwarding issues is provided in the subsections
   that follow.  This section provides some background on why some of
   these requirements exist.  The questions to ask of suppliers and
   testing is covered in the following sections, Section 3 and
   Section 4.

2.1.  Forwarding Basics

   Basic MPLS architecture and MPLS encapsulation, and thereforepacket
   forwarding is defined in [RFC3031] and [RFC3032].  RFC3031 and
   RFC3032 are somewhat LDP centric.  RSVP-TE supports traffic
   engineering (TE) and fast reroute, features that LDP lacks.  The base
   document for RSVP-TE based MPLSis [RFC3209].

   A few RFCs update RFC3032.  Those with impact on forwarding include
   the following.

   1.  TTL processing is clarified in [RFC3443].

   2.  The use of MPLS Explicit NULL is modified in [RFC4182].

   3.  Diffserv is supported by [RFC3270] and [RFC4124].  The "EXP"
       field is renamed to "Traffic Class" in [RFC5462], removing any
       misconception that it was available for experimentation or could
       be ignored.

   4.  ECN is supported by [RFC5129].

   5.  The MPLS G-ACh and GAL are defined in [RFC5586].

   A few RFCs update RFC3209.  Those that are listed as updating RFC3209
   generally impact only RSVP-TE signaling.  Forwarding is modified by
   major extension built upon RFC3209.  Some of these extensions are
   discussed in following subsections.

2.1.1.  Early Uses of Multiple Label Stack Entries

   MPLS deployments in the early part of the prior decade (circa 2000)
   tended to support either LDP or RSVP-TE.  LDP was favored by some for
   its ability to scale close to the network edges without adding
   deployment complexity.  RSVP-TE was favored where traffic engineering
   or fast reroute were considered important.

   The use of MPLS FRR [RFC4090] added a second label to MPLS traffic,
   but only when FRR protection was in use.




Villamizar & Kompella    Expires April 11, 2013                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft               MPLS Forwarding                October 2012


   At least one major service provider made use of LDP over RSVP-TE in
   their core network in the circa 2000-2005 time frame.  LDP supported
   VPN services to the provider edges.  RSVP-TE provided TE and FRR in
   the core.  This yields two labels on nearly all packets in the core.
   They also used FRR which yields three labels on a large subset of
   traffic while FRR protection is active.  VPNs added yet another
   label, bringing the label stack depth (with FRR) to four.

2.1.2.  MPLS Link Bundling

   MPLS Link Bundling was the first RFC to address the need for multiple
   parallel links between nodes [RFC4201].  MPLS Link Bundling is
   notable in that it tried not to change MPLS forwarding, except in
   specifying the "All-Ones" component link.  MPLS Link Bundling is
   seldom if ever deployed.  Instead multipath techniques described in
   Section 2.3 are used.

2.1.3.  MPLS Hierarchy

   MPLS hierarchy is defined in [RFC4206].  Although RFC4206 is
   considered part of GMPLS, the Packet Switching Capable (PSC) portion
   of the MPLS hierarchy are applicable to MPLS and may be supported in
   an otherwise GMPLS free implementation.  The MPLS PSC hierarchy
   remains the most likely means of providing further scaling in an
   RSVP-TE MPLS network, particularly where the network is designed to
   provide RSVP-TE connectivity to the edges.  This is the case for
   envisioned MPLS-TP networks.  The use of the MPLS PSC hierarchy can
   add as many as four labels to a label stack, though it is likely that
   only one layer of PSC will be used in the near future.

2.2.  Packet Rates

   While average packet size of Internet traffic may be large, long
   sequences of small packets have both been predicted in theory and
   observed in practice.  Traffic compression and TCP ACK compression
   can conspire to create long sequences of packets of 40-44 bytes in
   payload length.  If carried over Ethernet, the 64 byte minimum
   payload applies, yielding a packet rate of approximately 150 Mpps
   (million packets per second) for the duration of the burst.  The peak
   rate is higher for other encapsulations, as high as 250 Mpps.

   The loss of some TCP ACK packets are not the primary concern when
   such a burst occurs.  When a burst occurs, any other packets,
   regardless of packet length are dropped once input buffers are
   exceeded.  Buffers in front of the packet decision engine are often
   very small.

   Internet service providers and content providers generally specify



Villamizar & Kompella    Expires April 11, 2013                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft               MPLS Forwarding                October 2012


   full rate forwarding with 40 byte payload packets as a requirement.
   This requirement often can be waived if the provider can be convinced
   that when long sequence of short packets occur no packets will be
   dropped.

   With adequate buffers before the packet decision engine, an LSR can
   absorb a long sequence of short packets.  Even if the output is
   slowed to the point where light congestion occurs, the packets,
   having cleared the decision process, can make use of larger VOQ or
   output side buffers and be dealt with according to configured QoS
   treatment, rather than dropped completely at random.

   Packet rate requirements apply regardless of which network tier
   equipment is deployed in.  Whether deployed in the network core or
   near the network edges, packets must be processed at full line rate
   or with sufficient buffering prior to the packet decision engine.

2.3.  MPLS Multipath Techniques

   In any large provider, service providers and content providers, hash
   based multipath techniques are used in the core.  In many of these
   providers hash based multipath is used in the edge as well and in
   some cases the metro.

   The most common multipath techniques are ECMP applied at the IP
   forwarding level, Ethernet LAG with inspection of the IP payload, and
   multipath on links carrying both IP and MPLS, where the IP header is
   inspected below the MPLS label stack.  In most core networks, the
   vast majority of traffic is MPLS encapsulated.

   In order to support an adequately even load distribution across
   multiple links, IP addresses must be used.  Common practice today is
   to reinspect the IP addresses at each LSR and use the label stack and
   IP addresses in a hash performed at each LSR.

   The use of this technique is so ubiquitous in large core networks
   that lack of support for multipath makes any product unsuitable for
   use in large core networks.  This will continue to be the case in the
   near future, even as deployment of MPLS Entropy Label begins to relax
   the core LSR multipath performance requirements given the existing
   deployed base of edge equipment without the ability to add an Entropy
   Label.

   A generation of edge equipment supporting the ability to add an MPLS
   Entropy Label is needed before the performance requirements for core
   LSR can be relaxed.  However, it is likely that two generations of
   deployment in the future will allow core LSR to support full packet
   rate only when a relatively small number of MPLS labels need to be



Villamizar & Kompella    Expires April 11, 2013                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft               MPLS Forwarding                October 2012


   inspected before hashing.  For now, don't count on it.

2.3.1.  Pseudowire Control Word

   Within the core of a network some form of multipath is almost certain
   to be used.  Multipath techniques deployed today are likely to be
   looking beneath the label stack for an opportunity to hash on IP
   addresses.

   A pseudowire encapsulated at a network edge must have a means to
   prevent reordering within the core if the pseudowire will be crossing
   a network core, or any part of a network topology where multipath is
   used.

   Not supporting the ability to encapsulate a pseudowire with a control
   word may lock a product out from consideration.  A pseudowire
   capability without control word support might be sufficient for
   applications which are strictly both intra-metro and low bandwidth.
   However a provider with other applications will very likely not
   tolerate having equipment which can only support a subset of their
   pseudowire needs.

2.3.2.  Pseudowire Flow Label

   Unlike a pseudowire control word, a pseudowire flow label [RFC6391],
   is required only for relatively large capacity pseudowires.  There
   are many cases where a pseudowire flow label makes sense.  Any
   service such as a VPN which carries IP traffic within a pseudowire
   can make use of a pseudowire flow label.

   Any pseudowire which does not carry a flow label is in effect a
   single microflow (in [RFC2475] terms).  Where multipath makes use of
   a simple hash (see Section 2.3) the presense of large microflows that
   consumes 10% of the capacity of a potentially congested link, can
   upset the traffic balance and in effect reduce the effective capacity
   of the entire microflow by far more than 10%.  Therefore is a network
   where a significant number of parallel 10 Gb/s links exists, even a 1
   Gb/s pseudowire should carry a flow label if possible.

2.3.3.  MPLS Entropy Label

   The MPLS Entropy Label simplifies flow group identification
   [I-D.ietf-mpls-entropy-label] in the network core.  Prior to the MPLS
   Entropy Label core LSR needed to inspect the entire label stack and
   often the IP headers to provide an adequate distribution of traffic
   when using multipath techniques (see Section 2.3).  With the use of
   MPLS Entropy Label, a hash can be performed closer to network edges,
   placed in the label stack, and used within the network core.



Villamizar & Kompella    Expires April 11, 2013                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft               MPLS Forwarding                October 2012


   The MPLS Entropy Label avoid full label stack and payload inspection
   within the core where performance levels are most difficult to
   acheive (see Section 2.2).  The label stack inspection can be
   terminated as soon as the first Entropy Label is encounted, which is
   generally after a small number of labels are inspected.

   In order to provide these benefits in the core, LSR closer to the
   edge must be capable of adding an entropy label.  This support may
   not be required in the access tier, the tier closest to the customer,
   but is likely to be required in the edge or the border to the network
   core.  LSR peering with external networks will also need to be able
   to add an Entropy Label.

2.4.  MPLS-TP and UHP

   MPLS-TP introduces forwarding demands that will be extremely
   difficult to meet in a core network.  Most troublesome is the
   requirement for Ultimate Hop Popping (UHP, the opposite of
   Penultimate Hop Popping or PHP).  Using UHP opens the possibility of
   one or more MPLS POP operation plus an MPLS SWAP operation for each
   packet.  The potential for multiple lookups and multiple counter
   instances per packet exists.

   As networks grow and tunneling of LDP LSPs into RSVP-TE LSPs is used,
   and/or RSVP-TE hierarchy is used, the requrement to perform one or
   two or more MPLS POP operations plus a MPLS SWAP operation (and
   possibly a PUSH or two) increases.  If MPLS-TP LM (link monitoring)
   OAM is enabled at each layer, then a packet and byte count must be
   maintained for each POP and SWAP operation.


3.  Questions for Suppliers

   The following questions should be asked of a supplier.  These
   questions are grouped into broad categories.

   Basic Compliance

       Q#1  Can the implementation forward packets with an arbitrarily
            large stack depth?

   Basic Performance

       Q#2  Can very small packets be forwarded at full line rate on all
            interfaces indefinitely?






Villamizar & Kompella    Expires April 11, 2013                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft               MPLS Forwarding                October 2012


       Q#3  Customers must decide whether to relax the prior requirement
            and to what extent.  If the answer to the prior question is
            "no", then:

            a.  What is the smallest packet size where full line rate
                forwarding can be supported?

            b.  What is the longest burst of full rate small packets
                that can be supported?

       Q#4  How many POP operations can be supported along with a SWAP
            operation at full line rate while maintaining per LSP packet
            and byte counts for each POP and SWAP?  This requirement is
            particularly relevant for MPLS-TP.

       Q#5  For a worst case where all packets arrive on one LSP, what
            is the counter overflow time?  Are any means provided to
            avoid polling all counters at short intervals?  This applies
            to both MPLS and MPLS-TP.

   Multipath Capabilities and Performance

       Multipath capabilities do not apply to MPLS-TP but apply to MPLS
       and apply if MPLS-TP is carried in MPLS.

       Q#6   How many MPLS labels can be included in a hash based on the
             MPLS label stack?

       Q#7   Is packet rate performance decreased beyond some number of
             labels?

       Q#8   Can the IP addresses below the MPLS stack be used in the
             hash?

       Q#9   At what maximum MPLS label stack depth can Bottom of Stack
             and an IP header appear without impacting packet rate
             performance?

       Q#10  Are reserved labels included in the label stack hash?  They
             MUST NOT be included.

   Pseudowire Capabilities and Performance

       Q#11  Is the pseudowire control word supported?







Villamizar & Kompella    Expires April 11, 2013                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft               MPLS Forwarding                October 2012


       Q#12  What is the maximum rate of pseudowire encapsulation and
             decasulation?  Apply the same questions as in Based
             Performance for any packet based pseudowire such as IP VPN
             or Ethernet.

       Q#13  Does inclusion of a pseudowire control word impact
             performance?

       Q#14  Are flow labels supported?

       Q#15  If so, what fields are hashed on for the flow label for
             different types of pseudowires?

       Q#16  Does inclusion of a flow label impact performance?

   Entropy Label Support and Performance

       Q#17  Can an entropy label be added when acting as in ingress LER
             and can it be removed when acting as an egress LER?

       Q#18  If so, what fields are hashed on for the entropy label?

       Q#19  Does adding or removing an entropy label impact packet rate
             performance?

       Q#20  Can an entropy label be detected in the label stack, used
             in the hash, and properly terminate the search for further
             information to hash on?

       Q#21  Does using an entropy label have any negative impact on
             performance?  It should have no impact or a positive
             impact.


4.  Forwarding Compliance and Performance Testing

   Packet rate performance of equipment supporting a large number of 10
   Gb/s or 100 Gb/s links is not possible using desktop computers or
   workstations.  The use of high end workstations as a source of test
   traffic was barely viable 20 years ago, but is no longer at all
   viable.  Though custom microcode has been used on specialized router
   forwarding cards to serve the purpose of generating test traffic and
   measuring it, for the most part performance testing will require
   specialized test equipment.  There are multiple sources of suitable
   equipment.

   The set of tests listed here do not correspond one-to-one to the set
   of questions in Section 3.  The same categorization is used and these



Villamizar & Kompella    Expires April 11, 2013                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft               MPLS Forwarding                October 2012


   tests largely serve to validate answers provided the the prior
   questions, and can also provide answers where a supplier is unwilling
   to disclose compliance or performance.

   Performance testing is the domain of the IETF Benchmark Methodology
   Working Group (BMWG).  Below are brief descriptions of conformance
   and performance tests.  Some very basic tests are specified in
   [RFC5695] which partially cover only the basic performance test T#2.

   The following tests should be performed by the systems designer, or
   deployer, or performed by the supplier on their behalf if it is not
   practical for the potential customer to perform the tests directly.
   These tests are grouped into broad categories.

   Basic Compliance

       T#1  Test forwarding at a high rate for packets with varying
            number of label entriess.  While packets with more than a
            dozen label entriess are unlikely to be used in any
            practical scenario today, it is useful to know if
            limitations exists.

   Basic Performance

       T#2  Test packet forwarding at full line rate with small packets.
            See [RFC5695].  The most likely case to fail is the smallest
            packet size.

       T#3  If the prior tests did not succeed for all packat sizes,
            then perform the following tests.

            a.  Increase the packet size by 4 bytes until a size is
                found that can be forwarded at full rate.

            b.  Inject bursts of consecutive small packets into a stream
                of larger packets.  Allow some time for recovery between
                bursts.  Increase the number of packets in the burst
                until packets are dropped.  One way to accomplish this
                is to use a router with higher priority set on the
                interfaces on which small packets are sent to it.  The
                router should buffer the lower priority large packets.
                It is best to inject the small packets to this router on
                a faster interface (if such a thing exists), or more
                than one interface.







Villamizar & Kompella    Expires April 11, 2013                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft               MPLS Forwarding                October 2012


       T#4  Send test traffic where a SWAP operation is required.  Also
            set up multiple LSP carried over other LSP where the device
            under test (DUT) is the egress of these LSP.  Create test
            packets such that the SWAP operation is performed after POP
            operations, increasing the number of POP operations until
            forwarding of small packets at full line rate can no longer
            be supported.  Also check to see at what point the full set
            of counters can no longer be maintained.  This requirement
            is particularly relevant for MPLS-TP.

       T#5  Send all traffic on one LSP and see if the counters become
            inaccurate.  Often counters on silicon are much smaller than
            the 64 bit counters in IETF MIB.  System developers should
            consider what counter polling rate is necessary to maintain
            accurate counters and whether those polling rates are
            practical.  Relevant MIBs for MPLS are discussed in
            [RFC4221] and [RFC6639].

   Multipath Capabilities and Performance

       Multipath capabilities do not apply to MPLS-TP but apply to MPLS
       and apply if MPLS-TP is carried in MPLS.

       T#6   Send traffic at a rate well exceeding the capacity of a
             single multipath component link, and where entropy exists
             only below the top of stack.  If only the top label is used
             this test will fail immediately.

       T#7   Move the labels with entropy down in the stack until either
             the full forwarding rate can no longer be supported or most
             or all packets try to use the same component link.

       T#8   Repeat the two tests above with the entropy contained in IP
             addresses below the label stack rather than in the label
             stack.

       T#9   Determine whether traffic that contains a pseudowire
             control word is interpreted as IP traffic.  Information in
             the payload MUST NOT be used in the load balancing if the
             first nibble of the packet is not 4 or 6 (IPv4 or IPv6).

       T#10  Determine whether reserved labels are included in the label
             stack hash.  They MUST NOT be included.








Villamizar & Kompella    Expires April 11, 2013                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft               MPLS Forwarding                October 2012


   Pseudowire Capabilities and Performance

       T#11  Determine whether pseudowire can be set up with a
             pseudowire label and pseudowire control word added at
             ingress and the pseudowire label and pseudowire control
             word removed at egress.

       T#12  For pseudowire that contains variable length payload
             packets, repeat the packet size based performance tests for
             pseudowire ingress and egress functions.

       T#13  Repeat pseudowire performance tests with and without a
             pseudowire control word.

       T#14  Determine whether pseudowire can be set up with a
             pseudowire label, flow label, and pseudowire control word
             added at ingress and the pseudowire label, flow label, and
             pseudowire control word removed at egress.

       T#15  Determine which payload fields are used to create the flow
             label and whether the set of fields and algorithm provide
             sufficient entropy for load balancing.

       T#16  Repeat pseudowire performance tests with flow labels
             included.

   Entropy Label Support and Performance

       T#17  Determine whether entropy labels are supported.

       T#18  Determine which fields are used to create an entropy label.
             Labels further down in the stack, including entropy labels
             further down and IP payload where applicable should be
             used.  Determine whether the set of fields and algorithm
             provide sufficient entropy for load balancing.

       T#19  Repeat performance tests at LSP ingress and egress when
             entropy labels are added or removed.

       T#20  Determine whether an ELI is detected when acting as a
             midpoint LSR and whether the search for further information
             on which to base the load balancing is used.  Information
             below the entropy labe MUST NOT be used.

       T#21  Repeat performance tests for midpoint LSR with entropy
             labels found at various label stack depths.





Villamizar & Kompella    Expires April 11, 2013                [Page 14]

Internet-Draft               MPLS Forwarding                October 2012


5.  IANA Considerations

   This memo includes no request to IANA.


6.  Security Considerations

   This document reviews forwarding behaviour specified elsewhere and
   points out compliance and performance requirements.  As such it
   introduces no new security requirements or concerns.  Knowledge of
   potential performance shortcomings may serve to help avoid pitfalls,
   but in very unlikely circumstances such knowledge could in principle
   be the basis of denial of service.  In practice such extreme data and
   packet rate would be needed to make this type of denial of service
   extremely unlikely and undetectable denial of service impossible.


7.  References

7.1.  Normative References

   [I-D.ietf-mpls-entropy-label]
              Kompella, K., Drake, J., Amante, S., Henderickx, W., and
              L. Yong, "The Use of Entropy Labels in MPLS Forwarding",
              draft-ietf-mpls-entropy-label-06 (work in progress),
              September 2012.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC3032]  Rosen, E., Tappan, D., Fedorkow, G., Rekhter, Y.,
              Farinacci, D., Li, T., and A. Conta, "MPLS Label Stack
              Encoding", RFC 3032, January 2001.

   [RFC3209]  Awduche, D., Berger, L., Gan, D., Li, T., Srinivasan, V.,
              and G. Swallow, "RSVP-TE: Extensions to RSVP for LSP
              Tunnels", RFC 3209, December 2001.

   [RFC3270]  Le Faucheur, F., Wu, L., Davie, B., Davari, S., Vaananen,
              P., Krishnan, R., Cheval, P., and J. Heinanen, "Multi-
              Protocol Label Switching (MPLS) Support of Differentiated
              Services", RFC 3270, May 2002.

   [RFC3443]  Agarwal, P. and B. Akyol, "Time To Live (TTL) Processing
              in Multi-Protocol Label Switching (MPLS) Networks",
              RFC 3443, January 2003.

   [RFC4090]  Pan, P., Swallow, G., and A. Atlas, "Fast Reroute



Villamizar & Kompella    Expires April 11, 2013                [Page 15]

Internet-Draft               MPLS Forwarding                October 2012


              Extensions to RSVP-TE for LSP Tunnels", RFC 4090,
              May 2005.

   [RFC4182]  Rosen, E., "Removing a Restriction on the use of MPLS
              Explicit NULL", RFC 4182, September 2005.

   [RFC4201]  Kompella, K., Rekhter, Y., and L. Berger, "Link Bundling
              in MPLS Traffic Engineering (TE)", RFC 4201, October 2005.

   [RFC5129]  Davie, B., Briscoe, B., and J. Tay, "Explicit Congestion
              Marking in MPLS", RFC 5129, January 2008.

   [RFC5586]  Bocci, M., Vigoureux, M., and S. Bryant, "MPLS Generic
              Associated Channel", RFC 5586, June 2009.

   [RFC6391]  Bryant, S., Filsfils, C., Drafz, U., Kompella, V., Regan,
              J., and S. Amante, "Flow-Aware Transport of Pseudowires
              over an MPLS Packet Switched Network", RFC 6391,
              November 2011.

7.2.  Informative References

   [ACK-compression]
              "Observations and Dynamics of a Congestion Control
              Algorithm: The Effects of Two-Way Traffic", Proc. ACM
              SIGCOMM, ACM Computer Communications Review (CCR) Vol 21,
              No 4, 1991, pp.133-147., 1991.

   [RFC2475]  Blake, S., Black, D., Carlson, M., Davies, E., Wang, Z.,
              and W. Weiss, "An Architecture for Differentiated
              Services", RFC 2475, December 1998.

   [RFC3031]  Rosen, E., Viswanathan, A., and R. Callon, "Multiprotocol
              Label Switching Architecture", RFC 3031, January 2001.

   [RFC4124]  Le Faucheur, F., "Protocol Extensions for Support of
              Diffserv-aware MPLS Traffic Engineering", RFC 4124,
              June 2005.

   [RFC4206]  Kompella, K. and Y. Rekhter, "Label Switched Paths (LSP)
              Hierarchy with Generalized Multi-Protocol Label Switching
              (GMPLS) Traffic Engineering (TE)", RFC 4206, October 2005.

   [RFC4221]  Nadeau, T., Srinivasan, C., and A. Farrel, "Multiprotocol
              Label Switching (MPLS) Management Overview", RFC 4221,
              November 2005.

   [RFC5462]  Andersson, L. and R. Asati, "Multiprotocol Label Switching



Villamizar & Kompella    Expires April 11, 2013                [Page 16]

Internet-Draft               MPLS Forwarding                October 2012


              (MPLS) Label Stack Entry: "EXP" Field Renamed to "Traffic
              Class" Field", RFC 5462, February 2009.

   [RFC5695]  Akhter, A., Asati, R., and C. Pignataro, "MPLS Forwarding
              Benchmarking Methodology for IP Flows", RFC 5695,
              November 2009.

   [RFC6639]  King, D. and M. Venkatesan, "Multiprotocol Label Switching
              Transport Profile (MPLS-TP) MIB-Based Management
              Overview", RFC 6639, June 2012.


Authors' Addresses

   Curtis Villamizar (editor)
   Outer Cape Cod Network Consulting

   Email: curtis@occnc.com


   Kireeti Kompella
   Contrail Systems

   Email: kireeti.kompella@gmail.com



























Villamizar & Kompella    Expires April 11, 2013                [Page 17]

