


CCAMP                                                 C. Villamizar, Ed.
Internet-Draft                                      Infinera Corporation
Intended status: Informational                             June 29, 2010
Expires: December 31, 2010


                 Use of Multipath with MPLS-TP and MPLS
                 draft-villamizar-mpls-tp-multipath-00

Abstract

   Many MPLS implementations have supported multipath techniques and
   many MPLS deployments have used multipath techniques, particularly in
   very high bandwidth applications, such as provider IP/MPLS core
   networks.  MPLS-TP has discouraged the use of multipath techniques.
   Some degradation of MPLS-TP OAM performance cannot be avoided when
   operating over current high bandwidth multipath implementations.

   The tradeoffs involved in using multipath techniques with MPLS and
   MPLS-TP are described.  Requirements are discussed which enable full
   MPLS-TP compliant LSP including full OAM capability to be carried
   over MPLS LSP which are traversing multipath links.  Other means of
   supporting MPLS-TP coexisting with MPLS and multipath are discussed.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 31, 2010.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents



Villamizar              Expires December 31, 2010               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft         MPLS-TP and MPLS Multipath              June 2010


   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     1.1.  Multipath Behavior of Widely Deployed Equipment  . . . . .  4
     1.2.  New Requirements imposed by MPLS-TP  . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     1.3.  Apparantly Conflicting Requirements  . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     1.4.  Requirements Language  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   2.  Definitions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   3.  Multipath Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     3.1.  Scalability and Large Capacity Requirements  . . . . . . .  8
     3.2.  MPLS-TP Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     3.3.  Discussion of Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
       3.3.1.  Requirements related to midpoint LSR . . . . . . . . . 11
         3.3.1.1.  MPLS Incoming Label Map (ILM) Size . . . . . . . . 12
         3.3.1.2.  ILM Size Impact on Equipment Density . . . . . . . 12
         3.3.1.3.  Topology Impact on ILM Size  . . . . . . . . . . . 12
         3.3.1.4.  Multiple LSP Between Node Pairs  . . . . . . . . . 13
       3.3.2.  Requirements related to Ingress LSR  . . . . . . . . . 13
         3.3.2.1.  Reasons to Use MPLS/GMPLS Signaling  . . . . . . . 14
         3.3.2.2.  MPLS Fault Response and CSPF Scaling . . . . . . . 15
       3.3.3.  Efficient Use of Multipath Capacity  . . . . . . . . . 15
   4.  Multipath Current Practices  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
     4.1.  Techniques Common to Multipath in Provider Networks  . . . 16
       4.1.1.  Flow Identification  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
       4.1.2.  Simple Multipath and Adaptive Multipath  . . . . . . . 18
       4.1.3.  Traffic Split over Parallel Links  . . . . . . . . . . 19
       4.1.4.  Traffic Split over Multiple Paths  . . . . . . . . . . 19
     4.2.  Specific Types of Multipath  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
       4.2.1.  ECMP Current Practices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
       4.2.2.  Ethernet Link Aggregation Current Practices  . . . . . 21
       4.2.3.  MPLS Link Bundling Current Practices . . . . . . . . . 21
   5.  Improving Support for MPLS-TP and Multipath Requirements . . . 22
     5.1.  Characteristics of MPLS-TP Multipath Solutions . . . . . . 22
       5.1.1.  Coexistance of MPLS and MPLS-TP  . . . . . . . . . . . 23
       5.1.2.  Advantages and Disadvangates of Solutions  . . . . . . 24
     5.2.  MPLS-TP Multipath Solution Set . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
       5.2.1.  MPLS as a Server Layer for MPLS-TP . . . . . . . . . . 25
       5.2.2.  MPLS-TP as a Server Layer for MPLS . . . . . . . . . . 26
       5.2.3.  Relax MPLS-TP OAM Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . 27



Villamizar              Expires December 31, 2010               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft         MPLS-TP and MPLS Multipath              June 2010


         5.2.3.1.  MPLS-TP CC/CV OAM with Multipath . . . . . . . . . 28
         5.2.3.2.  MPLS-TP LM OAM with Multipath  . . . . . . . . . . 29
   6.  Summary of Recommendations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
   7.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
   8.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
   9.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
     9.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
     9.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
   Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35










































Villamizar              Expires December 31, 2010               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft         MPLS-TP and MPLS Multipath              June 2010


1.  Introduction

   Today the requirement to handle large aggregations of traffic, can be
   handled by a number of techniques which we will collectively call
   multipath.  Multipath applied to parallel links between the same set
   of nodes includes Ethernet Link Aggregation [IEEE-802.1AX], link
   bundling [RFC4201], or other aggregation techniques some of which may
   be vendor specific.  Multipath applied to diverse paths rather than
   parallel links includes Equal Cost MultiPath (ECMP) as applied to
   OSPF, ISIS, or BGP, and equal cost LSP, as described in Section 4.
   Various multipath techniques have strengths and weaknesses described
   in Section 4.2.

   The term composite link is more general than terms such as link
   aggregation (which is specific to Ethernet) or ECMP (which implies
   equal cost paths within a routing protocol).  The use of the term
   composite link here is consistent with the broad definition in
   [ITU-T.G.800].  Multipath is very similar to composite link, but
   specifically excludes inverse multiplexing.

1.1.  Multipath Behavior of Widely Deployed Equipment

   Identical load balancing techniques are used for multipath both over
   parallel links (for example IP/MPLS over Ethernet link aggregation)
   and over diverse paths (for example, IP ECMP, IP/MPLS ECMP over
   multiple LSP or link bundling over LSP component links).

   Large aggregates of IP traffic do not provide explicit signaling to
   indicate the expected traffic loads.  Large aggregates of MPLS
   traffic are carried in MPLS tunnels supported by MPLS LSP.  LSP which
   are signaled using RSVP-TE extensions do provide explicit signaling
   which includes the expected traffic load for the aggregate.  LSP
   which are signaled using LDP do not provide an expected traffic load.

   MPLS LSP may contain other MPLS LSP arranged hierarchically.  When an
   MPLS LSR serves as a midpoint LSR in an LSP carrying other LSP as
   payload, there is no signaling associated with these client (inner)
   LSP.  Therefore even when using RSVP-TE signaling there may be
   insufficient information provided by signaling to adequately
   distribute load across a multipath link.

   A set of label stack entries that is unique across the ordered set of
   label numbers can safely be assumed to contain a group of (one or
   more) flows.  The reordering of MPLS traffic (except MPLS-TP) can
   therefore be considered to be acceptable unless reordering occurs
   within traffic containing a common unique set of label stack entries.
   Existing load splitting techniques take advantage of this property in
   addition to looking beyond the bottom of the label stack and



Villamizar              Expires December 31, 2010               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft         MPLS-TP and MPLS Multipath              June 2010


   determining if the payload is IPv4 or IPv6 to load balance traffic
   based on IP addresses.

   A large aggregate of IP traffic may be subdivided into groups of
   flows using a hash on the IP source and destination addresses.  IP
   microflows are described in [RFC2475] and clarified in [RFC3260].
   For MPLS traffic that is not carrying IP, a similar hash can be
   performed on the set of labels in the label stack.  These techniques
   subdivide traffic into groups of flows for the purpose of load
   balancing traffic across the aggregated capacity of a multipath link.

   Attempting to resolve years of discussion as to whether a hash based
   approach provides a sufficiently even load balance using any
   particular hashing algorithm or method of distributing traffic across
   a set of component links is outside of the scope of this document.
   For the purpose of discussing existing widely deployed
   implementations, it is sufficient to say that hash based techniques
   have proven to be at least satisfactory through their widespread
   deployment (and its increase in deployment for more than two
   decades).

   The current load balancing techniques are referenced in [RFC4385] and
   [RFC4928], though few specifics are provided in these two RFCs.  The
   use of three hash based approaches are described in [RFC2991] and
   [RFC2992], though other techniques with very similar outcome are
   used.  A means to identify flows within pseudowires (when flows are
   present, since not all PW types contain discernible flows) is
   described in [I-D.ietf-pwe3-fat-pw].

1.2.  New Requirements imposed by MPLS-TP

   MPLS-TP OAM violates the assumption made in prior multipath
   implementations that it is safe to reorder traffic within an LSP.
   This assumption is common (if not universal) in multipath
   implementations which use hashing techniques for load balancing.  The
   use of multipath can impact CC/CV (connectivity check, connectivity
   verification) and LM (loss measurement) and DM (delay measurement)
   [I-D.ietf-mpls-tp-oam-framework].

   MPLS-TP CC/CV, DM, and LM OAM packets must take the same path as the
   payload.  If the label stack for the payload contains an LSP and a PW
   label beneath it (one of one or more additional PW labels), then the
   payload will be load split over the multipath.  The OAM packets will
   have a GAL label beneath the LSP label [RFC5586].  With no other
   label beneath the GAL label, the OAM traffic will take only one path
   and the set of PW will take multiple paths (though any one PW will
   take one path if a flow label is not used).




Villamizar              Expires December 31, 2010               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft         MPLS-TP and MPLS Multipath              June 2010


   With the current OAM CC/CV definition and current multipath
   practices, OAM CC/CV functionality may not cover the forwarding path
   for a particular PW within the LSP at any given multipath along the
   path.  The existing OAM CC/CV will provide a check for the condition
   where the entire multipath becomes unavailable (goes down or the
   particular LSP is preempted due to reduced multipath capacity).

   There is no assurance that DM OAM is measuring the delay of the
   forwarding path for a particular PW within the LSP with the current
   OAM DM definition and current multipath practices.  In addition, if
   packets are reordered, OAM LM accuracy can be (and generally is)
   affected.

1.3.  Apparantly Conflicting Requirements

   The existing multipath techniques address specific requirements.
   MPLS-TP requirements are in conflict with multipath, at least as
   currently implemented.

   The underlying requirements that motivated the current use of
   multipath are not in conflict with the use of MPLS-TP.  Section 3
   described these requirements in greater detail.  Section 4 described
   current practices in greater detail.  Section 5 describes means of
   better supporting both MPLS-TP and multipath requirements.

1.4.  Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].


2.  Definitions

   Multipath
       The term multipath includes all techniques in which

       1.  Traffic can take more than one path from one node to a
           destination.

       2.  Individual packets take one path only.

       3.  Packets are neither resequenced or subdivided and reassembled
           at the receiving end.

       4.  The paths may be:





Villamizar              Expires December 31, 2010               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft         MPLS-TP and MPLS Multipath              June 2010


           a.  parallel links between two nodes, or

           b.  may be specific paths across a network to a destination
               node, or

           c.  may be links or paths to a next hop hop used to reach a
               common destination.

   Link Bundle
       Link bundling is a multipath technique specific to MPLS
       [RFC4201].  Link bundling supports two modes of operations.
       Either an LSP can be placed on one component link of a link
       bundle, or an LSP can be load split across all members of the
       bundle.  There is no signaling defined which allows a per LSP
       preference regarding load split, therefore whether to load split
       is generally configured per bundle and applied to all LSP across
       the bundle.

   Link Aggregation
       The term "link aggregation" generally refers to Ethernet Link
       Aggregation [IEEE-802.1AX] as defined by the IEEE.  Ethernet Link
       Aggregation defines a Link Aggregation Control Protocol (LACP)
       which coordinates inclusion of LAG members in the LAG.

   Link Aggregation Group (LAG)
       A group of physical Ethernet interfaces that are treated as a
       logical link when using Ethernet Link Aggregation is referred to
       as a Link Aggregation Group (LAG).

   Equal Cost Multipath (ECMP)
       Equal Cost Multipath (ECMP) is a specific form of multipath in
       which the costs of the links or paths must be equal in a given
       routing protocol.  The load may be split equally across all
       available links (or available paths), or the load may be split
       proportionally to the capacity of each link (or path).

   Loop Free Alternate Paths
       "Loop-free alternate paths" (LFA) are defined in RFC 5714,
       Section 5.2 [RFC5714] as follows.  "Such a path exists when a
       direct neighbor of the router adjacent to the failure has a path
       to the destination that can be guaranteed not to traverse the
       failure."  Further detail can be found in [RFC5286].  LFA as
       defined for IPFRR can be used to load balance by relaxing the
       equal cost criteria of ECMP, though IPFRR defined LFA for use in
       selecting protection paths.  When used with IP, proportional
       split is generally not used.  LFA use in load balancing may be
       implemented though rare or non-existent in deployments.




Villamizar              Expires December 31, 2010               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft         MPLS-TP and MPLS Multipath              June 2010


   Composite Link
       The term Composite Link had been a registered trademark of Avici
       Systems, but was abandoned in 2007.  The term composite link is
       now defined by the ITU in [ITU-T.G.800].  The ITU definition
       includes multipath as defined here, plus inverse multiplexing
       which is explicitly excluded from the definition of multipath.

   Inverse Multiplexing
       Inverse multiplexing either transmits whole packets and
       resequences the packets at the receiving end or subdivides
       packets and reassembles the packets at the receiving end.
       Inverse multiplexing requires that all packets be handled by a
       common egress packet processing element and is therefore not
       useful for very high bandwidth applications.

   Component Link
       The ITU definition of composite link in [ITU-T.G.800] and the
       IETF definition of link bundling in [RFC4201] both refer to an
       individual link in the composite link or link bundle as a
       component link.  The term component link is applicable to all
       multipath.

   LAG Member
       Ethernet Link Aggregation as defined in [IEEE-802.1AX] refers to
       an individual link in a LAG as a LAG member.


3.  Multipath Requirements

   This section enumerates two sets of requirements.  The first set
   includes those requirements imposed by the need for scalability and
   very large capacity links and very large capacity LSP and are
   enumerated in Section 3.1.  The second set of requirements are those
   imposed by the needs of MPLS-TP and are enumerated in Section 3.2.
   Discussion of these requirements is provided in Section 3.3.

   Section 4 describes multipath techniques which are implemented and
   deployed today.  Section 5 enumerates derived requirements which
   focus on means to support the requirements in Section 3.1 and
   Section 3.2 with minimal modifications to existing multipath
   techniques.  A summary of recommendations is provided in Section 6.

3.1.  Scalability and Large Capacity Requirements

   Networks today may support thousands or tens of thousands of nodes in
   total.  This large number of nodes is typically arranged in tiers to
   improve scalability through aggregation of signaling and aggregation
   of traffic.  The innermost tier, most commonly referred to at the



Villamizar              Expires December 31, 2010               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft         MPLS-TP and MPLS Multipath              June 2010


   network core, may support interconnection of adjacent sites with
   hundreds of gigabits or terabits of capacity.

   The physical interface of choice today is 10GbE with migration toward
   100GbE expected to begin in the near future.  SONET and OTN are also
   in use, but are today also limited to 10Gb/s or 40Gb/s, with 100Gb/s
   availability (OTN ODU4) expected in the near future.  With core link
   capacities of terabits today and tens of terabits expected in the
   near future, multipath is needed.

   R#1  Multipath MUST support multipath links that are in well in
        excess of the largest component link and well in excess of the
        capacity of a single packet processing element.

   R#2  Multipath SHOULD support direct service bearing LSP carrying
        Internet traffic within the network core with capacity in excess
        of the largest component link and in excess of the capacity of a
        single packet processing element.

   R#3  Aggregation of LSP using hierarchy (as defined in [RFC4206]) may
        be necessary to reduce the number of MPLS labels in use within a
        network tier containing a large number of nodes.  This
        aggregation SHOULD NOT be constrained by multipath limitations.

   R#4  LSP containing the aggregate of other LSP SHOULD be capable of
        exceeding the capacity of the largest component link and in
        excess of the capacity of a single packet processing element.

   R#5  It SHOULD be possible to support load split of traffic which is
        very efficient in its utilization of available capacity, subject
        to some limitations due to conflicting requirements.  The load
        split SHOULD support sharing of total capacity across the entire
        multipath where some LSP may make use of unused capacity set
        aside for other LSP but unused.  This load split SHOULD be as
        free of bin packing issues as possible except when moving LSP to
        other component links would conflict with other requirements.

3.2.  MPLS-TP Requirements

   MPLS-TP requirements related to multipath are primarily related to
   prohibiting out-of-order delivery of traffic for reasons of OAM fate
   sharing.  Specific requirements related to OAM are provided in
   "MPLS-TP OAM Framework", Section 4.6, Section 5.5.3, and Section
   6.2.3 [I-D.ietf-mpls-tp-oam-framework].

   The following requirement is currently met with no changes to
   existing multipath implementations.




Villamizar              Expires December 31, 2010               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft         MPLS-TP and MPLS Multipath              June 2010


   R#6  Traffic within an MPLS-TP PW MUST NOT be reordered unless
        specifically allowed.  This is met if a PW control word is used
        [RFC4385].  Reordering may be specifically allowed using a PW
        flow label [I-D.ietf-pwe3-fat-pw].

   The following requirement can only be met with existing multipath
   techniques using MPLS link bundling [RFC4201] if LSR are configured
   to place an LSP on only a single component rather than spliting some
   or all LSP across the set of components.  Using link bundling with
   all LSP constrained to use a single component has well known
   disadvantages (see Section 4.2.3).  Other forms of multipath as
   currently defined do not meet this requirement (see Section 4.2).

   R#7  Traffic within an MPLS-TP LSP MUST NOT be reordered if full OAM
        capability is required of the MPLS-TP LSP
        [I-D.ietf-mpls-tp-oam-framework].

   The remaining MPLS-TP requirements are related to the scale of a
   deployed MPLS-TP network and have the greatest impact on the network
   core.  These are practical requirements mostly related to scalability
   but specific to MPLS-TP.

   R#8   Service PWs and/or service bearing LSPs may form a fairly dense
         mesh of LSPs from edge to edge over a very large set of nodes.
         Some means MUST be available to support such usage of MPLS-TP.
         See Section 3.3.1.1 for a discussion of ILM size limitations
         that are relevant to this requirement.

   R#9   For an MPLS-TP LSP to be fully compliant, all payload and OAM
         traffic on the MPLS-TP LSP MUST traverse the same physical
         path.  OAM traffic taking the same path as payload (service
         bearing) traffic is known as the "fate sharing" requirement
         (see RFC 5860, Section 2.1.3 [RFC5860]).

   R#10  For large networks, MPLS hierarchy [RFC4206] can be used to
         reduce the number of LSP from the large number which would be
         needed to carry all service bearing MPLS-TP LSP through the
         network core.  For networks configured through the management
         plane, label stacking can be used to aggregate LSP, though the
         signaling described in [RFC4206] is not used.  Any MPLS-TP
         constraints which impact this ability to aggregate LSP SHOULD
         be optional.  If MPLS-TP constraints must be relaxed in some
         deployments, such deployments MAY be referred to as partially
         MPLS-TP compliant.







Villamizar              Expires December 31, 2010              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft         MPLS-TP and MPLS Multipath              June 2010


   R#11  For large networks using link bundling to support large
         aggregations of MPLS-TP traffic, and using MPLS hierarchy, PSC
         LSP (see [RFC4206]) or label stacking which are providing a
         server layer within the network core and carrying many service
         bearing MPLS-TP LSP SHOULD be capable of supporting capacity in
         excess of any single link bundle component.  In meeting this
         requirement the server layer LSP need not be an MPLS-TP LSP as
         long as it is capable of providing a server layer which can
         support fully compliant MPLS-TP LSP.

   LSP which are configured entirely from the management plane rather
   than through use of a control plane need not use the MPLS PSC portion
   of the hierarchy as specified in RFC 4206, however hierarchy is still
   needed in the label stack.

3.3.  Discussion of Requirements

   There is a tradeoff between making use of MPLS-TP as a server layer
   for the benefits of MPLS-TP and the benefits of using MPLS.  The
   benefits of MPLS-TP include the ability to run without the OSPF-TE,
   ISIS-TE, and RSVP-TE control protocols, and MPLS-TP OAM.  The
   benefits of MPLS include more efficient use of multipath capacity due
   to removal of MPLS-TP constraints.

   A requirements for very large server layer traffic flow within the
   network core can be accommodated using multiple parallel MPLS-TP LSP.
   This increases the number of LSP required which itself is a drawback.
   This also results in a bin packing problem if the service bearing
   MPLS-TP LSP do not require the same capacity and are not all small
   multiples of a common capacity increment.  For example, if LSP are
   not all 10Gb/s, or they are not only 10Gb/s and 40 Gb/s then bin
   packing problems can occur.  This use of MPLS-TP can also result in
   less opportunity for statistical multiplexing with very large
   aggregates of lower priority non-TP IP/MPLS traffic (see
   Section 4.2.3 and Section 5.2.2 for further details on bin packing
   problems and loss of efficiency with MPLS-TP as a server layer).

   The following subsections provide further detail related to the
   requirements enumerated in Section 3.1 and Section 3.2.

3.3.1.  Requirements related to midpoint LSR

   Midpoint LSR must support a very large number of LSP.  This places
   requirements on the ILM size.  If a control plane is used this also
   places requirements on the speed of processing RSVP-TE messages.  As
   long as RSVP-TE ERO contain only strict hops, the processing is
   limited to connection admission, label assignment, and forwarding
   hardware programming of the label swap operation.



Villamizar              Expires December 31, 2010              [Page 11]

Internet-Draft         MPLS-TP and MPLS Multipath              June 2010


3.3.1.1.  MPLS Incoming Label Map (ILM) Size

   The MPLS label entry is 32 bits of which the label itself is 20 bits
   [RFC3032].  This allows 2^20 or 1,048,576 values minus the 16
   reserved label values.  The Incoming Label Map (ILM) (see RFC 3031,
   Section 1.11 [RFC3031]) is generally much smaller.  Circa 2000, ILM
   sizes of 4K-32K were common.  Circa 2010, ILM sizes of 64K-256K are
   more common in core LSR.

   Putting a bound on ILM size has two effects.  It allows LSR that
   offer higher power and space density.  For deployments which use a
   control plane and support restoration, speed of restoration is
   dramatically improved when a smaller number of LSP are supported.

3.3.1.2.  ILM Size Impact on Equipment Density

   For some architectures, bounding the ILM size allows the ILM to be
   supported without forwarding memory external to the forwarding IC.
   This is a practical consideration as the power reduction and board
   space reduction can allow an LSR to achieve higher power and space
   density.

   Reducing external memories reduces power consumed and therefore
   reduces cooling problems.  In addition there are board space
   reductions.  This results in reduced space as well as power.

   In today's networks, which predominantly use MPLS/GMPLS OSPF-TE or
   ISIS-TE and RSVP-TE signaling, the computational limitations
   described in Section 3.3.2.2 are the limiting factor.  Reduction in
   space and power due to smaller ILM are then a secondary consequence
   of the signaling scaling issue.

3.3.1.3.  Topology Impact on ILM Size

   In a network tier with N nodes, a worst case cutset has N/2 nodes on
   either side of the cutset.  Given that a full mesh of LSP
   connectivity is needed in the network core, the cutset therefore
   carries N^2/4 LSP.  For example, if N is 400, the cutset carries a
   minimum of 40,000 LSP to achieve a full mesh.  If the core has over
   2,000 nodes, then the cutset carries over 1,000,000 LSP.  Since the
   MPLS label space is only 20 bits, a full mesh within an entire
   provider network with no hierarchy could easily exceed the MPLS label
   number space.  Use of Hierarchy can solve this problem.

   Typically there are more than one LSP between any pair of LSR in the
   network core.  Protection is one source of additional LSP.  More than
   one LSP may be required to carry traffic with very different
   requirements.  See Section 3.3.1.4.



Villamizar              Expires December 31, 2010              [Page 12]

Internet-Draft         MPLS-TP and MPLS Multipath              June 2010


   The result is that even considering only the ILM size, the number of
   nodes in a full mesh of LSP must be limited to well under 1,000.  If
   two links in a cutset supporting a large number of LSP incur a fault,
   then the nodes bordering the remaining links in the cutset must
   process a very large number of RSVP-TE PATH and RESV messages and the
   connection admission requests and ILM allocation operations that are
   required as a result.

3.3.1.4.  Multiple LSP Between Node Pairs

   A full mesh of N nodes will have N*(N-1) unidirectional LSP or
   N*(N-1)/2 bidirectional LSP if there is only one LSP with any given
   pair of nodes as ingress and egress.  There may be more than one LSP
   with any given pair of nodes as ingress and egress to meet protection
   requirements or to meet certain quality of service requirements.

   If GMPLS protection [RFC4426] protection is used, the number of LSP
   is doubled with end-to-end (path) protection, but more than doubled
   with span protection.  If MPLS FRR [RFC4090] is used, the number of
   LSP is increased only slightly with the (more common) facilities
   backup technique, but more than doubled with the one-to-one backup
   technique.

   All services between a pair of core nodes may be carried over a
   single unsignaled E-LSP [RFC3270] if the eight TC values [RFC5462]
   are sufficient and the requirements of these services is sufficiently
   similar.  If more than eight PHB are required, more LSP will be
   required.  If services require preemption, or have different
   protection needs, then multiple LSP per pair of core nodes is
   required.

   The total number of LSP at a cutset needs to be constrained for two
   reasons.  First the number of LSP must fit in the 20 bit label field
   or the smaller number of labels supported by most LSR.  Second is a
   need to reduce the amount of signaling that would be required if
   restoration was needed to cover a multiple fault (if restoration is
   not supported multiple faults can result in otherwise avoidable
   outages which persist until a physical repair or manual intervention
   is completed).

3.3.2.  Requirements related to Ingress LSR

   Where traffic enters a provider network tier such as the core, LSR
   serve as ingress to PSC LSP if hierarchy is used.  If RSVP-TE
   signaling is used, ingress must perform CSPF if fully dynamic MPLS
   routing is used.  Even when working and protection paths are
   configured with explicit paths computed offline, when a multiple
   fault occurs, if restoration is supported, then CSPF must be run.  It



Villamizar              Expires December 31, 2010              [Page 13]

Internet-Draft         MPLS-TP and MPLS Multipath              June 2010


   is this multiple fault scenario which generally dictates scalability.

3.3.2.1.  Reasons to Use MPLS/GMPLS Signaling

   Dynamic routing is necessary in order to provide restoration which is
   as robust as possible in the presence of multiple faults while still
   providing efficient utilization of resources.

   Legacy transport networks offer protection which requires dedicated
   protection resources.  If resources are allocated through the
   management plane, then restoration support is either not provided at
   all or extremely slow at best.  More modern transport equipment which
   supports fast restoration requires signaling which is generally
   provided using GMPLS.

   IP/MPLS networks typically make use of protection which offers
   sharing or protection resources or more commonly make use of zero
   bandwidth allocation on protection paths.  The use zero bandwidth
   allocation provides robust protection of preferred traffic as long as
   preferred traffic is given queuing priority and preferred traffic
   levels are low enough that adequate protection resources are
   available for preferred traffic regardless of the protection path
   taken.  This assumption is not violated in network which are
   dominated by Internet traffic and carry a minority of preferred
   traffic.

   When a single fault occurs, protection should restore traffic flow
   quickly, with a typical target being 45 msec.  Many deployments are
   configured such that LSR run CSPF after a fault to obtain a new
   protection path for what is now effectively the working path, or
   reroute the working LSP and then create a new protection LSP.

   When multiple faults occur, which is fairly common, fast restoration
   is often required for a large number of LSP for which both the
   working and protect paths are affected.  In this case, a long
   convergence time would result in a more lengthy outage for those LSP
   for which the multiple fault was service affecting.

   For core Internet services and for many non-Internet core services,
   an inability to reach any one point in the network from another for a
   significant length of time due to a fault which is correctable, even
   if it is a multiple fault, is unacceptable.  These services require
   restoration at some layer.  If restoration is provided at a given
   layer, then it is most cost effective to provider protection at that
   same layer.






Villamizar              Expires December 31, 2010              [Page 14]

Internet-Draft         MPLS-TP and MPLS Multipath              June 2010


3.3.2.2.  MPLS Fault Response and CSPF Scaling

   For most core networks MPLS/GMPLS signaling is required at some layer
   for reasons described in Section 3.3.2.1.  In order for restoration
   to occur quickly, scaling issues must be considered and addressed,
   including network topology impacts on scaling.  These scaling issues
   are dominated by CSPF computations and OSPF or ISIS flooding impact.

   For a given ingress in a full mesh of LSR, a fault can result in a
   very large number of affected LSP.  At midpoint LSR the worst case
   number of connection acceptance decisions can be very large.  The
   computational load per LSP on connection acceptance at midpoint LSR
   is small but the reflooding of available bandwidth can also
   contribute significant load.

   At LSP ingress, the number of CSPF computations imposes scaling
   limitations.  CSPF computation time is proportional to the number of
   nodes in a mesh and the total number of links.  If the degree of any
   particular node remains constant, then the total number of links is
   proportional to the number of nodes.  The result is a single CSPF
   time with order N*log2(N) time complexity (where N is the number of
   nodes in the mesh).  If the worst case number of LSP affected by a
   fault also grows proportionally to N, then the total amount of
   computation is order N^2*log2(N).  The amount of computation grows at
   a rate of greater than the square of the growth in the number of
   nodes.

   If restoration is not supported, any multiple fault will result in a
   lengthy outage.  If restoration is supported, constraining the size
   of a full mesh will very significantly reduce the CSPF computation
   load and the reflooding overhead and very significantly improve the
   worst case restoration time.

3.3.3.  Efficient Use of Multipath Capacity

   Multipath load split based on hashing the IP addresses or MPLS labels
   is far from perfect, though it is widely implemented and widely
   deployed.  For the vast majority of traffic, which is predominantly
   Internet traffic, the underlying assumption that traffic is quite
   evenly distributed across a hash space is valid.  For a mix of
   Internet traffic and fairly persistent large microflows, adaptive
   multipath has proven effective (see Section 4.1.2).

   The bandwidth reservations of LSP carrying Internet traffic are
   merely predictions of required capacity.  Often a significant
   percentage of traffic can shift among a set of LSP.  A great deal of
   efficiency is gained in the presence of such shifts through the
   ability to dynamically share the available capacity on a multipath.



Villamizar              Expires December 31, 2010              [Page 15]

Internet-Draft         MPLS-TP and MPLS Multipath              June 2010


   The introduction of a minority of higher priority (and higher gross
   margin) services to predominantly Internet traffic yields an
   additional opportunity to make more efficient use of capacity.  These
   higher priority services on average significantly underutilize their
   guaranteed capacities.  The average over the entire set of such
   services is fairly predictable.  The capacity allocated to these
   services but unused can be used as Internet capacity.  Some small
   probability exists that these services will make use of significantly
   more capacity than predicted, up to their guaranteed capacities, but
   the consequences of this unlikely occupance is a reduction in
   capacity available to the Internet traffic for which capacity is not
   guaranteed.  This practice allows high margin services to be
   delivered at substantially lower cost with very little risk to
   Internet traffic and no risk at all to the higher priority services.

   For the reasons above, current multipath techniques offer efficient
   use of multipath capacity.  Changes to multipath MUST NOT sacrifice
   this efficiency where it is not necessary to meet other requirements.


4.  Multipath Current Practices

   Multipath take many forms.  These include the use of ECMP in various
   protocols, Ethernet Link Aggregation, and Link Bundling.  The
   specifications for each of these forms of multipath provide limited
   characterization of external behavior, where any guidance is provided
   at all.  This section summarizes current practices among products
   which are currently or have in the past been deployed successfully in
   Internet service provider networks and content provider networks.

   Much of the existing information on multipath current practices is
   summarized in Section 1.1.  With the exception of the work in PWE3
   and minimal mention in LDP very little consideration for multipath
   impact on new protocols has been documented.

   This section is divided into two parts.  First is documentation of
   techniques common to all forms of multipath in Section 4.1.  Second
   is application of these techniques and unique characteristics of
   specific forms of multipath in Section 4.2.

4.1.  Techniques Common to Multipath in Provider Networks

   There is a dramatic difference between the multipath techniques used
   for pure Layer-2 Ethernet switches intended for enterprise networks
   and the multipath techniques used for large provider core networks.
   Many enterprise switches use only the Ethernet MAC in load balancing,
   thought the argument that such networks may not be carrying IP or
   MPLS traffic at all is rarely cited as a reason today.  The routers



Villamizar              Expires December 31, 2010              [Page 16]

Internet-Draft         MPLS-TP and MPLS Multipath              June 2010


   and/or LSR used in large provider networks are assumed to be carrying
   IP traffic and/or MPLS traffic where the MPLS traffic is
   predominantly carrying IP traffic as its payload.

   Most of the multipath techniques used for large provider core
   networks are common across all types of multipath.  This is because
   the traffic being handled by multipath in large provider networks is
   predominantly IP or IP over MPLS.  The following paragraph is quoted
   from RFC 4928, Section 2, "Current ECMP Practices" [RFC4928]:

      In the early days of MPLS, the payload was almost exclusively IP.
      Even today the overwhelming majority of carried traffic remains
      IP.  Providers of MPLS equipment sought to continue this IP ECMP
      behavior.  As shown above, it is not possible to know whether the
      payload of an MPLS packet is IP at every place where IP ECMP needs
      to be performed.  Thus vendors have taken the liberty of guessing
      the payload.  By inspecting the first nibble beyond the label
      stack, existing equipment infers that a packet is not IPv4 or IPv6
      if the value of the nibble (where the IP version number would be
      found) is not 0x4 or 0x6 respectively.  Most deployed LSRs will
      treat a packet whose first nibble is equal to 0x4 as if the
      payload were IPv4 for purposes of IP ECMP.

   This observation led to the specification of the PW Control Word
   [RFC4385] such that the values 4 and 6 which could be mistaken for
   IPv4 or IPv6 were avoided.  More accurately, [RFC4928] was written to
   document the reasons for this decision made in [RFC4385].

4.1.1.  Flow Identification

   IP traffic in a large provider core network contains a very large
   number of very short lived microflows (refer to the definition of
   microflow in [RFC2475]).  The number of flows has in the past been
   estimated as many millions or many tens of millions.  Many of the
   flows exchange as few as two packet (DNS for example).  Most contain
   only tens of packets.  Most flows exist for a few seconds and some
   less than a second.  A much smaller number of flows (though still a
   large number) are longer in duration and exchange larger amounts of
   data.

   Attempts to isolate individual IP flows in large provider core
   networks for the purpose of routing them individually have met with
   resounding failure.  Current practice does not attempt to isolate
   individual flows, but instead isolates groups of flows.  If
   reordering is minimized or eliminated for groups of flows, then
   reordering is minimized or eliminated for any single flow with a
   group.




Villamizar              Expires December 31, 2010              [Page 17]

Internet-Draft         MPLS-TP and MPLS Multipath              June 2010


   The method of subdividing IP traffic into groups of flows that has
   been used successfully for more than two decades (since the T1-NSFNET
   in 1987 or possibly prior to that) is to use a hash function over the
   IP source address and destination address.  Including the TCP or UDP
   port numbers might be beneficial for enterprise networks but is not
   necessary for large provider networks.  Omitting port number is large
   provider networks has the desirable characteristic of better
   enforcing fairness among flows by eliminating or reducing the
   potential of end users using multiple port numbers to defeat any
   tendency toward fairness among flows.

   In large provider core networks, MPLS LSP (in contrast to IP) are
   very long lived, generally provide a large to very large amounts of
   traffic, and are relatively few in number.  In many large provider
   core networks LSP which carry Internet traffic from one major core
   node to another major core node, can very substantially exceed the
   capacity of a multipath component link.

   For MPLS traffic carrying Internet IP traffic, "taking the liberty of
   guessing the payload" (as described in RFC 4928) was a matter of
   necessity.  The label stack simply did not provide adequate
   diversity.  Initially some LSR did not support this capability.
   Splitting very large LSP by configuring two or more provided a
   workaround (which only moved the hashing and load splitting out of
   the core), however hashing based on label stack was highly
   ineffective and packing LSP individually into link bundle component
   links has substantial disadvantages (see Section 4.2.3).

   For MPLS that is not carrying IP, the MPLS label stack is used as the
   basis for the load split hash.  Generally the entire label stack is
   used or as few as three of the bottom labels are used.  Using only
   the bottom label (or only the top label) has proven unsatisfactory in
   terms of splitting the load.  Some forms of PW can be subdivided
   which has motivated the introduction of a PW flow label
   [I-D.ietf-pwe3-fat-pw].

4.1.2.  Simple Multipath and Adaptive Multipath

   Simple multipath generally relies on the mathematical probability
   that given a very large number of small microflows, these microflows
   will tend to be distributed evenly across a hash space.  A common
   simple multipath implementation assumes that all component links are
   of equal capacity and perform a modulo operation across the hashed
   value.  An alternate simple multipath technique uses a table
   generally with a power of two size, and distributes the table entries
   proportionally among component links according to the capacity of
   each component link.




Villamizar              Expires December 31, 2010              [Page 18]

Internet-Draft         MPLS-TP and MPLS Multipath              June 2010


   An adaptive multipath technique is one where the traffic bound to
   each component link is measured and the load split is adjusted
   accordingly.  As long as the adjustment is done within a single
   network element, then no protocol extensions are required and there
   are no interoperability issues.

   Specific adaptive multipath techniques are outside of the scope of
   this document.

4.1.3.  Traffic Split over Parallel Links

   The load splitting techniques defined in Section 4.1 and those
   defined in Section 4.1.2 are both used in splitting traffic over
   parallel links between the same pair of nodes.  The best known
   technique, though far from being the first, is Ethernet Link
   Aggregation [IEEE-802.1AX].  This same technique had been applied
   much earlier using OSPF or ISIS Equal Cost MultiPath (ECMP) over
   parallel links between the same nodes.  Multilink PPP [RFC1717] uses
   a technique that provides inverse multiplexing.  A number of vendors
   had provided proprietary extensions to PPP over SONET/SDH [RFC2615]
   that predated Ethernet Link Aggregation but are no longer used.

   Link bundling [RFC4201] provides yet another means of handling
   parallel LSP.  RFC4201 explicitly allow a special value of all ones
   to indicate a split across all component links of the bundle.  Use of
   link bundling is discussed in Section 4.2.3.

   All of these techniques, including ECMP, may be used over two or more
   links between a pair of nodes.  The most primitive load split
   algorithms may require that all links be of the same capacity and may
   attempt to load balance equally.  Somewhat less primitive techniques
   may allow links to be unequal in capacity.  Any of these techniques
   can also use an adaptive multipath algorithm as described in
   Section 4.1.2.

4.1.4.  Traffic Split over Multiple Paths

   OSPF or ISIS Equal Cost MultiPath (ECMP) is a well known form of
   traffic split over multiple paths that may traverse intermediate
   nodes.  ECMP is often incorrectly equated to only this case, and
   multipath over multiple diverse paths is often incorrectly equated to
   an equal division of traffic.

   Many implementations are able to create more than one LSP between a
   pair of nodes, where these LSP are routed diversely to better make
   use of available capacity.  The load on these LSP can be distributed
   proportionally to the reserved bandwidth of the LSP.  These multiple
   LSP may be advertised as a single PSC FA and any LSP making use of



Villamizar              Expires December 31, 2010              [Page 19]

Internet-Draft         MPLS-TP and MPLS Multipath              June 2010


   the FA may be split over these multiple LSP.

   Link bundling [RFC4201] component links may themselves be LSP.  When
   this technique is used, any LSP which specifies the link bundle may
   be split across the multiple paths of the LSP that comprise the
   bundle.

   Other forms of multipath may use what appear to be physical component
   links that are provided by a server layer.  For example, the
   components of an Ethernet LAG may be provided by Ethernet PW
   [RFC4448].

   Techniques which spread traffic over multiple paths may use simple
   multipath or adaptive multipath as described in Section 4.1.2.  When
   ECMP is used over an IP link or MPLS LDP LSP, visibility of available
   capacity along the path is limited to the next hop only, therefore
   load which is split proportionally to the capacity of the immediate
   hop may not be split optimally for the entire path, even using an
   adaptive multipath capable forwarding.  For techniques which split
   traffic over one or more LSP, the available capacity along the path
   to the destination is assumed to be known through the bandwidth
   reservations of the LSP.

4.2.  Specific Types of Multipath

   Three forms of multipath are considered here.

   o  ECMP

   o  Ethernet Link Aggregation

   o  MPLS Link Bundling

   Of these types of multipath, the latter two can be applied to MPLS
   with RSVP-TE signaling or static configurations.

4.2.1.  ECMP Current Practices

   Equal Cost Multipath has been available in the ISIS and OSPF link
   state routing protocols for two decades or more.  For example, see
   [RFC1247].  ECMP is also available in BGP.  ECMP is declared out of
   scope in LDP, though widely implemented.

   Although ECMP is not applicable to MPLS LSP setup with RSVP-TE
   signaling, ECMP can be applied at an LER.

   At an MPLS LER ECMP can be applied over two or more MPLS LSP with
   traffic split proportionally to the LSP reserved bandwidth.  This



Villamizar              Expires December 31, 2010              [Page 20]

Internet-Draft         MPLS-TP and MPLS Multipath              June 2010


   could also be considered to be IP ECMP with an underlying MPLS LSP
   server layer.

   The equivalent to ECMP for an LSP setup can be achieved by creating
   PSC LSP and concatenating them using link bundling, and using the
   "all ones" link bundle component (see Section 4.2.3.

4.2.2.  Ethernet Link Aggregation Current Practices

   Ethernet link aggregation ([IEEE-802.1AX]) concatenates a set of
   Ethernet member links below the Ethernet link layer, such that the
   link aggregation group (LAG) appears as a single link with a single
   Ethernet MAC address.  The link aggregation control protocol (LACP)
   coordinates membership in the LAG such that the member links can be
   made unavailable to upper layers and added to the LAG on both nodes.

   For IP using a link state protocol with ECMP, Ethernet link
   aggregation had little effect.  The load balancing on a LAG was
   identical to the load balancing using ECMP over the set of member
   links.  ISIS only advertises the adjacencies between nodes.  OSPF
   advertises each link between nodes, so for IP using OSPF, link
   aggregation only resulted in a reduction in routing protocol overhead
   and simplification of the SPF.

   For MPLS, some vendors had already implemented proprietary extensions
   to PPP over SONET/SDH [RFC2615] that predated the earliest IEEE work
   on link aggregation (IEEE 802.3ad) with capabilities similar to LACP.
   It was not until 10GbE became widely available (about 5 years later)
   that LAG was used in provider core networks, and began replacing OC-
   192.  MPLS link bundling implementations (prior to RFC status) also
   predated Ethernet link aggregation.

   A network deployment circa 2005 could either configure many Ethernet
   links and use MPLS link bundling, or configure an Ethernet LAG.  If
   an MPLS link bundle was configured to split load over all link bundle
   component links the functionality was equivalent to configuring the
   set of links as a LAG.  In core LSR implementations, the load split
   in these two cases was identical.

4.2.3.  MPLS Link Bundling Current Practices

   MPLS link bundling [RFC4201] was conceived at about the time that it
   was clear that OC-48 was too slow for IP core links, OC-192 was just
   becoming available and would soon be too slow, and MPLS had strong
   support among multiple providers.  Link bundling initially solved two
   problems.  A few individual vendors had proprietary extensions to PPP
   over SONET/SDH [RFC2615].  Link bundling could offer equivalent
   capability and offer vendor interoperability.  Second, some vendor



Villamizar              Expires December 31, 2010              [Page 21]

Internet-Draft         MPLS-TP and MPLS Multipath              June 2010


   hardware was not capable of load splitting and therefore required
   that each top level LSP be assigned a single path.  Further, each
   side of a link bundle could be configured differently, one could load
   split and the other could place LSP on individual component link.

   If LSP are place on individual links rather than split over the
   entire bundle, then bin packing problems can occur.  LSP are often
   large making this packing error significant.  In addition, LSP
   bandwidth reservations in most IP/MPLS deployments are only
   predictions of expected bandwidth.  With link bundling, as specified,
   LSP cannot be moved from one link bundle component link to another.
   If LSP are assigned to links rather than split based on IP address
   pairs, there is less opportunity for one LSP to make use of unused
   capacity due to other LSP being utilized.  The bin packing and loss
   of opportunity to share capacity both reduce the efficiency of
   capacity utilization.

   MPLS link bundling does not currently offer an ability to select
   which LSP are assigned to a single component link and which LSP are
   split over the entire set of component links.  Most forwarding
   hardware can support this.  Although an LSR could in principle be
   configured to use some other attribute of an LSP to infer the
   decision to load split, such as holding priority or an affinity for
   an administrative attribute, no LSR software provides this
   capability.  Until MPLS-TP there was never a need for that
   capability.


5.  Improving Support for MPLS-TP and Multipath Requirements

   The purpose of this section is to describe how MPLS-TP and multipath
   could coexist and to define simple changes to accomplish this.

5.1.  Characteristics of MPLS-TP Multipath Solutions

   Three different methods to support MPLS-TP and multipath are
   described.  One method requires simple changes to link bundle and
   LAG.  One method requires no changes but has disadvantages.  One
   method involves no change to multipath but requires relaxation to
   MPLS-TP OAM requirements.

   The best solution makes MPLS over multipath a fully compliant server
   layer for MPLS-TP meeting all of the requirements stated in the prior
   sections but cannot be fully supported by most existing LSR without
   hardware changes.  The other two solutions have disadvantages but
   require little or no change to existing hardware that would otherwise
   support MPLS-TP.  The changes are specified at the level of detail of
   requirements and/or framework rather than as specific protocol



Villamizar              Expires December 31, 2010              [Page 22]

Internet-Draft         MPLS-TP and MPLS Multipath              June 2010


   changes.

5.1.1.  Coexistance of MPLS and MPLS-TP

   The largest contributor of provider traffic today is the Internet.
   All of this traffic is IP with some providers, but not all, using IP
   over MPLS.  IP is used without MPLS with ECMP and LAG and IP is used
   with MPLS with all three forms 0f multipath described in Section 4.2,
   ECMP, LAG, and link bundling.

   In addition to Internet services, many providers currently offer
   layer-2 and layer-3 VPN services over MPLS today.  Other providers
   offer native layer-2 services with an intention to migrate to MPLS-TP
   for these services.

   A primary purpose of migrating VPN and circuit services from layer-2
   to MPLS-TP is to reduce cost relative to a dedicated layer-2
   infrastructure for these services.  Much of that reduction comes from
   making use of infrastructure in place to support Internet traffic.

   Using the capacity in place for Internet, predictive reservations can
   be made for higher priority services, with guarantees possible by
   transferring the risk of exceeding the predictions to the Internet
   traffic through use of priority queuing.  With Internet loads being
   much larger, the unlikely event of predictive reservations being
   exceeded would easily be absorbed.  This architecture allows VPN and
   circuit services to be delivered at lower cost.

   IP/MPLS requires the use of multipath due to the high traffic levels.
   MPLS-TP requires a single path for each LSP.  With no changes, these
   two requirements are in conflict.  Three possible approaches are
   examined in the following sections.

   1.  Supporting MPLS and MPLS-TP over a common server layer with
       multipath support as well as MPLS-TP over an MPLS server layer
       over a multipath capable server layer.

   2.  Supporting MPLS over an MPLS-TP server layer using multiple
       MPLS-TP LSP as MPLS component links where multipath is needed.

   3.  Relaxing MPLS-TP OAM and documenting the limitations such that
       MPLS-TP could be supported over an existing multipath server
       layer.

   Each of these are separate solutions.  For example, if changes to
   MPLS forwarding enable MPLS with multipath to support fully compliant
   MPLS-TP LSP, then relaxing MPLS-TP OAM is not needed.  Conversely, if
   MPLS forwarding cannot be changed on specific existing equipment to



Villamizar              Expires December 31, 2010              [Page 23]

Internet-Draft         MPLS-TP and MPLS Multipath              June 2010


   accommodate MPLS-TP, then one of the other two solutions is required.
   Supporting MPLS-TP OAM at high rates also requires hardware change to
   most existing LSR, therefore all of these solutions require some form
   of hardware change.

5.1.2.  Advantages and Disadvangates of Solutions

   A desirable solution is one that meets all requirements and is highly
   cost effective.  An undesirable solution is one that either does not
   meet all requirements or is not cost effective.  The ability to use
   existing hardware is also desirable.  A number of solutions and the
   necessary changes are discussed in the following subsections.

   MPLS, which requires multipath, and MPLS-TP, which requires a single
   path, could potentially coexist in the following ways.

   MPLS as a Server Layer for MPLS-TP
       (Section 5.2.1)

       Advangates:  MPLS-TP can be fully accommodated with small
           signaling changes and forwarding changes.  Efficient use of
           capacity can be achieved.

       Disadvangates:  Changes to the fields over which a hash is
           computed is required and therefore this method may no be
           supportable with some existing hardware.

   MPLS-TP as a Server Layer for MPLS
       (Section 5.2.2)

       Advangates:  Some transport providers prefer to offer MPLS-TP due
           to its ability to support familiar management and operations
           procedures, involving static configuration of network
           elements and inband performance monitoring and protection
           activation.

       Disadvangates:  Multipath is moved to the client layer.  High
           bandwidth MPLS LSP must be supported through smaller parallel
           MPLS-TP LSP.  The opportunity to dynamically share capacity
           of MPLS LSP is diminished when large MPLS LSP are run over
           smaller MPLS-TP LSP.  The use of MPLS-TP LSP across a high
           bandwidth core will increase the number of LSP required and
           may impact scalability.








Villamizar              Expires December 31, 2010              [Page 24]

Internet-Draft         MPLS-TP and MPLS Multipath              June 2010


   Relax MPLS-TP OAM Requirements
       (Section 5.2.3)

       Advangates:  Relaxing OAM requirements would allow MPLS-TP LSP to
           exceed the capacity of a single component (or member) link.
           MPLS over MPLS-TP becomes more practical.

       Disadvangates:  CC/CV requires enhancement to exercise all parts
           of a multipath and would benefit from further enhancements
           (see Section 5.2.3).  CC/CV must be coordinated across
           multiple packet processing elements.  Reordering of MPLS-TP
           traffic, even if not harmful to the payload itself, would
           result in significant short term inaccuracy in loss reported
           by OAM LM.

5.2.  MPLS-TP Multipath Solution Set

   Three solutions are described.  As noted in Section 5.1.1 these are
   three separate solutions.  Each can be deployed independently.  Most
   important neither of the first two solutions requires relaxing
   MPLS-TP OAM requirements.  On the other hand, these solutions are not
   mutually exclusive.

5.2.1.  MPLS as a Server Layer for MPLS-TP

   Using MPLS with multipath as a server layer for MPLS-TP has the most
   advantages, and with the exception of inability to run on some (or
   most) existing hardware, has no disadvantages.  This is assuming that
   the changes suggested in this subsection are implemented.

   Supporting fully conformant MPLS-TP LSP over MPLS LSP which are
   making use of multipath, requires special treatment of the MPLS-TP
   LSP such that those LSP only are not subject to the multipath load
   slitting.

   MP#1  It MUST be possible to identify MPLS-TP LSP.

   MP#2  It MUST be possible to completely exclude MPLS-TP LSP from the
         multipath hash and load split, statically assign it to a
         component link or member, and compensate for this assignment in
         the MPLS multipath load split.

   MP#3  In order to support one or more MPLS-TP LSP contained in an
         MPLS LSP, it MUST be possible to signal the presence of MPLS-TP
         LSP.






Villamizar              Expires December 31, 2010              [Page 25]

Internet-Draft         MPLS-TP and MPLS Multipath              June 2010


   MP#4  In order to support an MPLS LSP carrying other MPLS LSP some of
         which in turn carry MPLS-TP LSP, it MUST be possible to
         determine the minimum depth within the label stack at which an
         MPLS-TP LSP exists and provide this depth in signaling.

   MP#5  The depth within the label stack of the multipath hash for any
         MPLS LSP that is carrying MPLS-TP LSP MUST be constrained for
         that MPLS LSP so that the hashing does not include any
         information past an MPLS-TP label.

   MP#6  It must be possible for an LSR which is setting up an MPLS-TP
         or MPLS LSP to determine at CSPF time whether a link can
         support the MPLS-TP requirements of the LSP.

   Some hardware which exists today can support requirement MP#2.  For
   example, if a table is used to support multipath and produces
   satisfactory results given existing traffic patterns, and the number
   of component links or members is smaller than the table by a factor
   or N, then an allocation of a multiple of 1/N of a component or
   member link can be set aside for MPLS-TP traffic.  The MPLS-TP
   traffic can be protected from an degraded performance due to an
   imperfect load split if the MPLS-TP traffic is given queuing priority
   (using strict priority and policing or shaping at ingress or locally
   or weighted queuing locally).

   Most existing hardware cannot support requirement MP#5 but some may
   be able to partially support this requirements by fixing the label
   stack inspection depth to a fixed number of LSP from the top.  Full
   support for requirement MP#5 requires that the depth over which the
   hash is computed can be derived from the label number of the label on
   which a label swap operation is performed.

5.2.2.  MPLS-TP as a Server Layer for MPLS

   Carrying MPLS LSP which are larger than a component link over an
   MPLS-TP server layer requires that the large MPLS client layer LSP be
   accommodated by multiple MPLS-TP server layer LSPs.  MPLS multipath
   can be used in the client layer MPLS as described in Section 4.1.4.

   Creating multiple MPLS-TP server layer LSP places a greater ILM
   scaling burden on the LSR (see Section 3.3.1.1 and the examples in
   Section 3.3.1.3).  High bandwidth MPLS cores with a smaller amount of
   nodes have the greatest tendency to require LSP in excess of
   component links, therefore the reduction in number of nodes offsets
   the impact of increasing the number of server layer LSP in parallel.
   Today, only in cases where the ILM is small would this be an issue.

   The most significant disadvantage of MPLS-TP as a Server Layer for



Villamizar              Expires December 31, 2010              [Page 26]

Internet-Draft         MPLS-TP and MPLS Multipath              June 2010


   MPLS is that the MPLS LSP reduces the efficiency of carrying the MPLS
   client layer.  The service which provides by far the largest offered
   load today is Internet, for which the LSP capacity reservations are
   predictions of expected load.  Many of these MPLS LSP may be smaller
   than component link capacity.  Using MPLS-TP as a server layer
   results in bin packing problems for these smaller LSP.  For those LSP
   that are larger than component link capacity, their capacity are not
   increments of convenient capacity increments such as 10Gb/s.  Using
   MPLS-TP as an underlying server layer greatly reduces the ability of
   the client layer MPLS LSP to share capacity.  For example, when one
   MPLS LSP is underutilizing its predicted capacity, the fixed
   allocation of MPLS-TP to component links may not allow another LSP to
   exceed its predicted capacity.  A solution which makes less efficient
   use of resources may result in a less cost effective solution, due to
   the amount of capital equipment cost required and an increase in
   space and power required.

   No additional requirements beyond MPLS-TP as it is now currently
   defined are required to support MPLS-TP as a Server Layer for MPLS.
   It is therefore viable but has some undesirable characteristics
   discussed above.

5.2.3.  Relax MPLS-TP OAM Requirements

   If MPLS-TP OAM requirements are not fully met, as currently
   specified, an LSP is not fully MPLS-TP conformant.  That may be
   little more than a semantic inconvenience and can not prevent
   implementations from allowing LSP which are otherwise MPLS-TP
   compliant to optionally use multipath with some reduction in OAM
   capability.

   Regardless as to whether relaxing MPLS-TP OAM requirements makes an
   LSP no longer an MPLS-TP LSP, this section discusses the consequence
   of using multipath with regard to MPLS-TP OAM.

   If MPLS-TP over multipath is supported by relaxing MPLS-TP OAM
   requirements, the requirements listed below will improve the behavior
   of MPLS-TP OAM over multipath.

   OAM#1  There MUST be a means of introducing entropy to MPLS-TP OAM.

   OAM#2  There SHOULD be a means to focus CC/CV testing on a specific
          multipath component link.

   OAM#3  There MUST be a means to support LM over multipath, even if at
          best a bounded long term inaccuracy is achieved.





Villamizar              Expires December 31, 2010              [Page 27]

Internet-Draft         MPLS-TP and MPLS Multipath              June 2010


5.2.3.1.  MPLS-TP CC/CV OAM with Multipath

   MPLS-TP CC/CV as currently defined has no means to exercise all paths
   of a multipath.  The label stack is fixed, followed by a GAL label
   [RFC5586].  As is, only one path along a multipath can be exercised
   when the ingress to the multipath is not also the ingress to the LSP.
   For example, if the LSP is carrying PW, the PW themselves can be
   spread across the multipath, but not the OAM traffic.

   If CC/CV OAM is allowed to place a label below the GAL label, the
   entire set of paths can be tested, though not in a deterministic
   manner.  This is called an entropy label.  Using a different random
   number in this entropy label for each OAM packet allows all links to
   be exercised on a probabilistic basis.

   The loss of a isolated OAM CC/CV packet currently has no effect.  If
   the loss of a single OAM packet can be noted by the sender, then the
   sender can repeatedly use the same value in the entropy label.  This
   requires either a two way OAM or feedback to the ingress.  If OAM
   packets can be reordered, then a sliding window of outstanding OAM
   packets is required.  If OAM CC/CV packets are given high priority
   (as currently specified), then delay difference should be minimal and
   reordering may be non-existent if the send interval is longer than
   the delay difference.

   If a multipath component link failure had been detected locally (at a
   node adjacent to the failure) and the failure corrected locally (ie:
   segment protection) or the component link taken out of service, the
   client LSP would either no longer be affected or it would be
   preempted.  If the client LSP has been preempted, MPLS-TP OAM
   unmodified would be sufficient to detect this condition.  The
   existing BFD [RFC5884] provides this functionality.

   Only in the case where a component link has failed and the server
   layer has not been able to detect and correct the failure or take the
   component link out of service would CC/CV OAM on the client LSP serve
   any purpose.  For this purpose, a relaxed OAM may be sufficient.  If
   the client LSP has no control over the multipath itself, the entire
   multipath must be considered down if any uncorrected component link
   failure is occurring at the multipath.

   The CC/CV as described here can be handled by an OAM mechanism which
   is bidirectional.  LSP Ping provides such a mechanism [RFC4379].
   Because the condition being handled by LSP ping should be quite rare,
   it may be acceptable to use a combination of BFD and MPLS ping to
   provide OAM with full coverage of all types of fault, but with a
   slower response to a component link failure which is not detected at
   the point of the fault.



Villamizar              Expires December 31, 2010              [Page 28]

Internet-Draft         MPLS-TP and MPLS Multipath              June 2010


   For LSR implementations which support BFD and MPLS ping "as is",
   these may be viable as an optional MPLS-TP form of CC/CV OAM.  A
   deployment may use this option if the reliance on IP is acceptable to
   the provider.  Alternately MPLS-TP OAM could take such requirements
   into consideration and provide an additional capability in BFD or
   provide MPLS-TP extensions to MPLS ping.

   A further small complication may occur at the OAM egress.  If the
   egress to the LSP is a multipath egress, then the OAM may arrive at
   any of the component links at the egress.  This requires that the
   CC/CV OAM be forwarded within the LSR to a common packet processor in
   order to be handled in hardware (or forwarded to a common CPU).  This
   is also true of other types of OAM.

5.2.3.2.  MPLS-TP LM OAM with Multipath

   MPLS-TP LM OAM makes use of the count of payload packets at an
   egress.  If the payload is reordered, even with no consequence to the
   payload itself, some inaccuracy is introduced to the LM.  Some number
   of payload packets which were transmitted before the LM OAM packet
   was sent may arrive after the LM packet is received and some payload
   packets transmitted after the LM OAM packet may arrive before the LM
   packet.

   If the LSP egress is a multipath, then the LM packets may arrive at
   any packet processor over which the multipath resides.  The counters
   from each of the egress packet processors will have to be sampled.
   During the sampling interval, addition packet arrive and will be
   counted.  This creates an equivalent out of order problem with
   respect to the LM OAM and the payload it is counting.

   This error is bounded and is not cumulative.  For example, if one LM
   interval counts too few packets, the next LM interval will tend to
   count too many.  Over longer measurement periods the total error
   retains the same bounds, which over longer intervals becomes less
   significant.

   These errors are most significant when a substantial amount of
   queuing delay is present (generally an indication of light
   congestion) and when the queues at various component links differ in
   delay.  Queuing delay differences are generally milliseconds.  Delay
   differences of tens of milliseconds requires persistent queues and
   significant congestion.

   The worst case errors over long intervals are reasonably well
   bounded.  For example, with A 10 msec delay difference, a one minute
   sampling yields less than a 0.02% uncertainty and over a 15 minute
   interval loss uncertainty is just over 0.001%.  Given that congestion



Villamizar              Expires December 31, 2010              [Page 29]

Internet-Draft         MPLS-TP and MPLS Multipath              June 2010


   is required to achieve these uncertainties, the loss due to
   congestion is likely to significantly exceed these uncertainties for
   all but very short measurement intervals.

   When loss is zero but short term queues are formed, the queuing delay
   difference is likely to be under one millisecond for the common case
   of parallel links that are routed along the same fiber (using WDM).
   The uncertainty for 1 minute and 15 minute samples are under 0.002%
   and just over 0.0001% (10^-6).  The uncertainty over a 24 hour period
   is 0.00000011% or just over 10^-9.  An SLA could easily be supported
   where loss was guaranteed not to exceed 10^-6 in any hour or 10^-8 in
   any 24 hour period.  Such a guarantee would require that the MPLS-TP
   LSP be given priority over non-policed or shaped traffic and itself
   is policed or shaped.

   This measurement uncertainty may or may not be acceptable to a given
   deployment.  Providing an option to support MPLS-TP over multipath
   does introduce a bounded error to LM but it does not remove a
   providers option not to use MPLS-TP over multipath.


6.  Summary of Recommendations

   Section 3 enumerates functional requirements.  Section 4 describes
   current practices.  Section 5 enumerates functional changes to better
   meet these requirements.  This section provides specific
   recommendations.

   To support MPLS with multipath as a server layer for MPLS-TP the
   following changes are required.

   Recommendation #1  Provide a means in RSVP-TE for an LSP to self
                      identify its requirement to be treated as fully
                      compliant MPLS-TP (disallow reordering).

   Recommendation #2  Provide a means in RSVP-TE for an LSP that is not
                      an MPLS-TP LSP but is directly carrying MPLS-TP
                      LSP to indicate that hashing may only be performed
                      on the first two labels and indicate the largest
                      MPLS-TP LSP being carried (the largest potential
                      microflow).

   Recommendation #3  Provide a means in RSVP-TE for an LSP that is not
                      an MPLS-TP LSP but is carrying MPLS-TP at some
                      depth to indicate the maximum depth in the label
                      stack that hashing can operate on, and the largest
                      MPLS-TP LSP being carried (the largest potential
                      microflow).



Villamizar              Expires December 31, 2010              [Page 30]

Internet-Draft         MPLS-TP and MPLS Multipath              June 2010


   Recommendation #4  Provide a means in OSPF-TE and ISIS-TE to indicate
                      the largest microflow that a multipath can
                      accommodate independent of the largest LSP that
                      can accommodated with load splitting.  An
                      extension to [RFC4201] which separates Maximum LSP
                      into two variables, with backward compatibility
                      may be the most desirable solution.

   The current framework documents could be improved with the following
   additions.

   Recommendation #5  Relax GAL specification in [RFC5586] to allow a
                      label below GAL to provide entropy in OAM traffic
                      over multipath.

   Recommendation #6  Preferably in the OAM framework, acknowledge the
                      need for entropy in OAM in some circumstances.
                      Note that if no multipath exists along a path, the
                      entropy is not needed but does no harm.  Support
                      optional entropy in MPLS-TP OAM through use of a
                      label under the GAL label.

   Recommendation #7  Document the need for MPLS Ping or other two way
                      mechanism to keep a sliding window of outstanding
                      packets at the sender which records the entropy
                      value used, note any single loss, and send
                      repeated packets for an entropy value which has
                      experienced a loss.

   Recommendation #8  Preferably in the OAM framework, document the need
                      for CC/CV at a multipath egress to forward OAM
                      packets for an LSP that is load split through an
                      out of band means to a common packet processor or
                      CPU.

   Recommendation #9  Preferably in the OAM framework, document the need
                      for LM at multipath egress to collect packet
                      counts on all packet processors that could
                      potentially receive packets for a given LSP.

   Forwarding changes to multipath necessary to support MPLS with
   multipath as a server layer for fully compliant MPLS-TP are the
   following:

   Forwarding #1  Store the maximum depth of multipath hash (or zero for
                  unconstrained depth) in the ILM.





Villamizar              Expires December 31, 2010              [Page 31]

Internet-Draft         MPLS-TP and MPLS Multipath              June 2010


   Forwarding #2  Do not hash using the IP stack on an LSP which is
                  carrying MPLS-TP.  An LSP where IP headers can be used
                  in the stack can be identified by noting that a
                  maximum depth equal zero cannot be carrying MPLS-TP or
                  it can be explicitly indicated, independently of
                  depth.  If a CW is not used with PW, then this
                  indication must be explicit.

   Forwarding #3  When hashing on the MPLS label stack do not hash
                  beyond the maximum depth of hash for a given LSP.

   Forwarding #4  Exclude reserved labels from the hash on label stack.
                  In particular, the GAL [RFC5586] and OAM Alert Label
                  [RFC3429] should be skipped.


7.  IANA Considerations

   This memo includes no request to IANA.


8.  Security Considerations

   This document specifies requirements with discussion of framework for
   solutions.  The requirements and framework are related to the
   coexistence of MPLS/GMPLS (without MPLS-TP) when used over a packet
   network, MPLS-TP, and multipath.  The combination of MPLS, MPLS-TP,
   and multipath does not introduce any new security threats.  The
   security considerations for MPLS/GMPLS and for MPLS-TP are documented
   in [I-D.ietf-mpls-mpls-and-gmpls-security-framework] and
   [I-D.fang-mpls-tp-security-framework].


9.  References

9.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

9.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.fang-mpls-tp-security-framework]
              Fang, L. and B. Niven-Jenkins, "Security Framework for
              MPLS-TP", draft-fang-mpls-tp-security-framework-01 (work
              in progress), March 2010.

   [I-D.ietf-mpls-mpls-and-gmpls-security-framework]



Villamizar              Expires December 31, 2010              [Page 32]

Internet-Draft         MPLS-TP and MPLS Multipath              June 2010


              Fang, L. and M. Behringer, "Security Framework for MPLS
              and GMPLS Networks",
              draft-ietf-mpls-mpls-and-gmpls-security-framework-09 (work
              in progress), March 2010.

   [I-D.ietf-mpls-tp-oam-framework]
              Allan, D., Busi, I., Niven-Jenkins, B., Fulignoli, A.,
              Hernandez-Valencia, E., Levrau, L., Mohan, D., Sestito,
              V., Sprecher, N., Helvoort, H., Vigoureux, M., Weingarten,
              Y., and R. Winter, "MPLS-TP OAM Framework",
              draft-ietf-mpls-tp-oam-framework-06 (work in progress),
              April 2010.

   [I-D.ietf-pwe3-fat-pw]
              Bryant, S., Filsfils, C., Drafz, U., Kompella, V., Regan,
              J., and S. Amante, "Flow Aware Transport of Pseudowires
              over an MPLS PSN", draft-ietf-pwe3-fat-pw-03 (work in
              progress), January 2010.

   [IEEE-802.1AX]
              IEEE Standards Association, "IEEE Std 802.1AX-2008 IEEE
              Standard for Local and Metropolitan Area Networks - Link
              Aggregation", 2006, <http://standards.ieee.org/getieee802/
              download/802.1AX-2008.pdf>.

   [ITU-T.G.800]
              ITU-T, "Unified functional architecture of transport
              networks", 2007, <http://www.itu.int/rec/T-REC-G/
              recommendation.asp?parent=T-REC-G.800>.

   [RFC1247]  Moy, J., "OSPF Version 2", RFC 1247, July 1991.

   [RFC1717]  Sklower, K., Lloyd, B., McGregor, G., and D. Carr, "The
              PPP Multilink Protocol (MP)", RFC 1717, November 1994.

   [RFC2475]  Blake, S., Black, D., Carlson, M., Davies, E., Wang, Z.,
              and W. Weiss, "An Architecture for Differentiated
              Services", RFC 2475, December 1998.

   [RFC2615]  Malis, A. and W. Simpson, "PPP over SONET/SDH", RFC 2615,
              June 1999.

   [RFC2991]  Thaler, D. and C. Hopps, "Multipath Issues in Unicast and
              Multicast Next-Hop Selection", RFC 2991, November 2000.

   [RFC2992]  Hopps, C., "Analysis of an Equal-Cost Multi-Path
              Algorithm", RFC 2992, November 2000.




Villamizar              Expires December 31, 2010              [Page 33]

Internet-Draft         MPLS-TP and MPLS Multipath              June 2010


   [RFC3031]  Rosen, E., Viswanathan, A., and R. Callon, "Multiprotocol
              Label Switching Architecture", RFC 3031, January 2001.

   [RFC3032]  Rosen, E., Tappan, D., Fedorkow, G., Rekhter, Y.,
              Farinacci, D., Li, T., and A. Conta, "MPLS Label Stack
              Encoding", RFC 3032, January 2001.

   [RFC3260]  Grossman, D., "New Terminology and Clarifications for
              Diffserv", RFC 3260, April 2002.

   [RFC3270]  Le Faucheur, F., Wu, L., Davie, B., Davari, S., Vaananen,
              P., Krishnan, R., Cheval, P., and J. Heinanen, "Multi-
              Protocol Label Switching (MPLS) Support of Differentiated
              Services", RFC 3270, May 2002.

   [RFC3429]  Ohta, H., "Assignment of the 'OAM Alert Label' for
              Multiprotocol Label Switching Architecture (MPLS)
              Operation and Maintenance (OAM) Functions", RFC 3429,
              November 2002.

   [RFC4090]  Pan, P., Swallow, G., and A. Atlas, "Fast Reroute
              Extensions to RSVP-TE for LSP Tunnels", RFC 4090,
              May 2005.

   [RFC4201]  Kompella, K., Rekhter, Y., and L. Berger, "Link Bundling
              in MPLS Traffic Engineering (TE)", RFC 4201, October 2005.

   [RFC4206]  Kompella, K. and Y. Rekhter, "Label Switched Paths (LSP)
              Hierarchy with Generalized Multi-Protocol Label Switching
              (GMPLS) Traffic Engineering (TE)", RFC 4206, October 2005.

   [RFC4379]  Kompella, K. and G. Swallow, "Detecting Multi-Protocol
              Label Switched (MPLS) Data Plane Failures", RFC 4379,
              February 2006.

   [RFC4385]  Bryant, S., Swallow, G., Martini, L., and D. McPherson,
              "Pseudowire Emulation Edge-to-Edge (PWE3) Control Word for
              Use over an MPLS PSN", RFC 4385, February 2006.

   [RFC4426]  Lang, J., Rajagopalan, B., and D. Papadimitriou,
              "Generalized Multi-Protocol Label Switching (GMPLS)
              Recovery Functional Specification", RFC 4426, March 2006.

   [RFC4448]  Martini, L., Rosen, E., El-Aawar, N., and G. Heron,
              "Encapsulation Methods for Transport of Ethernet over MPLS
              Networks", RFC 4448, April 2006.

   [RFC4928]  Swallow, G., Bryant, S., and L. Andersson, "Avoiding Equal



Villamizar              Expires December 31, 2010              [Page 34]

Internet-Draft         MPLS-TP and MPLS Multipath              June 2010


              Cost Multipath Treatment in MPLS Networks", BCP 128,
              RFC 4928, June 2007.

   [RFC5286]  Atlas, A. and A. Zinin, "Basic Specification for IP Fast
              Reroute: Loop-Free Alternates", RFC 5286, September 2008.

   [RFC5462]  Andersson, L. and R. Asati, "Multiprotocol Label Switching
              (MPLS) Label Stack Entry: "EXP" Field Renamed to "Traffic
              Class" Field", RFC 5462, February 2009.

   [RFC5586]  Bocci, M., Vigoureux, M., and S. Bryant, "MPLS Generic
              Associated Channel", RFC 5586, June 2009.

   [RFC5714]  Shand, M. and S. Bryant, "IP Fast Reroute Framework",
              RFC 5714, January 2010.

   [RFC5860]  Vigoureux, M., Ward, D., and M. Betts, "Requirements for
              Operations, Administration, and Maintenance (OAM) in MPLS
              Transport Networks", RFC 5860, May 2010.

   [RFC5884]  Aggarwal, R., Kompella, K., Nadeau, T., and G. Swallow,
              "Bidirectional Forwarding Detection (BFD) for MPLS Label
              Switched Paths (LSPs)", RFC 5884, June 2010.


Author's Address

   Curtis Villamizar (editor)
   Infinera Corporation
   169 W. Java Drive
   Sunnyvale, CA  94089

   Email: cvillamizar@infinera.com


















Villamizar              Expires December 31, 2010              [Page 35]

