Audio/Video Transport WG                                       P. Yang
Internet Draft                                              Y.-K. Wang
Intended status: Standards track                   Huawei Technologies
Expires: April 2010
                                                      October 26, 2009




     Synchronized Playback in Rapid Acquisition of Multicast Sessions
                 draft-yang-avt-rtp-synced-playback-02.txt


Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with
   the provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.  This document may contain
   material from IETF Documents or IETF Contributions published or
   made publicly available before November 10, 2008.  The person(s)
   controlling the copyright in some of this material may not have
   granted the IETF Trust the right to allow modifications of such
   material outside the IETF Standards Process.  Without obtaining an
   adequate license from the person(s) controlling the copyright in
   such materials, this document may not be modified outside the IETF
   Standards Process, and derivative works of it may not be created
   outside the IETF Standards Process, except to format it for
   publication as an RFC or to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other
   documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts
   as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in
   progress".

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 26, 2010.





Yang & Wang             Expires April 26, 2010                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft          Synchronized playback            October 2009




Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2009 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents in effect on the date of
   publication of this document (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info).
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your
   rights and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code
   Components extracted from this document must include Simplified BSD
   License text as described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal
   Provisions and are provided without warranty as described in the
   BSD License.



Abstract

   When watching the same IPTV channel, different TV sets may not
   render the same picture and the associated audio at the same moment.
   The variation in end-to-end delay that resulted in such
   asynchronous playback between users is referred to as inter-user
   playback delay.  Unicast based rapid acquisition of multicast RTP
   sessions (RAMS) as specified in [I-D.ietf-avt-rapid-acquisition-
   for-rtp] is an important technique in achieving fast channel
   switching in IPTV as well as other multicast applications.  In
   addition, RAMS also significantly relaxes the requirement of
   relatively short random access point period in encoding of video
   streams in multicast applications, thus allowing significantly
   improved compression efficiency.  However, on the other hand, the
   use of RAMS increases inter-user playback delay, which makes users
   receiving the same multicast session playback the same content
   asynchronously.  This document specifies a mechanism to help reduce
   inter-user playback delay caused by the use of RAMS.



Table of Contents


   1. Introduction..................................................3
   2. Conventions...................................................5
   3. Definitions...................................................5



Yang & Wang             Expires April 26, 2010                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft          Synchronized playback            October 2009


   4. Reducing Inter-User Playback Delay due to RAMS................5
   5. Message Extensions............................................8
      5.1. Extension to RAMS-R......................................8
      5.2. Extension to RAMS-I......................................8
   6. Security Considerations.......................................8
   7. IANA Considerations...........................................8
   8. Acknowledgements..............................................8
   9. References....................................................8
   10. Authors' Addresses...........................................9



1. Introduction

   The Internet-Draft "Unicast-Based Rapid Acquisition of Multicast
   RTP Sessions" in [I-D.ietf-avt-rapid-acquisition-for-rtp] presents
   a method based on unicast burst stream for rapid acquisition of
   multicast RTP sessions (RAMS), thus to reduce the waiting time for
   the so-called Reference Information (RI).  This method is effective
   in reducing channel switching and tune-in delay in multicast
   applications, such as IPTV.  The RI typically starts at an access
   unit that is a random access point.  In RAMS, RTP receivers start
   playback from the random access point from which the RI starts when
   they switch from one multicast session to another.  As the unicast
   burst stream starts from the RI and is transmitted as fast as
   possible and faster than the media rate, on average the receiver
   can start processing the unicast burst stream faster, because it
   does not need to wait for the next random access point, as it does
   if it directly joined the multicast group.

   Another important benefit brought by RAMS is that significantly
   improved coding efficiency for video streams is possible.  In
   conventional multicast applications, video streams must be encoded
   with frequent random access points, e.g. 0.5 to 1 second, to allow
   new receivers to tune-in or existing users to switching from
   another multicast session.  Random access points typically contain
   intra-coded pictures, for which the compression efficiency is
   significantly, e.g., several to ten times, lower than inter-coded
   pictures.  Therefore, the less the random access points, the higher
   the coding efficiency.  When RAMS is in use, random access period
   length is not the decision factor for the tune-in or channel
   switching delay.  This means that the video random access point
   frequency can be significantly reduced, leading to significantly
   improved compression efficiency.





Yang & Wang             Expires April 26, 2010                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft          Synchronized playback            October 2009


   In a video communication system, an end-to-end delay is unavoidable.
   Typical end-to-end delay components are transmission delay,
   receiver buffering delay (which also handles transmission jitter),
   decoding buffering delay, output buffering delay, and other
   processing delays.  Use of RAMS causes additional end-to-end delay,
   the amount of which is equal to the time difference between the
   latest RTP timestamp of primary multicast packets buffered in the
   RS when the unicst burst starts and the RTP timestamp of the
   starting point of the unicast burst.

   In multicast applications, receivers receiving the same multicast
   session can have different end-to-end delays and thus the playback
   of the same content among the receivers is not synchronized.  In
   this document, a delay in playback time of the same content between
   any two users is referred to as inter-user playback delay (IUPD).
   This document further refers to the typical end-to-end delay (when
   RAMS is not in use) as Common End-to-end Delay (CED).  Among the
   delay components of CED, jitter buffer delay is the main part.
   Typical set-top box de-jitter buffers can store 100-500 ms (of SDTV)
   video, so network jitter must be within these limits and delay
   variation beyond these limits will manifest itself as loss [TR-126].
   Compared to jitter buffer delay under the level of several hundreds
   of milliseconds, the acquisition of Reference Information by RAMS
   may result in much longer delay which depends on the period of
   random access points, which sometimes are, vaguely, referred to as
   Group of Pictures (GOP) length (distance between key or I-frames).
   This document refers to this additional end-to-end delay caused by
   the use of RAMS as Rapid Acquisition Playback Delay (RAPD).

   Due to IUPD, different users may watch different pictures from
   different TV sets when watching the same IPTV content.  In some
   application scenarios, e.g., remote education or a discussion room
   for an ongoing TV program in a social network, different users may
   be discussing the same content received through multicast.  In this
   case, an obvious playback synchronization loss due to excessive
   inter-user playback delay can generate bad user experience.

   As mentioned above, a disadvantage of RAMS is that the use of the
   technique causes RAPD for each user.  Receivers are not
   synchronized in sending RAMS requests.  Regardless of when the
   receiver starts the RAMS request (i.e. joins the program), the
   playback will start from a previous random access point.  Given the
   starting point, the closer to the next random access point the
   receiver joins the program, the longer the RAP will be.  Thus, the
   use of RAMS increases IUPD.




Yang & Wang             Expires April 26, 2010                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft          Synchronized playback            October 2009


   When obvious IUPD affects user experiences in above application
   scenarios, some actions must be taken.  One way is to constrain the
   use of long random access period length, which significantly hurts
   video compression efficiency.  In this document, we describe some
   mechanisms to reduce IUPD due to the use of RAMS and to allow the
   use of long random access period length for improved compression
   efficiency at the same time.


2. Conventions

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in
   this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119
   [RFC2119].

3. Definitions

   This document uses the following acronyms and definitions:

   Inter-User Playback Delay (IUPD): The playback delay between
   different users, for the same content transmitted on the same
   multicast session, due to variations in end-to-end delays.

   Common End-to-end Delay (CED): The end-to-end delay when RAMS is
   not in use, which consists of transmission delay, receiver
   buffering delay (which also handles transmission jitter), decoding
   buffering delay, output buffering delay, and other processing
   delays.

   Rapid Acquisition Playback Delay (RAPD): The additional end-to-end
   delay introduced by the use of RAMS.  The value is equal to the
   time difference between the latest RTP timestamp of primary
   multicast packets buffered in the RS when the unicst burst starts
   and the RTP timestamp of the starting point of the unicast burst.

4. Reducing Inter-User Playback Delay due to RAMS

   Inter-User Playback Delay (IUPD) is causes by the variation in end-
   to-end delay, which includes Common End-to-End Delay (CED) and
   Rapid Acquisition Playback Delay (RAPD).  CED is primarily
   determined by jitter buffering delay which is in the range from 100
   ms to 500 ms [TR-126].  In practice, IUPD caused by CED, and
   primarily by jitter buffer delay variations, should be under the
   level of tens of milliseconds.  In contrast to this small range of
   IUPD values caused by CED, the IUPD caused by RAPD can be much



Yang & Wang             Expires April 26, 2010                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft          Synchronized playback            October 2009


   higher, up to a few seconds or even to ten seconds, as long period
   of random access points can be used for significantly improved
   video compression efficiency when RAMS is in us.

   To lower IUPD the receiver can speed up video playback until it
   catches up with the primary multicast stream.  The procedures are
   outlined bellow.

   The playback synchronization of receivers uses the Primary
   Multicast Stream as a reference point to address RAPD due to the
   use of RAMS.  Each receiver keeps the synchronization with the
   primary multicast stream so that all receivers can keep an
   approximate synchronization in playback.  The advantage is that it
   does not need every receiver to get playback synchronization
   information of other receivers, and thus scalability is not an
   issue as the procedure does not depend on the number of receivers.

   The mechanism for speeding up video frames uses a method of
   skipping video frame.  In other words, one frame per an interval of
   some video frames is skipped until the number of extra video frames
   has been skipped.  This way, the additional end-to-end delay, RAPD,
   can be compensated, and at the same time a smooth playback is
   ensured.

   The mechanism involves the following changes to the RAMS method:

   1) When the RTP Receiver (RR) sends a rapid acquisition request for
      the new multicast RTP session, the request MAY contain
      additional information indicating whether RR supports inter-user
      playback delay reduction.

   2) When the Retransmission Sever (RS) receives the RAMS-R message
      and decides to accept it, RS MAY include the following
      additional information in the RAMS-I message to RR:

      a) N, the playback delay reduction target in number of frame
         durations; and

      b) V, recommended interval, in frames, between two continuous
         events for skipping of one frame.

      When the RAMS-R message indicates that RR supports inter-user
      playback delay reduction, RS SHOULD include the above
      information in the RAMS-I message.





Yang & Wang             Expires April 26, 2010                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft          Synchronized playback            October 2009


      Retransmission server (RS) can precisely determine the value of
      N by detecting the time of RAMS-R, as the amount of additional
      end-to-end delay introduced by the use of RAMS, i.e. RAPD, is
      known to RS.  The value is equal to the time difference between
      the latest RTP timestamp of primary multicast packets buffered
      in the RS when the unicst burst starts and the RTP timestamp of
      the starting point of the unicast burst.  The value V is a
      recommended skip frame interval and the value must be chosen
      such that there is no noticeable audio distortion.  For a video
      frame rate of 30 frames per second, typically when V is greater
      than 15 there is no noticeable audio distortion.

   3) When RR receives an RAMS-I message containing the above
      information, it SHOULD speed up media rendering during playback
      taking into account the information as follows.  During the
      speedup playback, after each V frames, one frame is skipped as
      if it was not present, and the presentation time of each
      remaining frame is shifted earlier by one frame duration, until
      totally N frames have been skipped. Receivers will playback the
      media content with its original speed after totally N frames
      have been skipped.  Note that decoding remains the same as if
      speedup playback was not in use.

   Besides the above mechanism, RS can use selective transmission of
   packets in the beginning of the unicast burst, by taking advantage
   of the temporal scalability of video bitstreams.

   Video bitstreams are typically temporally scalable, in the sense
   that a portion of the bitstream can be extracted and decoded with a
   lower frame rate.  Conventionally video coding standards like MPEG-
   2 can realize temporal scalability using different types of frames,
   i.e. I frame, P frame, and B frame, wherein I frames only consist
   of the lowest temporal layer (corresponding to the lowest frame
   rate), P frames only consist of the middle temporal layer, and B
   frames only consist of the highest temporal layer.  Decoding of one
   temporal layer requires the presence of the temporal layer itself
   and all the lower temporal layers, but not the presence of any
   higher layer.  H.264/AVC and its scalable extension SVC (Scalable
   Video Coding) support advanced temporal scalability thanks to the
   flexible inter prediction scheme and flexible reference frame
   management scheme.  It should be noted that in H.264/AVC and its
   extensions, B frames themselves may be reference frames, which may
   be used by other frames for inter prediction, therefore the
   discarding of which may lead to problems in decoding of the rest of
   the bitstream.




Yang & Wang             Expires April 26, 2010                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft          Synchronized playback            October 2009


   The RS MAY transmit the unicast burst as follows.  In the beginning
   of the unicast burst, the RS discards one or more of the highest
   temporal layers and transmits only the remaining lower temporal
   layers.  After a certain point, all temporal layers are transmitted.
   This would speed up the acquisition of the multicast session under
   the same unicsat burst rate, at the cost of lower initial frame
   rate.  At the same time, if the playback of the initial stream with
   lower frame rate is sped up, inter-user playback delay can be
   reduced.

5. Message Extensions

   This section defines the extensions to RAMS-R and RAMS-I messages
   for inter-user playback delay reduction.

5.1. Extension to RAMS-R

   TBD.

5.2. Extension to RAMS-I

   TBD.

6. Security Considerations

   TBD.

7. IANA Considerations

   TBD.

8. Acknowledgements

   TBD.

   This document was prepared using 2-Word-v2.0.template.dot.

9. References

   [I-D.ietf-avt-rapid-acquisition-for-rtp]
             Steeg, B., Begen, A., Caenegem, T., and Z. Vax, "Unicast-
             Based Rapid Acquisition of Multicast RTP Sessions",
             draft-ietf-avt-rapid-acquisition-for-rtp-01 (work in
             progress), June 2009.





Yang & Wang             Expires April 26, 2010                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft          Synchronized playback            October 2009


   [I-D.ietf-avt-rtcp-guidelines]
             Ott, J. and C. Perkins, "Guidelines for Extending the RTP
             Control Protocol (RTCP)", draft-ietf-avt-rtcp-guidelines-
             01 (work in progress), March 2009.

   [RFC2119] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
             Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC3550] Schulzrinne, H., Casner, S., Frederick, R., and V.
             Jacobson, "RTP: A Transport Protocol for Real-Time
             Applications", STD 64, RFC 3550, July 2003.

   [RFC4585] Ott, J., Wenger, S., Sato, N., Burmeister, C., and J. Rey,
             "Extended RTP Profile for Real-time Transport Control
             Protocol (RTCP)-Based Feedback (RTP/AVPF)", RFC 4585,
             July 2006.

   [RFC4588] Rey, J., Leon, D., Miyazaki, A., Varsa, V., and R.
             Hakenberg, "RTP Retransmission Payload Format", RFC 4588,
             July 2006.

   [TR-126]  Triple-play Services Quality of Experience (QoE)
             Requirements, DSL Forum TR-126, 13 December 2006

10. Authors' Addresses

   Peilin Yang
   Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd.
   No.91,Baixia Road, Nanjing 210001
   P. R. China

   Phone: +86-25-84565881
   EMail: yangpeilin@huawei.com


   Ye-Kui Wang
   Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd.
   400 Somerset Corp Blvd, Suite 602
   Bridgewater, NJ 08807
   USA

   Phone: +1-908-541-3518
   EMail: yekuiwang@huawei.com






Yang & Wang             Expires April 26, 2010                [Page 9]

