


MPLS WG                                                           L. Qiu
Internet-Draft                             University of Texas at Austin
Intended status: Standards Track                                 Y. Yang
Expires: January 6, 2011                                 Yale University
                                                                Y. Zhang
                                           University of Texas at Austin
                                                            July 5, 2010


               MPLS-ff for Supporting Flow-Based Routing
                       draft-yang-mpls-ff-00.txt

Abstract

   A flow-based routing scheme is a highly compact, flexible scheme for
   specify routing for both traffic engineering (TE) and fast rerouting.
   Many highly effective TE algorithms are proposed and evaluated based
   on flow-based routing.

   In this document, we propose MPLS-ff, an extension to MPLS to allow
   efficient implementation of flow-based routing.  We present the
   required extensions in the MPLS data forwarding plane.  We also list
   the requirements in signaling for MPLS-ff.

Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [1].

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.




Qiu, et al.              Expires January 6, 2011                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft              MPLS-ff Extension                  July 2010


   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 6, 2011.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the BSD License.
































Qiu, et al.              Expires January 6, 2011                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft              MPLS-ff Extension                  July 2010


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   2.  Data Plane Extension Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   3.  Control Plane Extension Requirements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   4.  Use Case  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
     4.1.  Resilient Routing Reconfiguration . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   5.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   6.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   7.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
     7.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
     7.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   Appendix A.  Acknowledgments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8





































Qiu, et al.              Expires January 6, 2011                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft              MPLS-ff Extension                  July 2010


1.  Introduction

   A flow-based routing scheme is a highly compact, flexible scheme for
   specify routing for both traffic engineering (TE) and fast rerouting
   (FRR).  In this scheme, for a given origin-destination (OD) pair, a
   set of links are used to carry traffic for this pair; at each router,
   flow routing specifies the fraction of traffic to be routed along
   each (logical) outgoing link.  A major advantage of flow-based
   routing is that it allows efficient computation of optimal traffic
   engineering and fast rerouting.  Many highly effective TE algorithms
   are proposed and evaluated using realistic traffic patterns.  They
   can consider many factors including traffic variations and network
   failures [2], [3], [4].

   In contrast, traffic engineering using path-based routing (i.e.,
   routing specified by how traffic is split among LSPs) can be
   intractable, since there can be exponential number of candidate LSPs
   between each OD pair.  There are several ways to address the
   intractability problem of computation using path-based routing.  One
   type of approaches is to preselect a small number of paths (e.g.,
   K-shortest paths [5]) and then focus traffic engineering to only
   these preselected paths.  A limitation of this type of approaches is
   that the preselected paths need to have high quality.  Another type
   of approaches is to use a two-phase process.  In the first phase, a
   flow-based routing representation is used to make computation
   tractable.  In the second phase, a path generation technique can be
   used to convert a flow-based routing into path-based routing.  A
   problem of this type of approaches is that a small variation in the
   result of the first-phase can lead to a different set of paths to be
   selected.  For example, in a recent proposed scheme named R3, the
   protection routing needs to be revised (i.e., traffic splitting
   ratios re-scaled) after each failure.  With flow-based routing, the
   re-scaling can be implemented efficiently.

   The objective of this document is to propose a simple extension to
   MPLS to allow efficient implementation of flow-based routing.

   The rest of the document is organized as follows.  In Section 2, we
   give details on flow-based routing and list the required changes to
   MPLS data plane to support flow-based routing.  We name the extension
   MPLS-ff, standing for MPLS with flow and flexible forwarding.  In
   Section 3, we discuss requirements on extensions in the control plane
   to signal MPLS-ff configurations.  In Section 4, we give one use
   case.







Qiu, et al.              Expires January 6, 2011                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft              MPLS-ff Extension                  July 2010


2.  Data Plane Extension Requirements

   The new functionality required by MPLS-ff does not require any change
   to MPLS header.

   MPLS-ff needs an ability to associate multiple outgoing subentries
   with an incoming entry in a switching table, so that we can achieve
   more flexible traffic forwarding.

   For each outgoing subentry, MPLS-ff specifies a next-hop splitting
   ratio, indicating the desired fraction of traffic to be sent to that
   entry.

   As an example, with MPLS-ff, the switching table of a transit router
   may specify that the incoming label 10,000 is associated with two
   outgoing subentries: one going out to port 1 with a splitting ratio
   of 0.3, while the other going out to port 3 with a splitting ratio of
   0.7.  This means that traffic with incoming label 10,000 is split to
   the two outgoing entries, with the first one taking 30% traffic,
   while the second one taking 70%.

   MPLS-ff does not specify the exact details of how to implement the
   splitting ratios.  However, it is desired that the implementation of
   the splitting ratios SHOULD satisfy additional requirements.

   Consistent Forwarding: One straightforward approach of implementing
   the splitting ratios is random splitting.  However, this may cause
   packets of the same TCP flow to follow different routes, which will
   generate out-of-order packets and degrade TCP performance.  To avoid
   unnecessary packet reordering, packets belonging to the same TCP flow
   should be routed consistently.

   One way to achieve consistent splitting is to use hashing.  The
   hashing implementation should satisfy two requirements:

   1.  At each given switching router, the hash of the packets belonging
       to the same (TCP) flow should be the same so that all these
       packets are forwarded along the same path.

   2.  The hash of a flow at different routers should be independent of
       each other.  One way to achieve this is that the input to the
       hash should include router ID in addition to (TCP) flow
       identification fields.  If the hash value is only determined by
       the TCP flow, the probability distribution of the hash values
       might be "skewed" on some routers.  For example, for a TCP flow
       ab, if router i only forwards the packets with hash values
       between 40 and 64 to router j, then router j may never see
       packets in TCP flow ab with hash values less than 40.



Qiu, et al.              Expires January 6, 2011                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft              MPLS-ff Extension                  July 2010


3.  Control Plane Extension Requirements

   We envision that a first approach to setup MPLS-ff is to use static
   configurations.  An advantage of fast deployment.  An issue of this
   approach, however, is that the configuration command can be vendor
   specific, thus lacking standard.

   Thus, it can be desirable to extend an existing MPLS signaling
   protocol to allow setting up MPLS-ff states at the switching routers
   for a given flow.  We identify the following requirements:

   o  The signaling protocol is extensible to carry the next-hop
      splitting ratios.  An MPLS signaling protocol allowing TLV (e.g.,
      RSVP based) can be extended to carry a new type of splitting
      ratio.

   o  The signaling protocol can set up MPLS-ff states at a set of
      routers that do not form a single path, but a directed acyclic
      graph (DAG).

   An additional requirement that is related with both data forwarding
   and signaling is MPLS label space management.  For scalability and
   ease of signaling, different switching routers may assign different
   outgoing label values for the same OD pair.  However, traffic of the
   same OD pair from multiple incoming labels may converge to the same
   router again.  As an example, in Figure 2 of [4], traffic of the same
   OD pair comes to router R2 from both R4 and R5.  Ideally, the two
   incoming streams of data should belong to the same forwarding
   equivalence class (FEC) again.  Supporting such convergence can
   reduce storage overhead and improve load balancing.


4.  Use Case

4.1.  Resilient Routing Reconfiguration

   Supporting of MPLS-ff can allow efficient implementation of new
   traffic engineering and fast rerouting capabilities.  One use case is
   the implementation of a new capability named R3: Resilient Routing
   Reconfiguration.

   Specifically, R3 is a technique to address major practical challenges
   when using MPLS-based FRR in large business core networks [6]:

   o  Complexity: "the existing FRR bandwidth and preemption design
      quickly becomes too complicated when multiple FRR paths are set up
      to account for multiple failures;"




Qiu, et al.              Expires January 6, 2011                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft              MPLS-ff Extension                  July 2010


   o  Congestion: "multiple network element failure can cause domino
      effect on FRR reroute due to preemption which magnifies the
      problem and causes network instability;"

   o  No performance predictability: "service provider loses performance
      predictability due to the massive amount of combinations and
      permutations of the reroute scenarios."

   R3 is a routing protection protection scheme that is (i) provably
   congestion-free under a large number of failure scenarios; (ii)
   efficient by having low router processing overhead and memory
   requirements; (iii) flexible in accommodating different performance
   requirements (e.g., handling realistic failure scenarios, prioritized
   traffic, and the trade-off between performance and resilience); and
   (iv) robust to both topology failures and traffic variations.

   Note that by "congestion-free" in R3, it means that all traffic
   demands, except those that have lost reachability due to network
   partition, are routed without creating any link overload, when
   certain weak conditions are verified.  This is a much stronger
   guarantee than providing reachability alone (as is commonly done in
   existing FRR schemes).

   Please see Section 4.3 of [4] for an example of how to use MPLS-ff to
   efficiently implement R3.

   Evaluations based on real Internet topologies and traffic traces show
   that R3 achieves near-optimal performance.  Its performance is at
   least 50% better than existing protection schemes including OSPF
   reconvergence, OSPF with CSPF fast rerouting, and among others.


5.  IANA Considerations

   This document makes no request of IANA.

   Note to RFC Editor: this section may be removed on publication as an
   RFC.


6.  Security Considerations

   MPLS-ff introduces more routing states into each switching router.
   In addition, depending on the signaling protocol, additional security
   risks maybe introduced in attacking switching routers.


7.  References



Qiu, et al.              Expires January 6, 2011                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft              MPLS-ff Extension                  July 2010


7.1.  Normative References

   [1]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
        Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

7.2.  Informative References

   [2]  Hao Wang, Haiyong Xie, Lili Qiu, Yang Richard Yang, Yin Zhang,
        and Albert Greenberg., "COPE: Traffic Engineering in Dynamic
        Networks", In SIGCOMM 2006.

   [3]  Hao Wang, Yang R. Yang, Paul H. Liu, Jia Wang, Alex Gerber, and
        Albert Greenberg., "Reliability as an Interdomain Service", In
        SIGCOMM 2007.

   [4]  Y. Wang, H. Wang, A. Mahimkar, R. Alimi, Y. Zhang, L. Qiu, Y.R.
        Yang., "R3: Resilient Routing Reconfiguration", In SIGCOMM 2010;
        available at http://cs-www.cs.yale.edu/homes/yry/projects/
        reinforce/r3-sigcomm10.pdf.

   [5]  S. Kandula, D. Katabi, B. Davie, and A. Charny., "Walking the
        Tightrope: Responsive yet Stable Traffic Engineering", In
        SIGCOMM 2005.

   [6]  N. So and H. Huang., "Building a highly adaptive, resilient, and
        scalable MPLS backbone", In MPLS World Congress 2007.

   [7]  Cetin, R., Nadeau, T., and K. Koushik, "Multiprotocol Label
        Switching (MPLS) Traffic Engineering Management Information Base
        for Fast Reroute", draft-ietf-mpls-fastreroute-mib-14 (work in
        progress), April 2010.


Appendix A.  Acknowledgments

   The proposed design is based on [4].  We thank Dave Wang from WANDL
   for valuable discussions.  We thank Richard Alimi for creating an XML
   skeleton for this draft.


Authors' Addresses

   Lili Qiu
   University of Texas at Austin

   Email: lili@cs.utexas.edu





Qiu, et al.              Expires January 6, 2011                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft              MPLS-ff Extension                  July 2010


   Y. Richard Yang
   Yale University

   Email: yry@cs.yale.edu


   Yin Zhang
   University of Texas at Austin

   Email: yzhang@cs.utexas.edu









































Qiu, et al.              Expires January 6, 2011                [Page 9]

