A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3318

        Title:      Framework Policy Information Base
        Author(s):  R. Sahita, Ed., S. Hahn, K. Chan, K. McCloghrie
        Status:     Informational
        Date:       March 2003
        Mailbox:    ravi.sahita@intel.com, scott.hahn@intel.com,
                    khchan@nortelnetworks.com, kzm@cisco.com
        Pages:      70
        Characters: 144530
        Updates/Obsoletes/See Also:   None

        I-D Tag:    draft-ietf-rap-frameworkpib-09.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3318.txt

This document defines a set of PRovisioning Classes (PRCs) and textual
conventions that are common to all clients that provision policy using
Common Open Policy Service (COPS) protocol for Provisioning.

Structure of Policy Provisioning Information (SPPI) describes a
structure for specifying policy information that can then be
transmitted to a network device for the purpose of configuring
policy at that device.  The model underlying this structure is one
of well-defined (PRCs) and instances of these
classes (PRIs) residing in a virtual information store called the
Policy Information Base (PIB).

One way to provision policy is by means of the (COPS) protocol with
the extensions for provisioning.  This protocol supports multiple
clients, each of which may provision policy for a specific policy
domain such as QoS, virtual private networks, or security.

As described in COPS usage for Policy Provisioning (COPS-PR), each
client supports a non-overlapping and independent set of PIB
modules.  However, some PRovisioning Classes are common to all
subject-categories (client-types) and need to be present in
each.

This document is a product of the Resource Access Protocol (RAP)
Working Group of the IETF.

This memo provides information for the Internet community.  It does
not specify an Internet standard of any kind.  Distribution of this
memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.
