A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3182

        Title:      Identity Representation for RSVP
        Author(s):  S. Yadav, R. Yavatkar, R. Pabbati, 
                    P. Ford, T. Moore, S. Herzog, R. Hess
        Status:     Standards Track
        Date:       October 2001
        Mailbox:    rodney.hess@intel.com, Satyendra.Yadav@intel.com,
                    rameshpa@microsoft.com, peterf@microsoft.com,
                    timmoore@microsoft.com,
                    herzog@policyconsulting.com 
        Pages:      18
        Characters: 36544
        Obsoletes:  2752

        I-D Tag:    draft-ietf-rap-rsvp-newidentity-02.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3182.txt


This document describes the representation of identity information in
POLICY_DATA object for supporting policy based admission control in
the Resource ReSerVation Protocol (RSVP).  The goal of identity
representation is to allow a process on a system to securely identify
the owner and the application of the communicating process (e.g., user
id) and convey this information in RSVP messages (PATH or RESV) in a
secure manner.  We describe the encoding of identities as RSVP policy
element.  We describe the processing rules to generate identity policy
elements for multicast merged flows.  Subsequently, we describe
representations of user identities for Kerberos and Public Key based
user authentication mechanisms.  In summary, we describe the use of
this identity information in an operational setting.

This memo corrects an RSVP POLICY_DATA P-Type codepoint assignment
error and a field size definition error in ErrorValue in RFC 2752.

This document is a product of the Resource Allocation Protocol Working
Group of the IETF.

This is now a Proposed Standard Protocol.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.

