A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3520

        Title:      Session Authorization Policy Element
        Author(s):  L-N. Hamer, B. Gage, B. Kosinski, H. Shieh
        Status:     Standards Track
        Date:       April 2003
        Mailbox:    nhamer@nortelnetworks.com,
                    brettk@invidi.com, gageb@nortelnetworks.com,
                    hugh.shieh@attws.com
        Pages:      30
        Characters: 63445
        Updates/Obsoletes/SeeAlso:  None

        I-D Tag:    draft-ietf-rap-rsvp-authsession-05.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3520.txt


This document describes the representation of a session
authorization policy element for supporting policy-based per-session
authorization and admission control.  The goal of session
authorization is to allow the exchange of information between
network elements in order to authorize the use of resources for a
service and to co-ordinate actions between the signaling and
transport planes.  This document describes how a process on a system
authorizes the reservation of resources by a host and then provides
that host with a session authorization policy element which can be
inserted into a resource reservation protocol (e.g., the Resource
ReSerVation Protocol (RSVP) PATH message) to facilitate proper and
secure reservation of those resources within the network.  We describe
the encoding of session authorization information as a policy element
conforming to the format of a Policy Data object (RFC 2750) and
provide details relating to operations, processing rules and error
scenarios.

This document is a product of the Resource Allocation Protocol Working
Group of the IETF. 

This is now a Proposed Standard Protocol.

This document specifies an Internet standards track protocol for
the Internet community, and requests discussion and suggestions
for improvements.  Please refer to the current edition of the
"Internet Official Protocol Standards" (STD 1) for the
standardization state and status of this protocol.  Distribution
of this memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.

