A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3521

        Title:      Framework for Session Set-up with Media
                    Authorization
        Author(s):  L-N. Hamer, B. Gage, H. Shieh
        Status:     Informational
        Date:       April 2003
        Mailbox:    nhamer@nortelnetworks.com,
                    gageb@nortelnetworks.com, hugh.shieh@attws.com
        Pages:      25
        Characters: 59548
        Updates/Obsoletes/SeeAlso:  None

        I-D Tag:    draft-ietf-rap-session-auth-04.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3521.txt


Establishing multimedia streams must take into account requirements
for end-to-end QoS, authorization of network resource usage and
accurate accounting for resources used.  During session set up,
policies may be enforced to ensure that the media streams being
requested lie within the bounds of the service profile established
for the requesting host.  Similarly, when a host requests resources
to provide a certain QoS for a packet flow, policies may be enforced
to ensure that the required resources lie within the bounds of the
resource profile established for the requesting host.

To prevent fraud and to ensure accurate billing, this document
describes various scenarios and mechanisms that provide the linkage
required to verify that the resources being used to provide a
requested QoS are in-line with the media streams requested (and
authorized) for the session.

This document is a product of the Resource Allocation Protocol Working
Group of the IETF.

This memo provides information for the Internet community.  It does
not specify an Internet standard of any kind.  Distribution of this
memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.


