A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3159

        Title:      Structure of Policy Provisioning Information
                    (SPPI) 
        Author(s):  K. McCloghrie, M. Fine, J. Seligson, K. Chan,
                    S. Hahn, R. Sahita, A. Smith, F. Reichmeyer
        Status:     Standards Track
        Date:       August 2001
        Mailbox:    kzm@cisco.com, mfine@cisco.com,
                    jseligso@nortelnetworks.com,
                    khchan@nortelnetworks.com, 
                    scott.hahn@intel.com, ravi.sahita@intel.com, 
                    andrew@allegronetworks.com, franr@pfn.com
        Pages:      40
        Characters: 78621
        Obsoletes/Updates/SeeAlso:    None

        I-D Tag:    draft-ietf-rap-sppi-07.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3159.txt


This document, the Structure of Policy Provisioning Information
(SPPI), defines the adapted subset of SNMP's Structure of Management
Information (SMI) used to write Policy Information Base (PIB) modules.
 
RFC 2748 defines the COPS protocol, and RFC 2749 describes how the
COPS protocol is used to provide for the outsourcing of policy
decisions for RSVP.  Another usage of the COPS protocol, for
the provisioning of policy, is introduced in RFC 3084.  In
this provisioning model, the policy information is viewed as a
collection of Provisioning Classes (PRCs) and Provisioning Instances
(PRIs) residing in a virtual information store, termed the Policy
Information Base (PIB).  Collections of related Provisioning Classes
are defined in a PIB module.

This document is a product of the Resource Allocation Protocol Working
Group of the IETF.

This is now a Proposed Standard Protocol.

This document specifies an Internet standards track protocol for
the Internet community, and requests discussion and suggestions
for improvements.  Please refer to the current edition of the
"Internet Official Protocol Standards" (STD 1) for the
standardization state and status of this protocol.  Distribution
of this memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.
