
A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3094

        Title:      Tekelec's Transport Adapter Layer Interface
        Author(s):  D. Sprague, R. Benedyk, D. Brendes, J. Keller 
        Status:     Informational
        Date:       April 2001
        Mailbox:    david.sprague@tekelec.com,
                    dan.brendes@tekelec.com, 
                    robby.benedyk@tekelec.com, joe.keller@tekelec.com
        Pages:      105
        Characters: 265104
        Updates/Obsoletes/SeeAlso:  None

        I-D Tag:    draft-benedyk-sigtran-tali-01.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3094.txt


This document proposes the interfaces of a Signaling Gateway, which
provides interworking between the Switched Circuit Network (SCN) and
an IP network.  Since the Gateway is the central point of signaling
information, not only does it provide transportation of signaling
from one network to another, but it can also provide additional
functions such as protocol translation, security screening, routing
information, and seamless access to Intelligent Network (IN) services
on both networks.
 
The Transport Adapter Layer Interface (TALI) is the proposed
interface, which provides TCAP (Transaction Capability Application
Part), ISUP (ISDN User Part), and MTP (Mail Transport Protocol)
messaging over TCP/IP.  In addition, TALI provides SCCP (Signalling
Connection Control Part) Management (SCMG), MTP Primitives, dynamic
registration of circuits, and routing of call control messages based
on circuit location.

This memo provides information for the Internet community.  It does
not specify an Internet standard of any kind.  Distribution of this
memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.
