


CLUE                                                      C. Groves, Ed.
Internet-Draft                                                   W. Yang
Intended status: Informational                                   R. Even
Expires: March 15, 2013                                       P. Kyzivat
                                                                  Huawei
                                                      September 11, 2012


          Discussion of scene and capture scene entry concepts
               draft-groves-clue-scene-clarifications-00

Abstract

   The CLUE framework document defines the concept of media captures
   which identify and describe the characteristics of media sent by a
   provider.  A capture scene is a grouping concept that provides ties a
   number of captures together.  Within the capture scene the media
   captures may further be grouped into capture scene entries.  The
   current text in the CLUE framework document describing these concepts
   could be improved and clarified so that both providers and consumers
   use the same logic to encode/decode CLUE messages with capture
   scenes/ capture scene entries and media captures.  This draft
   discusses these concepts and provides suggested updates.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on March 15, 2013.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2012 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents



Groves, et al.           Expires March 15, 2013                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft              Abbreviated Title             September 2012


   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


1.  Introduction

   Recent discussion on the IETF mailing list has indicated that there
   are different interpretations of exactly what a "Capture Scene Entry"
   is.  In the framework draft it is defined as:

             /*Capture Scene Entry: a list of media captures of the same
             media type that together form one way to represent the
             capture scene./

   it also says:

             /A media provider arranges media captures in a capture
             scene to help the media consumer choose which captures it
             wants.  The capture scene entries in a capture scene are
             different alternatives the provider is suggesting for
             representing the capture scene./

   It could be interpreted as meaning that each "Capture Scene Entry"
   shows an entire scene, or it could be interpreted as meaning that
   each "Capture Scene Entry" could show part of the overall scene.

   It appears from reading the framework both interpretations are
   allowed.

   For example: if VC1,VC2,VC3 are three main cameras, VC4 is an camera
   that automatically zooms in on the active speaker.  One could
   construct a capture scene with one or two capture scene entries.
   There are other possibilities but to illustrate the issue the
   following alternatives are shown:












Groves, et al.           Expires March 15, 2013                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft              Abbreviated Title             September 2012


   +------------------+
   | Capture Scene #1 |
   +------------------+
   | VC1, VC2, VC3    |
   | VC4              |
   +------------------+
   or
   +--------------------+
   | Capture Scene #1   |
   +--------------------+
   | VC1, VC2, VC3, VC4 |
   +--------------------+

                                 Figure 1

   Depending on how the consumer is designed it may not see the two
   options as equivalent.  In the first example a consumer may only
   chose the first capture scene entry as it has been designed with the
   premise that a capture scene entry represents the whole scene and
   therefore it is sufficient to choose only one line.  If it choses one
   line it missing out on part of the scene.  Another consumer may
   choose both as it recognises multiple capture scene entries.  Clearly
   there is an interoperability problem if the provider and consumer are
   using different logic to encode / decode captures from scenes.  It is
   also noted that there may be additional complexity for consumers if
   the method of using capture scene entries to represent partial scenes
   is used.  A consumer would have to parse the characteristcis of each
   capture to see how they are related.

   A further issue is if the entire scene is depicted how does the
   consumer determine which captures are closely related within a
   capture scene entry.  For example: which of the capture must be
   processed together to form a continuous image.  The area of capture
   attribute does provide positioning information however determining
   which captures make up a continuous image may be non-trivial and
   would become more complicated as the number of captures in a scene
   entry rose.  It would be compounded in situations where different
   providers have different gaps and scales as there would be different
   thresholds as to what captures would appear to be continuous.  It is
   believed that having a way to indicated closely bound captures would
   be advantageous to simplifying this determination.

   To add to the complication the framework draft is vague in making
   recommendations as to what the consumer should do at the reception of
   scene / capture scene entry / capture information.  It suggests that
   the consumer could pick an element from each of the option presented.
   It's not clear how this would work under the assumption that a
   provider provides this information with the understanding to it must



Groves, et al.           Expires March 15, 2013                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft              Abbreviated Title             September 2012


   be able to simultaneously provide this media.  Chosing different
   captures to what the provider has sent may mean that the media
   streams related to captures may not be able to sent together.
   Limiting this flexibility may increase interoperability.


2.  Proposal

   This section provides a strawman proposal of principles that should
   be documented in the framework document

   Whilst there appears to be different interpretations, to the
   Contributors there appears to be one fundamental assumption that
   everyone agrees on, that is that all captures within a scene must be
   spatially related.

   It is also assumed that there would be a desire to increase the
   chances of interoperability and to minimise the complexity needed for
   encoding and parsing scene information.

   Based on this assumption and the above discussion it is proposed that
   :

   a)      A scene represents an area where the capture devices are
           spatially related, i.e. a presentation that shares no spatial
           relation with a video is a separate scene.

   b)      A capture scene entry thus represents alternate
           representations of a complete scene.  The provider is the one
           that determines what a complete scene is.  A consumer choses
           a capture scene entry from the scene in the knowledge that it
           represents the entire scene.

   c)      A new concept of "Capture group" be incorporated into a
           capture scene entry which indicates which captures are
           closely bound.  Closely bound captures are those that have a
           closer relationship than just being spatially related and
           MUST be able to be encoded and sent simultaneously.  E.g.
           multiple captures for the purposes of capturing a continuous
           image or sound stage are closely bound.

   d)      A consumer shall chose a captre scene entry rather than
           choosing individual captures from multiple entries.  This
           does not mean that an consuming endpoint must render all the
           captures.  What is locally rendered and how is a local
           decision.





Groves, et al.           Expires March 15, 2013                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft              Abbreviated Title             September 2012


3.  Acknowledgements

   This template was derived from an initial version written by Pekka
   Savola and contributed by him to the xml2rfc project.


4.  IANA Considerations

   This memo includes no request to IANA.


5.  Security Considerations

   TBD


6.  References

6.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

6.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.ietf-clue-framework]
              Romanow, A., Duckworth, M., Pepperell, A., and B. Baldino,
              "Framework for Telepresence Multi-Streams",
              draft-ietf-clue-framework-06 (work in progress).

   [RFC2629]  Rose, M., "Writing I-Ds and RFCs using XML", RFC 2629,
              June 1999.

   [RFC3552]  Rescorla, E. and B. Korver, "Guidelines for Writing RFC
              Text on Security Considerations", BCP 72, RFC 3552,
              July 2003.

   [RFC5226]  Narten, T. and H. Alvestrand, "Guidelines for Writing an
              IANA Considerations Section in RFCs", BCP 26, RFC 5226,
              May 2008.











Groves, et al.           Expires March 15, 2013                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft              Abbreviated Title             September 2012


Authors' Addresses

   Christian Groves (editor)
   Huawei
   Melbourne,
   Australia

   Email: Christian.Groves@nteczone.com


   Weiwei Yang
   Huawei
   P.R.China

   Email: tommy@huawei.com


   Roni Even
   Huawei
   Tel Aviv,
   Isreal

   Email: roni.even@mail01.huawei.com


   Paul Kyzivat
   Huawei
   Greater Boston, Massachusetts
   USA

   Email: pkyzivat@alum.mit.edu




















Groves, et al.           Expires March 15, 2013                 [Page 6]

