



CLUE                                                      C. Groves, Ed.
Internet-Draft                                                   W. Yang
Intended status: Informational                                   R. Even
Expires: January 10, 2014                                         Huawei
                                                           July 09, 2013


                         Use of "Roles" in CLUE
                draft-groves-clue-role-clarifications-00

Abstract

   There have been recent discussions on the CLUE and DISPATCH mailing
   lists about "roles" associated with multimedia conferences.  From the
   discussions it was apparent that there is some confusion as to what
   the current defined roles actually imply and that people had
   different understanding of the meaning and scope of the term "role".
   This draft seeks to identify the various "roles" that may be
   associated with a multimedia conference and to provide a grouping and
   nomenclature for further discussions on this topic.

   Specific to CLUE this draft proposes a number of attributes to be
   able to clearly identify the various roles that may be associated
   with a media capture.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 10, 2014.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.





Groves, et al.          Expires January 10, 2014                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft              Abbreviated Title                  July 2013


   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Role Categories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     2.1.  Meeting Roles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     2.2.  Conference System Control Roles . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     2.3.  Institution type  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     2.4.  Person Name Title . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     2.5.  Person Occupation (Job Title) . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     2.6.  Organisation Name . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     2.7.  Meeting Specific Roles  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     2.8.  Other Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   3.  Relation to CLUE  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     3.1.  Meeting Roles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     3.2.  Meeting Specific Roles  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     3.3.  Conference System Control Roles . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     3.4.  Institution type  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
     3.5.  Personal Information  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
       3.5.1.  Person Name Title . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
       3.5.2.  Person Occupation (Job Title) . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
       3.5.3.  Organisation Name . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   4.  Capture scene attributes  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
   5.  Summary of proposed updates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
   6.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
   7.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
   8.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
   9.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
     9.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
     9.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15

1.  Introduction

   The purpose of this document is to collect together different types
   of "roles" or attributes of people participating within a multi-media
   conference.  It is recognised that a person may have multiple roles
   in a conference that denote different information regarding their
   social and/or organisational status.  For example: At a "Internal



Groves, et al.          Expires January 10, 2014                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft              Abbreviated Title                  July 2013


   organisational level" a person may have the role of "Chief Executive
   Officer (CEO)" but from a conference control level may be a
   "Participant" who cannot control the conference despite having large
   amount of power in a company.  The definition of a role may also give
   information regarding the type of organisation a person is from.  For
   example: From "Professor" it could be assumed that the person is from
   an educational institution, however this assumption may be false as a
   Professor is a title of a person.  One's status is an important
   aspect in social interactions.  Telepresence is designed to increase
   the experience of normal social interactions so communication of
   status is an important aspect.

   From a media perspective a media stream that either depicts a person
   or carries their voice could be attributed with the person's role/s.

2.  Role Categories

   As shown above the term "role" can be associated with a wide range of
   characteristics.  The sections below attempt to collect roles into
   different sub-categories of related roles.  When a person talks about
   "role" it is important to identify the category of role that is being
   talked about as these are likely to have semantic differences.

   For example: When using the role "chairman" it could be considered
   as:

   a)      a meeting role - the person who runs the meeting through the
           agenda

   b)      a conference control role - the person who controls the
           conference system that allows people to speak

   c)      the person is the chairman of a company and is participating
           in the conference

   Each of the above is a different function with potentially the same
   label.

2.1.  Meeting Roles

   These roles relate to typical traditional functions when a meeting is
   held.  These roles are related to the running of the meeting itself,
   i.e. with respect to the agenda.  These roles pre-date multimedia
   conferencing and are typically needed whenever a meeting is held.
   Knowing who has these roles is integral to running a successful
   meeting.





Groves, et al.          Expires January 10, 2014                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft              Abbreviated Title                  July 2013


   1.      Chairman ([RFC6501]. moderator?)  (Leader - Person who
           convenes the meeting) (facilitator - keeps discussion going)

   2.      Vice-Chairman

   3.      Secretary/Scribe/Recorder/Minute Taker

   4.      Member/Participant/Audience

   5.      Presenter/Lecturer

   6.      Translator

   7.      Timekeeper

2.2.  Conference System Control Roles

   These roles are related to the establishment and maintenance of the
   multimedia conference and are related to the scope of conference
   system only.  It can be beneficial for other people to know who has
   these roles.  For example: If the controller is responsible for
   selecting which people/endpoints can speak it might be beneficial to
   observe them for visual CLUEs on how they determine the turn taking
   process.

   Speaker/Presenter Can share content/media with others.

   Controller/Host   Indicates the person responsible for controlling
                     admission to the conference.  Sets up the meeting,
                     adds and shares contents, control who presents and
                     talks.

   Participant       Indicates a participant in the conference who does
                     not have any special control.  Receives media and
                     content from presenter.

2.3.  Institution type

   This type indicates the type of organisation a person is from.  This
   could be helpful to scope a person's title.

   1.      Industry (this could be broken into segments, i.e.
           healthcare, telecommunications etc.)

   2.      Government

   3.      Non-governmental organisation (NGO)




Groves, et al.          Expires January 10, 2014                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft              Abbreviated Title                  July 2013


   4.      Educational

   5.      Religious

   6.      Not for profit

   7.      Military

   8.      Private

   9.      Etc.

2.4.  Person Name Title

   Common honorific titles relate to a person's gender (Social Title)
   i.e. Mr, Mrs, Miss etc. however there are other titles used to show
   aristocratic status (Hereditary title) (Honorary title) or one's role
   in government, a religious, military or educational institution.  For
   example: Doctor (Professional Title), Professor (Academic Title) and
   Air Marshall (Military title).  These are placed into context and
   relative authority given by the organisation type.

   Wikipedia provides a discussion of the different types of titles:
   http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Title

   It can be seen that there are hundreds of possible titles related to
   a person's status.

   A further complication is that a title may be repeated i.e. Honorary
   Doctor (Hon Dr).

   There are some standards that allow for the carriage of titles (these
   are discussed below) however there does not appear to be a standard
   definition containing all the titles.

   Appendix A of Standards Australia AS 4590-2006 "Interchange of client
   information" provides a list of some common titles.

   [ITU.X520.2001] does contain syntax for Title (the designated
   position or function of the object within an organization) and allows
   it's usage in Commonname attribute (which vCard uses) however this
   does not provide any values.

   OASIS have developed standards for naming in the OASIS Identity
   Metasystem Interoperability (IMI) Technical Committee: (https://www
   .oasis-open.org/committees/tc_home.php?wg_abbrev=ciq).





Groves, et al.          Expires January 10, 2014                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft              Abbreviated Title                  July 2013


   However they do not define a set of allowed titles.  See: Extensible
   Name Language (xML) Standard Description Document for W3C DTD/Schema

   Beyond the common set of English honorific titles it may be difficult
   to implement a policy based on a standard set.

2.5.  Person Occupation (Job Title)

   Persons can be further classified by their occupation.  In some
   respects this is a combination of institution type and title.  There
   is already a standard ISCO-8 "International Standard Classification
   of Occupations" that groups jobs into 10 major groups:

   1-      Managers

   2-      Professionals

   3-      Technicians and associate professionals

   4-      Clerical support workers

   5-      Service and sales workers

   6-      Skilled agricultural, forestry and fishery workers

   7-      Craft and related trades workers

   8-      Plant and machine operators, and assemblers

   9-      Elementary occupations

   0-      Armed forces occupations

   These categories are further broken down into to provide more
   detailed information regarding the job.  For example:

           Major Group 1

           Managers



           11      Chief executives, senior officials and legislators



                   111     Legislators and senior officials




Groves, et al.          Expires January 10, 2014                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft              Abbreviated Title                  July 2013


                   112     Managing directors and chief executives

   It may be advantageous to utilise this specification to indicate the
   organisational position of someone.  A free text field could provide
   extra information if the user determines it is necessary.

2.6.  Organisation Name

   Rather than providing person information an endpoint could provide
   information regarding an organisation name.  For example: it may not
   matter that media is from a certain person you may want media from a
   certain company.

   OASIS as mentioned above provides guidelines on organisation name
   formats.

   vCard [RFC6350] also allows the indication of an organisation name.

2.7.  Meeting Specific Roles

   Rather than being international and regionally accepted roles, roles
   may also be internal to an organisation or group.  This group may
   define their own roles as integral to the meeting process and it may
   be advantageous for other people in the meeting to know these roles.
   For example:

   Toastmasters (http://www.toastmasters.org/meetingroles.aspx) define
   the roles of: Ah-counter, Evaluator, General Evaluater, Grammarian,
   Meeting Speaker, Pledge, etc.

   So in the scope of a Telepresence conference between toastmasters
   participants it should be possible to select captures based on their
   agreed set of roles.  They could be scoped by organisation.  However
   for the wider community these roles would largely be meaningless.

   Another example would be the Telemedical use case.  A capture of "the
   patient" would be difficult to express using the normal conference
   roles.

2.8.  Other Considerations

   This draft has only considered this issue from an English language
   perspective.  Further consideration would be needed on the use of
   non-English roles and any potential mapping.

3.  Relation to CLUE





Groves, et al.          Expires January 10, 2014                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft              Abbreviated Title                  July 2013


   [I-D.groves-clue-capture-attr] proposed a number of attributes to
   describe media captures.  One of those was the "role" attribute.  The
   intention of the "role" attribute was to allow the consumer to
   advertise that a media capture has a person and/or conference role
   associated with it.  During discussions it was noted that more work
   was needed on the allowed values.

   As shown above the term "role" relates to a wide range of functions
   so the CLUE work on roles should be more specific on what function/s
   are supported.  If more than one role type is supported it may be
   more appropriate to support several attributes, each specific to a
   particular function.

   An advertiser may populate "role" information either by manual or
   automatic provisioning.  Manual configuration would be that the
   participant enter the information at the time of meeting
   establishment.  Automatic provisioning is where the conference system
   uses previously supplied information to populate the role
   information.  This could be provided when the system is provisioned
   or based on electronic exchange of information.  For example the
   Popov room at the ITU-T allows the insertion of an identity card at a
   seating position which the conference system can use.

   The basic premise of CLUE is that the attributes are used by a
   consumer to select which of the advertised media captures it wants.
   Therefore it is assumed that the "role" type information is only used
   in scope of CLUE.  For example: the CLUE role information would not
   be used by SIP XCON ([RFC6501]) to determine conference policies.
   Like the other CLUE attributes the "role" information may also be
   used to determine display/playout characteristics by a consumer.

   A secondary premise is that by knowing the "role" of the person/media
   capture it enhances the social interactions in the conference.  What
   the relevance of the different "role" functions has to a consumer is
   largely a matter of local policy.  A person associated with the
   consuming endpoint may be more interested in seeing the company CEO
   than the person chairing the meeting.  This different relevance may
   also be based on cultural preferences / norms.

   The various "role" categories are discussed below in the context of
   relevance to CLUE.

3.1.  Meeting Roles

   As described in section 2.1 these roles are key to most meetings.
   They describe the functions related to the running of the meeting.
   They are NOT related to running a conferencing system.  These roles
   are assigned to people within a meeting.  As a media capture may



Groves, et al.          Expires January 10, 2014                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft              Abbreviated Title                  July 2013


   capture more than one person it means that an attribute describing
   meeting roles must allow more than one value per media capture.  A
   person may also have more than one meeting role, i.e. a secretary and
   time keeper.  Multiple people within a capture may also have the same
   role, i.e. three people in a capture may all be participants.  In
   such a case a meeting role attribute would only need a single value
   "participant".

   A media capture may contain people with the following meeting roles:

   Chairman        A person who convenes the meeting and presides over
                   discussions.  Also known as a moderator or
                   rapporteur.

   Vice-Chairman   A person who assist the chairman.

   Secretary       A person who is responsible for documenting the
                   meeting.  Also known as a scribe, recorder or minute
                   taker.

   Participant     A person who is participating in a meeting that has
                   no other role in a meeting.  Also known as a member,
                   participant or audience.

   Presenter       A person who has been invited to present a message to
                   the meeting.  Also known as a lecturer.

   Translator      A person who translates from one language to another
                   in a meeting.

   Timekeeper      A person who is responsible who records the time
                   taken for the meeting.

   It is proposed to add a capture attribute "Meeting Role" to CLUE with
   the above values.

3.2.  Meeting Specific Roles

   As discussed in section 2.7 it is possible that certain group may
   define their own meeting roles.  The ability to carry this
   information should be possible in CLUE.  To facilitate the carriage
   of this information in CLUE it is proposed to add a free text field
   to the "Meeting Role" attribute proposed in section 3.1 above.

3.3.  Conference System Control Roles

   As mentioned in section 2.2 conference system control roles relate to
   the control of the electronic conference.  For CLUE an attribute with



Groves, et al.          Expires January 10, 2014                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft              Abbreviated Title                  July 2013


   the Conference Control role would indicate that the person depicted
   in the media capture has certain conference control responsibilities.
   It does not provide any authorisation in a conference management
   system for these conference control roles.  The information is
   provided as a means for the consumer to select media captures and for
   display/playout purposes.

   The following conference system control roles are proposed:

   Presenter       Indicates a person that can share content/media with
                   others.  May also be known as speaker.

   Controller      Indicates the person responsible for controlling
                   admission to the conference.  Sets up the meeting,
                   adds and shares contents, control who presents and
                   talks.  Also known as "host".

   Participant     Indicates a participant in the conference who does
                   not have any special control.  Receives media and
                   content from presenter.

   Unlike meeting role a person can only have one conference system
   control role at a time.  However as multiple people can be captured
   in a media capture the conference system control role may have
   multiple values.

   It is proposed to add an attribute "Conference System Control Role"
   to CLUE with the above attributes.

3.4.  Institution type

   CLUE media captures are more likely to be selected based on the
   person and their position and company rather than the type of
   organisation that they are from.  This can be omitted from CLUE.

3.5.  Personal Information

3.5.1.  Person Name Title

   As described in section 2.4 above there may be many different
   variations of a person name title.  There are also non-English
   speaking titles that would need to be conveyed.  It is unlikely that
   all the variations could be enumerated.  As discussed above a
   person's title gives important information regarding the social
   status of that person.  It is noted that vCard [RFC6350] section
   6.2.2 allows title as part of the "n" attribute.  As a means to
   provide information regarding the person in a capture it is proposed
   to allow vCard [RFC6350] descriptions to be linked with CLUE media



Groves, et al.          Expires January 10, 2014               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft              Abbreviated Title                  July 2013


   captures.  This is a standardised form of providing information
   regarding a person's title, name and contact details as well as
   additional attributes.  This would allow a Consumer to choose
   captures based on a rich set of information as well as using this
   information for display.

3.5.2.  Person Occupation (Job Title)

   As has been discussed Consumers may choose to receive a particular
   media capture based on the role of a person.  For example a consumer
   may always want to see a managing director. vCard provides a "title"
   parameter in [RFC6350] section 6.6.1 and the "role" parameter in
   section 6.6.2.  These parameters are based on [ITU.X520.2001] "title"
   and "business category" attributes.  If CLUE utilises the vCard
   format then it could utilise these parameters to carry information
   regarding a person's occupation.

   The vCard "role" parameter is a single text value.  In order to
   provide interoperability between advertiser and consumers CLUE could
   recommend that the ISO classifications as discussed in section 2.5 be
   used whilst allowing an advertiser to use a free text field.

   Therefore it is proposed that CLUE allow vCard/s be associated with
   media captures for this purpose.

3.5.3.  Organisation Name

   vCard [RFC6350] defines a data format for representing and exchanging
   a variety of information about individuals and other entities.  The
   information is grouped into the following set of properties:

   o       Identification Properties

   o       Delivery addressing properties

   o       Communications Properties

   o       Organizational Properties

   o       Explanatory Properties

   o       Security Properties

   o       Calendar Properties

   These properties allow a wide range of information to be transmitted
   in a manner that interoperable between an advertiser and consumer.
   vCard allows the description of persons, groups, organisation and



Groves, et al.          Expires January 10, 2014               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft              Abbreviated Title                  July 2013


   locations.  This would allow an Advertiser to send information
   regarding the organisation and location where the endpoint is located
   as well as the people participating in the conference.  Having this
   information available regarding the persons/groups/organisations
   allows for service innovation.

   As discussed previously metadata regarding captures needs to be sent
   before or with the CLUE messages as the data needs to be an input
   into capture selection.  Leaving such information to be collected
   later in the conference establishment process e.g. via XCON or some
   other means would not be appropriate.

   An advertiser may choose to send a minimal set of information such as
   only a name or a more complete set with personal title, job title
   etc.  The only mandatory vCard field (apart from syntax related ones)
   is the "FN" (Formatted name) property (section 6.2.1/[RFC6350]).
   This relates to the vCard "object" rather than a "person" which
   allows for names other than person names to be used.  So an endpoint
   could transit the meeting roles even if the names of the people in
   the conference are not available.

   vCard also allows information to be transmitted in multiple languages
   as specified by a language property parameter.

   The vCard format is also a widely supported for electronic business
   cards and are often associated with e-mail messages.  Rather than
   defining a new format for personal information in CLUE it would be
   beneficial to capitalise on a format that enjoys wide use.

   In terms of the CLUE data model it may not be necessary to carry a
   vCard format syntax for each capture due to the fact that a person/
   group/organisation may appear in multiple capture.  For example: An
   Advertiser that has 3 cameras (VC1,VC2,VC3) each capturing one
   person, one camera (VC4) capturing the room and a microphone
   capturing the room would be advertised as:

       CSE1(VC1[vCARD1{syntax}],VC2[vCARD2{syntax}],VC3[vCARD3{syntax}])

       CSE2(VC4[vCARD1{syntax},vCARD2{syntax},vCARD3{syntax}])

       CSE3(AC1[vCARD1{syntax},vCARD2{syntax},vCARD3{syntax}])

   If the contents of each of the vCARDs was large this would result in
   a large CLUE message size.  Therefore it would be more appropriate to
   transmit the vCARDs in a separate section of the CLUE message and
   provide a pointer to the card in a capture attribute.  Additionally
   rather than transmitting the entire vCARD in the CLUE message a URI
   to location where the vCARD can be downloaded should be possible.



Groves, et al.          Expires January 10, 2014               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft              Abbreviated Title                  July 2013


4.  Capture scene attributes

   The current CLUE framework contains a Capture Scene attribute
   "Description" which is a human-readable description of the capture
   scene.  As can be seen vCard allows a rich description regarding a
   person or an organisation.  In the case that a scene represents an
   endpoint as a whole rather than associating a vCard with each media
   capture it may be desirable to associate a vCard with the Capture
   Scene.

5.  Summary of proposed updates

   1.      The addition of a capture attribute "Meeting Role" attribute
           with values as per section 3.1 and 3.2.

   2.      The addition of a capture attribute "Conference System
           Control Role" attribute with values as per section 3.3.

   3.      The addition of a capture attribute "vCard" that allows one
           or more vCards according to [RFC6350] to be associated with a
           capture.

   4.      The addition of a capture attribute "End point vCard" that
           allows a "group", "org" or "location" kind of vCard according
           to section 6.1.4/[RFC6350] to be associated with a capture.

6.  Acknowledgements

   This template was derived from an initial version written by Pekka
   Savola and contributed by him to the xml2rfc project.

7.  IANA Considerations

   The "Meeting Roles" and "Conference Control Roles" attribute may have
   an IANA registry associated with them to facilitate the addition of
   future new roles.

   vCard already has IANA registration procedures for new properties,
   parameters and values.

8.  Security Considerations

   Providing "meeting role", "conference control role" and "vCard"
   attributes raises the question of whether the endpoint (or the people
   at the endpoint) are authorized to provide the roles and are who they
   say they are?





Groves, et al.          Expires January 10, 2014               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft              Abbreviated Title                  July 2013


   The context of the use of these attributes is for the purposes of
   choosing media captures not to provide pre-authorization for the
   control of conference control function.  It is expected that the
   original SIP exchange would provide an "authorisation" between the
   Advertiser and Consumer to utilize a CLUE signaling channel.
   Therefore there is some level of trust between these two entities.

   An Advertiser could send false information regarding a media capture.
   For example it may assert in a vCard attribute that a person in a
   capture is "King Richard" when the person is not.  However this is
   not problematic only for "role" related attributes it applies to any
   asserted information in CLUE i.e. every attribute.

9.  References

9.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

9.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.groves-clue-capture-attr]
              Groves, C., Yang, W., and R. Even, "CLUE media capture
              description", draft-groves-clue-capture-attr-01 (work in
              progress), February 2013.

   [I-D.ietf-clue-framework]
              Duckworth, M., Pepperell, A., and S. Wenger, "Framework
              for Telepresence Multi-Streams", draft-ietf-clue-
              framework-10 (work in progress), May 2013.

   [ITU.X520.2001]
              International Telecommunications Union, "Information
              Technology - Open Systems Interconnection - The Directory:
              Selected attribute types", ITU-T Recommendation X.520, ISO
              Standard 9594-6, February 2001.

   [RFC2629]  Rose, M., "Writing I-Ds and RFCs using XML", RFC 2629,
              June 1999.

   [RFC3552]  Rescorla, E. and B. Korver, "Guidelines for Writing RFC
              Text on Security Considerations", BCP 72, RFC 3552, July
              2003.

   [RFC5226]  Narten, T. and H. Alvestrand, "Guidelines for Writing an
              IANA Considerations Section in RFCs", BCP 26, RFC 5226,
              May 2008.



Groves, et al.          Expires January 10, 2014               [Page 14]

Internet-Draft              Abbreviated Title                  July 2013


   [RFC6350]  Perreault, S., "vCard Format Specification", RFC 6350,
              August 2011.

   [RFC6501]  Novo, O., Camarillo, G., Morgan, D., and J. Urpalainen,
              "Conference Information Data Model for Centralized
              Conferencing (XCON)", RFC 6501, March 2012.

Authors' Addresses

   Christian Groves (editor)
   Huawei
   Melbourne
   Australia

   Email: Christian.Groves@nteczone.com


   Weiwei Yang
   Huawei
   P.R.China

   Email: tommy@huawei.com


   Roni Even
   Huawei
   Tel Aviv
   Isreal

   Email: roni.even@mail01.huawei.com





















Groves, et al.          Expires January 10, 2014               [Page 15]
