





Network Working Group                               R. Aggarwal (Editor)
Internet Draft                                          Juniper Networks
Category: Standards Track
Expiration Date: January 2013                                  Y. Kamite
                                                      NTT Communications

                                                                 L. Fang
                                                      Cisco Systems, Inc

                                                            July 11 2012


                           Multicast in VPLS


                   draft-ietf-l2vpn-vpls-mcast-11.txt

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

Copyright and License Notice

   Copyright (c) 2012 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors. All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document. Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document. Code Components extracted from this document must



Raggarwa, Kamite & Fang                                         [Page 1]


Internet Draft     draft-ietf-l2vpn-vpls-mcast-11.txt          July 2012


   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

   This document may contain material from IETF Documents or IETF
   Contributions published or made publicly available before November
   10, 2008. The person(s) controlling the copyright in some of this
   material may not have granted the IETF Trust the right to allow
   modifications of such material outside the IETF Standards Process.
   Without obtaining an adequate license from the person(s) controlling
   the copyright in such materials, this document may not be modified
   outside the IETF Standards Process, and derivative works of it may
   not be created outside the IETF Standards Process, except to format
   it for publication as an RFC or to translate it into languages other
   than English.


Abstract

   This document describes a solution for overcoming a subset of the
   limitations of existing VPLS multicast solutions. It describes
   procedures for VPLS multicast that utilize multicast trees in the
   sevice provider (SP) network.  One such multicast tree can be shared
   between multiple VPLS instances.  Procedures by which a single
   multicast tree in the SP network can be used to carry traffic
   belonging only to a specified set of one or more IP multicast streams
   from one or more VPLSes are also described.
























Raggarwa, Kamite & Fang                                         [Page 2]


Internet Draft     draft-ietf-l2vpn-vpls-mcast-11.txt          July 2012


Table of Contents

 1          Specification of requirements  .........................   4
 2          Contributors  ..........................................   4
 3          Terminology  ...........................................   5
 4          Introduction  ..........................................   5
 5          Existing Limitations of VPLS Multicast  ................   6
 6          Overview  ..............................................   6
 6.1        Inclusive and Selective Multicast Trees  ...............   6
 6.2        BGP-Based VPLS Membership Auto-Discovery  ..............   8
 6.3        IP Multicast Group Membership Discovery  ...............   8
 6.4        Advertising P-Multicast Tree to VPLS/C-Multicast Binding  ..9
 6.5        Aggregation  ...........................................  10
 6.6        Inter-AS VPLS Multicast  ...............................  10
 7          Intra-AS Inclusive P-Multicast Tree Auto-discovery/Binding  11
 7.1        Originating intra-AS VPLS A-D routes  ..................  12
 7.2        Receiving intra-AS VPLS A-D routes  ....................  12
 8          Demultiplexing P-Multicast Tree Traffic  ...............  14
 8.1        One P-Multicast Tree - One VPLS Mapping  ...............  14
 8.2        One P-Multicast Tree - Many VPLS Mapping  ..............  14
 9          Establishing P-Multicast Trees  ........................  15
 9.1        Common Procedures  .....................................  15
 9.2        RSVP-TE P2MP LSPs  .....................................  16
 9.2.1      P2MP TE LSP - VPLS Mapping  ............................  16
 9.3        Receiver Initiated MPLS Trees  .........................  17
 9.3.1      P2MP LSP - VPLS Mapping  ...............................  17
 9.4        Encapsulation of Aggregate P-Multicast Trees  ..........  17
10          Inter-AS Inclusive P-Multicast Tree A-D/Binding  .......  17
10.1        VSIs on the ASBRs  .....................................  18
10.1.1      Option (a): VSIs on the ASBRs  .........................  18
10.1.2      Option (e): VSIs on the ASBRs  .........................  18
10.2        Option (b) - Segmented Inter-AS Trees  .................  19
10.2.1      Segmented Inter-AS Trees VPLS Inter-AS A-D/Binding  ....  19
10.2.2      Propagating BGP VPLS A-D routes to other ASes: Overview  ...20
10.2.2.1    Propagating Intra-AS VPLS A-D routes in EBGP  ..........  21
10.2.2.2    Inter-AS A-D route received via EBGP  ..................  22
10.2.2.3    Leaf A-D Route received via EBGP  ......................  24
10.2.2.4    Inter-AS A-D Route received via IBGP  ..................  24
10.3        Option (c): Non-Segmented Tunnels  .....................  25
11          Optimizing Multicast Distribution via Selective Trees  .  26
11.1        Protocol for Switching to Selective Trees  .............  27
11.2        Advertising (C-S, C-G) Binding to a Selective Tree  ....  28
11.3        Receiving S-PMSI A-D routes by PEs  ....................  30



Raggarwa, Kamite & Fang                                         [Page 3]


Internet Draft     draft-ietf-l2vpn-vpls-mcast-11.txt          July 2012


11.4        Inter-AS Selective Tree  ...............................  32
11.4.1      VSIs on the ASBRs  .....................................  33
11.4.1.1    VPLS Inter-AS Selective Tree A-D Binding  ..............  33
11.4.2      Inter-AS Segmented Selective Trees  ....................  33
11.4.2.1    Handling S-PMSI A-D routes by ASBRs  ...................  34
11.4.2.1.1  Merging Selective Tree into an Inclusive Tree  .........  35
11.4.3      Inter-AS Non-Segmented Selective trees  ................  36
12          BGP Extensions  ........................................  36
12.1        Inclusive Tree/Selective Tree Identifier  ..............  36
12.2        MCAST-VPLS NLRI  .......................................  37
12.2.1      S-PMSI A-D route  ......................................  38
12.2.2      Leaf A-D route  ........................................  39
13          Aggregation Considerations  ............................  39
14          Data Forwarding  .......................................  40
14.1        MPLS Tree Encapsulation  ...............................  40
14.1.1      Mapping multiple VPLS instances to a P2MP LSP  .........  40
14.1.2      Mapping one VPLS instance to a P2MP LSP  ...............  41
15          VPLS Data Packet Treatment  ............................  42
16          Security Considerations  ...............................  43
17          IANA Considerations  ...................................  44
18          Acknowledgments  .......................................  44
19          Normative References  ..................................  44
20          Informative References  ................................  45
21          Author's Address  ......................................  46






1. Specification of requirements

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].


2. Contributors

   Rahul Aggarwal
   Yakov Rekhter
   Juniper Networks
   Yuji Kamite
   NTT Communications
   Luyuan Fang
   AT&T
   Chaitanya Kodeboniya




Raggarwa, Kamite & Fang                                         [Page 4]


Internet Draft     draft-ietf-l2vpn-vpls-mcast-11.txt          July 2012


3. Terminology

   This document uses terminology described in [RFC4761] and [RFC4762].

   In this document we refer to various auto-discovery routes, as "A-D
   routes".


4. Introduction

   [RFC4761] and [RFC4762] describe a solution for VPLS multicast that
   relies on the use of P2P RSVP-TE or MP2P LDP LSPs, referred to as
   Ingress Replication in this document. This solution has certain
   limitations for certain VPLS multicast traffic profiles. For example,
   it may result in highly non-optimal bandwidth utilization in the MPLS
   network when large amount of multicast traffic is to be transported.

   This document describes procedures for overcoming the limitations of
   existing VPLS multicast solutions. It describes procedures for VPLS
   multicast that utilize multicast trees in the Service Provider (SP)
   network. The procedures described in this document are applicable to
   both [RFC4761] and [RFC4762].

   It provides mechanisms that allow a single multicast distribution
   tree in the Service Provider (SP) network to carry all the multicast
   traffic from one or more VPLS sites connected to a given PE,
   irrespective of whether these sites belong to the same or different
   VPLSes. Such a tree is referred to as an "Inclusive tree" and more
   specifically as an "Aggregate Inclusive tree" when the tree is used
   to carry multicast traffic from more than one VPLS.

   This document also provides procedures by which a single multicast
   distribution tree in the SP network can be used to carry traffic
   belonging only to a specified set of IP multicast streams, originated
   in one or more VPLS sites connected to a given PE, irrespective of
   whether these sites belong to the same or different VPLSes.  Such a
   tree is referred to as a "Selective tree" and more specifically as an
   "Aggregate Selective tree" when the IP multicast streams belong to
   different VPLSes. This allows multicast traffic, by default, to be
   carried on an Inclusive tree, while traffic from some specific
   multicast streams, e.g., high bandwidth streams, could be carried on
   one of the "Selective trees".









Raggarwa, Kamite & Fang                                         [Page 5]


Internet Draft     draft-ietf-l2vpn-vpls-mcast-11.txt          July 2012


5. Existing Limitations of VPLS Multicast

   One of the limitations of existing VPLS multicast solutions described
   in [RFC4761] and [RFC4762] is that they rely on ingress replication.
   Thus, the ingress PE replicates the multicast packet for each egress
   PE and sends it to the egress PE using a unicast tunnel.

   Ingress Replication may be an acceptable model when the bandwidth of
   the multicast traffic is low or/and the number of replications
   performed on average on each outgoing interface for a particular
   customer VPLS multicast packet is small. If this is not the case it
   is desirable to utilize multicast trees in the SP network to transmit
   VPLS multicast packets [RFC5501]. Note that unicast packets that are
   flooded to each of the egress PEs, before the ingress PE learns the
   destination MAC address of those unicast packets, MAY still use
   ingress replication.


6. Overview

   This document describes procedures for using multicast trees in the
   SP network to transport VPLS multicast data packets. RSVP-TE P2MP
   LSPs described in [RFC4875] are an example of such multicast trees.
   The use of multicast trees in the SP network can be beneficial when
   the bandwidth of the multicast traffic is high or when it is
   desirable to optimize the number of copies of a multicast packet
   transmitted on a given link. This comes at a cost of state in the SP
   network to build multicast trees and overhead to maintain this state.
   This document describes procedures for using multicast trees for VPLS
   multicast when the provider tunnels are P2MP LSPs signaled by either
   P2MP RSVP-PE or mLDP [RFC6388].

   This document uses the prefix 'C' to refer to the customer control or
   data packets and 'P' to refer to the provider control or data
   packets. An IP (multicast source, multicast group) tuple is
   abbreviated to (S, G).


6.1. Inclusive and Selective Multicast Trees

   Multicast trees used for VPLS can be of two types:

     + Inclusive trees. This option supports the use of a single
       multicast distribution tree, referred to as an Inclusive P-
       Multicast tree, in the SP network to carry all the multicast
       traffic from a specified set of VPLS sites connected to a given
       PE. There is no assumption made with respect to whether this
       traffic is IP encapsulated or not. A particular P-Multicast tree



Raggarwa, Kamite & Fang                                         [Page 6]


Internet Draft     draft-ietf-l2vpn-vpls-mcast-11.txt          July 2012


       can be set up to carry the traffic originated by sites belonging
       to a single VPLS, or to carry the traffic originated by sites
       belonging to different VPLSes. The ability to carry the traffic
       of more than one VPLS on the same tree is termed Aggregation. The
       tree needs to include every PE that is a member of any of the
       VPLSes that are using the tree. This implies that a PE may
       receive multicast traffic for a multicast stream even if it
       doesn't have any receivers that are interested in receiving
       traffic for that stream.

       An Inclusive P-Multicast tree as defined in this document is a
       P2MP tree.  A P2MP tree is used to carry traffic only from VPLS
       sites that are connected to the PE that is the root of the tree.

     + Selective trees. A Selective P-Multicast tree is used by a PE to
       send IP multicast traffic for one or more specific IP multicast
       streams, received by a PE over PE-CE interfaces that belong to
       the same or different VPLSes, to a subset of the PEs that belong
       to those VPLSes. Each of the PEs in the subset should be on the
       path to a receiver of one or more multicast streams that are
       mapped onto the tree. The ability to use the same tree for
       multicast streams that belong to different VPLSes is termed
       Aggregation. The reason for having Selective P-Multicast trees is
       to provide a PE the ability to create separate SP multicast trees
       for specific multicast streams, e.g. high bandwidth multicast
       streams. This allows traffic for these multicast streams to reach
       only those PE routers that have receivers in these streams. This
       avoids flooding other PE routers in the VPLS.

   A SP can use both Inclusive P-Multicast trees and Selective P-
   Multicast trees or either of them for a given VPLS on a PE, based on
   local configuration.  Inclusive P-Multicast trees can be used for
   both IP and non-IP data multicast traffic, while Selective P-
   Multicast trees must be used only for IP multicast data traffic. The
   use of Selective P-Multicast trees for non-IP multicast traffic is
   outside the scope of this document.

   A variety of transport technologies may be used in the SP network.
   For inclusive P-Multicast trees, these transport technologies include
   point-to-multipoint LSPs created by RSVP-TE or mLDP. For selective P-
   Multicast trees, unicast PE-PE tunnels (using MPLS or IP/GRE
   encapsulation) and P2MP LSPs are supported, and the supported P2MP
   LSP signaling protocols are RSVP-TE, and mLDP. Other transport
   technologies are outside the scope of this document.

   This document also describes the data plane encapsulations for
   supporting the various SP multicast transport options.




Raggarwa, Kamite & Fang                                         [Page 7]


Internet Draft     draft-ietf-l2vpn-vpls-mcast-11.txt          July 2012


6.2. BGP-Based VPLS Membership Auto-Discovery

   In order to establish Inclusive P-Multicast trees for one or more
   VPLSes, when aggregation is performed (with either mLDP or P2MP RSVP-
   TE as the tunneling technology), or when the tunneling technology is
   P2MP RSVP-TE, the PE acting as a root of a P2MP LSP must be able to
   discover the other PEs that have membership in one or more of these
   VPLSes (these other PEs act as leaves of that P2MP LSP). This
   document uses the BGP-based procedures described in [RFC4761] and
   [L2VPN-SIG] for discovering the VPLS membership of all PEs. When no
   aggregation is performed and the tunneling technology is mLDP, then
   the root of the P2MP LSP need not discover the other PEs that are the
   leaves of that LSP.

   The leaves of the Inclusive P-Multicast tree must also be able to
   auto-discover the identifier of the tree (note that this applies when
   the tree is established by either mLDP or P2MP RSVP-TE).  This is
   described in section 6.4.



6.3. IP Multicast Group Membership Discovery

   The setup of a Selective P-Multicast tree for one or more IP
   multicast (C-S, C-G)s, requires the ingress PE to learn the PEs that
   have receivers in one or more of these (C-S, C-G)s, in the following
   cases:

     + When aggregation is used OR

     + When the tunneling technology is P2MP RSVP-TE

     +  If ingress replication is used and the ingress PE wants to send
       traffic for (C-S, C-G)s to only those PEs that are on the path to
       receivers for the (C-S,C-G)s.


   For discovering the IP multicast group membership, this document
   describes procedures that allow an ingress PE to enable explicit
   tracking. Thus an ingress PE can request the IP multicast membership
   from egress PEs for one or more C-multicast streams. These procedures
   are described in section "Optimizing Multicast Distribution via
   Selective Trees".

   These procedures are applicable when IGMP is used as the multicast
   signaling protocol between the VPLS CEs. They are also applicable
   when PIM as specified in [RFC4601] is used as the multicast routing
   protocol between the VPLS CEs and PIM join suppression is disabled on



Raggarwa, Kamite & Fang                                         [Page 8]


Internet Draft     draft-ietf-l2vpn-vpls-mcast-11.txt          July 2012


   all the CEs. However these procedures do not apply when PIM is used
   as the multicast routing protocol between the VPLS CEs and PIM join
   suppression is not disabled on all the CEs. Procedures for this case
   are for further study.

   The leaves of the Selective P-Multicast trees must also be able to
   discover the identifier of the tree. This is described in section
   6.4.


6.4. Advertising P-Multicast Tree to VPLS/C-Multicast Binding

   This document describes procedures based on BGP VPLS Auto-Discovery
   (A-D) that are used by the root of an Aggregate P-Multicast tree to
   advertise the Inclusive or Selective P-Multicast tree binding and the
   de-multiplexing information to the leaves of the tree. This document
   uses the PMSI Tunnel attribute [RFC6514] for this purpose.

   Once a PE decides to bind a set of VPLSes or customer multicast
   groups to an Inclusive P-Multicast tree or a Selective P-Multicast
   tree, it needs to announce this binding to other PEs in the network.
   This procedure is referred to as Inclusive P-Multicast tree or
   Selective P-Multicast tree binding distribution and is performed
   using BGP.

   When an Aggregated Inclusive P-Multicast tree is used by an ingress
   PE, this discovery implies that an ingress PE MUST announce the
   binding of all VPLSes bound to the Inclusive P-Multicast tree to the
   other PEs. The inner label assigned by the ingress PE for each VPLS
   MUST be included, if more than one VPLS is bound to the same P-
   Multicast tree. The Inclusive P-Multicast tree Identifier MUST be
   included.

   For a Selective P-Multicast tree this discovery implies announcing
   all the specific <C-S, C-G> entries bound to this P-Multicast tree
   along with the Selective P-Multicast tree Identifier. The inner label
   assigned for each <C-S, C-G> MUST be included if <C-S, C-G>s from
   different VPLSes are bound to the same P-Multicast tree. The labels
   MUST be distinct on a per VPLS basis and MAY be distinct on a per <C-
   S, C-G> basis.  The Selective P-Multicast tree Identifier MUST be
   included.










Raggarwa, Kamite & Fang                                         [Page 9]


Internet Draft     draft-ietf-l2vpn-vpls-mcast-11.txt          July 2012


6.5. Aggregation

   As described above the ability to carry the traffic of more than one
   VPLS on the same P-Multicast tree is termed 'Aggregation'. Both
   Inclusive and Selective P-Multicast trees support aggregation.

   Aggregation enables the SP to place a bound on the amount of
   multicast tree forwarding and control plane state which the P routers
   must have.  Let us call the number of VPLSes aggregated onto a single
   P-Multicast tree as the "Aggregation Factor". When Inclusive source
   P-Multicast trees are used the number of trees that a PE is the root
   of is proportional to:

     + (Number of VPLSes on the PE / Aggregation Factor).


   In this case the state maintained by a P router, is proportional to:

     + ((Average number of VPLSes on a PE / Aggregation Factor) * number
       of PEs) / (Average number of P-Multicast trees that transit a
       given P router)


   Thus, the state does not grow linearly with the number of VPLSes.

   Aggregation requires a mechanism for the egresses of the P-Multicast
   tree to demultiplex the multicast traffic received over the P-
   Multicast tree.  To enable the egress nodes to perform this
   demultiplexing, upstream-assigned labels [RFC5331] MUST be assigned
   and distributed by the root of the aggregate P-multicast tree."


6.6. Inter-AS VPLS Multicast

   This document supports four models of inter-AS VPLS service, option
   (a), (b), (c), and (e). Options (a), (b), and (c) are very similar
   conceptually to options (a), (b) and (c) specified in [RFC4364] for
   IP VPNs. These options described here are also similar to the three
   options described in [RFC4761], which in turn extends the concepts of
   [RFC4364] to inter-AS VPLS.

   For option (a) and option (b) support, this document specifies a
   model where Inter-AS VPLS service can be offered without requiring a
   single P-Multicast tree to span multiple ASes. There are two variants
   of this model and they are described in section 10.

   For option (c) support this document specifies a model where Inter-AS
   VPLS service is offered by requiring a single P-Multicast tree to



Raggarwa, Kamite & Fang                                        [Page 10]


Internet Draft     draft-ietf-l2vpn-vpls-mcast-11.txt          July 2012


   span multiple ASes. This is because in the case of option (c) the
   ASBRs do not exchange BGP-VPLS NLRIs or A-D routes.

   In addition, this document also specifies option (e), which one may
   think of as a variant of option (a).


7. Intra-AS Inclusive P-Multicast Tree Auto-discovery/Binding

   This section specifies procedures for the intra-AS auto-discovery of
   VPLS membership and the distribution of information used to
   instantiate P-Multicast Tunnels.

   VPLS auto-discovery/binding consists of two components: intra-AS and
   inter-AS. The former provides VPLS auto-discovery/binding within a
   single AS. The latter provides VPLS auto-discovery/binding across
   multiple ASes. Inter-AS auto-discovery/binding is described in
   section 10.

   VPLS auto-discovery using BGP as described in [RFC4761, RFC6074]
   enables a PE to learn the VPLS membership of other PEs. A PE that
   belongs to a particular VPLS announces a BGP Network Layer
   Reachability Information (NLRI) that identifies the Virtual Switch
   Instance (VSI). This NLRI is constructed from the <Route-
   Distinguisher (RD), VPLS Edge Device Identifier (VE-ID)> tuple. The
   NLRI defined in [RFC4761] comprises the <RD, VE-ID> tuple and label
   blocks for PW signaling. The VE-ID in this case is a two octet
   number. The NLRI defined in [RFC6074] comprises only the <RD, VE-ID>
   where the VE-ID is a four octet number.

   The procedures for constructing Inclusive intra-AS and inter-AS trees
   as specified in this document require the BGP A-D NLRI to carry only
   the <RD, VE-ID>. Hence these procedures can be used for both BGP-VPLS
   and LDP-VPLS with BGP A-D.

   It is to be noted that BGP A-D is an inherent feature of BGP-VPLS.
   However it is not an inherent feature of LDP-VPLS. In fact there are
   deployments and/or implementations of LDP-VPLS that require
   configuration to enable a PE in a particular VPLS to determine other
   PEs in the VPLS and exchange PW labels using FEC 128 [RFC4447]. The
   use of BGP A-D for LDP-VPLS [RFC6074], to enable automatic setup of
   PWs, requires FEC 129 [RFC4447]. However FEC 129 is not required in
   order to use procedures in this document for LDP-VPLS.  An LDP-VPLS
   implementation that supports this document MUST support the BGP A-D
   procedures to setup P-Multicast trees, as described here, and it MAY
   support FEC 129 to automate the signaling of PWs.





Raggarwa, Kamite & Fang                                        [Page 11]


Internet Draft     draft-ietf-l2vpn-vpls-mcast-11.txt          July 2012


7.1. Originating intra-AS VPLS A-D routes

   To participate in the VPLS auto-discovery/binding a PE router that
   has a given VSI of a given VPLS originates an BGP VPLS intra-AS A-D
   route and advertises this route in Multi-Protocol (MP) IBGP. The
   route is constructed as described in [RFC4761] and [RFC6074].

   The route carries a single L2VPN NLRI with the RD set to the RD of
   the VSI, and the VE-ID set to the VE-ID of the VSI.  The route also
   carries one or more Rout Targets (RTs) as specified in [RFC4761] and
   [RFC6074].

   If an Inclusive P-Multicast tree is used to instantiate the provider
   tunnel for VPLS multicast on the PE, the advertising PE MUST
   advertise the type and the identity of the P-Multicast tree in the
   PMSI Tunnel attribute [RFC6514]. This attribute is described in
   section 12.1.

   A PE that uses an Inclusive P-Multicast tree to instantiate the
   provider tunnel MAY aggregate two or more VPLSes present on the PE
   onto the same tree. If the PE decides to perform aggregation after it
   has already advertised the intra-AS VPLS A-D routes for these VPLSes,
   then aggregation requires the PE to re-advertise these routes. The
   re-advertised routes MUST be the same as the original ones, except
   for the PMSI Tunnel attribute. If the PE has not previously
   advertised intra-AS A-D routes for these VPLSes, then the aggregation
   requires the PE to advertise (new) intra-AS A-D routes for these
   VPLSes.  The PMSI attribute in the newly advertised/re-advertised
   routes MUST carry the identity of the P-Multicast tree that
   aggregates the VPLSes, as well as an MPLS upstream-assigned label
   [RFC5331]. Each re-advertised route MUST have a distinct label.

   Discovery of PE capabilities in terms of what tunnels types they
   support is outside the scope of this document. Within a given AS PEs
   participating in a VPLS are expected to advertise tunnel bindings
   whose tunnel types are supported by all other PEs that are
   participating in this VPLS and are part of the same AS.


7.2. Receiving intra-AS VPLS A-D routes

   When a PE receives a BGP Update message that carries an intra-AS A-D
   route such that (a) the route was originated by some other PE within
   the same AS as the local PE, (b) at least one of the Route Targets of
   the route matches one of the import Route Targets configured for a
   particular VSI on the local PE, (c) the BGP route selection
   determines that this is the best route with respect to the NLRI
   carried by the route, and (d) the route carries the PMSI Tunnel



Raggarwa, Kamite & Fang                                        [Page 12]


Internet Draft     draft-ietf-l2vpn-vpls-mcast-11.txt          July 2012


   attribute, the PE performs the following.

   If the route carries the PMSI Tunnel attribute then:

     + If the Tunnel Type in the PMSI Tunnel attribute is set to LDP
       P2MP LSP, the PE SHOULD join the P-Multicast tree whose identity
       is carried in the PMSI Tunnel attribute.

     + If the Tunnel Type in the PMSI Tunnel attribute is set to RSVP-TE
       P2MP LSP, the receiving PE has to establish the appropriate state
       to properly handle the traffic received over that LSP. The PE
       that originated the route MUST establish an RSVP-TE P2MP LSP with
       the local PE as a leaf. This LSP MAY have been established before
       the local PE receives the route.

     + If the PMSI Tunnel attribute does not carry a label, then all
       packets that are received on the P-Multicast tree, as identified
       by the PMSI Tunnel attribute, are forwarded using the VSIs that
       have at least one of its import Route Targets that matches one of
       the Route Targets of the received A-D route.

     + If the PMSI Tunnel attribute has the Tunnel Type set to LDP P2MP
       LSP or RSVP-TE P2MP LSP, and the attribute also carries an MPLS
       label, then the egress PE MUST treat this as an upstream-assigned
       label, and all packets that are received on the P-Multicast tree,
       as identified by the PMSI Tunnel attribute, with that upstream
       label are forwarded using the VSIs that have at least one of its
       import Route Target that matches one of the Route Targets of the
       received intra-AS A-D route.


   If the local PE uses RSVP-TE P2MP LSP for sending (multicast)
   traffic, originated by VPLS sites connected to the PE, to the sites
   attached to other PEs then the local PE MUST use the Originating
   Router's IP address information carried in the intra-AS A-D route to
   add the PE, that originated the route, as a leaf node to the LSP.
   This MUST be done irrespective of whether the received Intra-AS A-D
   route carries the PMSI Tunnel attribute or not.













Raggarwa, Kamite & Fang                                        [Page 13]


Internet Draft     draft-ietf-l2vpn-vpls-mcast-11.txt          July 2012


8. Demultiplexing P-Multicast Tree Traffic

   Demultiplexing received VPLS traffic requires the receiving PE to
   determine the VPLS instance the packet belongs to. The egress PE can
   then perform a VPLS lookup to further forward the packet. It also
   requires the egress PE to determine the identity of the ingress PE
   for MAC learning, as described in section 15.


8.1. One P-Multicast Tree - One VPLS Mapping

   When a P-Multicast tree is mapped to only one VPLS, determining the
   tree on which the packet is received is sufficient to determine the
   VPLS instance on which the packet is received. The tree is determined
   based on the tree encapsulation. If MPLS encapsulation is used,
   e.g.,: RSVP-TE P2MP LSPs, the outer MPLS label is used to determine
   the tree. Penultimate-hop-popping MUST be disabled on the MPLS LSP
   (RSVP-TE P2MP LSP or LDP P2MP LSP).


8.2. One P-Multicast Tree - Many VPLS Mapping

   As traffic belonging to multiple VPLSes can be carried over the same
   tree, there is a need to identify the VPLS the packet belongs to.
   This is done by using an inner label that determines the VPLS for
   which the packet is intended. The ingress PE uses this label as the
   inner label while encapsulating a customer multicast data packet.
   Each of the egress PEs must be able to associate this inner label
   with the same VPLS and use it to demultimplex the traffic received
   over the Aggregate Inclusive tree or the Aggregate Selective tree.

   If traffic from multiple VPLSes is carried on a single tree,
   upstream-assigned labels [RFC5331] MUST be used. Hence the inner
   label is assigned by the ingress PE.  When the egress PE receives a
   packet over an Aggregate tree, the outer encapsulation (in the case
   of MPLS P2MP LSPs, the outer MPLS label) specifies the label space to
   perform the inner label lookup. The same label space MUST be used by
   the egress PE for all P-Multicast trees that have the same root
   [RFC5331].

   If the tree uses MPLS encapsulation, as in RSVP-TE P2MP LSPs, the
   outer MPLS label and optionally the incoming interface provides the
   label space of the label beneath it. This assumes that penultimate-
   hop-popping is disabled. The egress PE MUST NOT advertise IMPLICIT
   NULL or EXPLICIT NULL for that tree once it is known to the egress PE
   that the tree is bound to one or more VPLSes. Once the label
   representing the tree is popped off the MPLS label stack, the next
   label is the demultiplexing information that allows the proper VPLS



Raggarwa, Kamite & Fang                                        [Page 14]


Internet Draft     draft-ietf-l2vpn-vpls-mcast-11.txt          July 2012


   instance to be determined.

   The ingress PE informs the egress PEs about the inner label as part
   of the tree binding procedures described in section 12.


9. Establishing P-Multicast Trees

   This document supports only P2MP P-Multicast trees wherein it is
   possible for egress PEs to identify the ingress PE to perform MAC
   learning.  Specific procedures are specified only for RSVP-TE P2MP
   LSPs and LDP P2MP LSPs. An implementation that supports this document
   MUST support RSVP-TE P2MP LSPs and LDP P2MP LSPs.

   A P2MP tree is used to carry traffic originated in sites connected to
   the PE which is the root of the tree. These sites MAY belong to
   different VPLSes or the same VPLS.


9.1. Common Procedures

   The following procedures apply to both RSVP-TE P2MP and LDP P2MP
   LSPs.

   Demultiplexing the C-multicast data packets at the egress PE requires
   that the PE must be able to determine the P2MP LSP that the packets
   are received on. This enables the egress PE to determine the VPLS
   instances that the packet belongs to. To achieve this the LSP MUST be
   signaled with penultimate-hop-popping (PHP) off and a non-reserved
   MPLS label off as described in section 8. In other words an egress PE
   MUST NOT advertise IMPLICIT NULL or EXPLICIT NULL for a P2MP LSP that
   is carrying traffic for one or more VPLSes. This is because the
   egress PE needs to rely on the MPLS label, that it advertises to its
   upstream neighbor, to determine the P2MP LSP that a C-multicast data
   packet is received on.

   The egress PE also needs to identify the ingress PE to perform MAC
   learning.  When P2MP LSPs are used as P2MP trees, determining the
   P2MP LSP that the packets are received on, is sufficient to determine
   the ingress PE.  This is because the ingress PE is the root of the
   P2MP LSP.

   The egress PE relies on receiving the PMSI Tunnel attribute in BGP to
   determine the VPLS instance to P2MP LSP mapping.







Raggarwa, Kamite & Fang                                        [Page 15]


Internet Draft     draft-ietf-l2vpn-vpls-mcast-11.txt          July 2012


9.2. RSVP-TE P2MP LSPs

   This section describes procedures that are specific to the usage of
   RSVP-TE P2MP LSPs for instantiating a P-Multicast tree. Procedures in
   [RFC4875] are used to signal the P2MP LSP. The LSP is signaled as the
   root of the P2MP LSP discovers the leaves. The egress PEs are
   discovered using the procedures described in section 7. Aggregation
   as described in this document is supported.


9.2.1. P2MP TE LSP - VPLS Mapping

   P2MP TE LSP to VPLS mapping is learned at the egress PEs using BGP
   based advertisements of the P2MP TE LSP - VPLS mapping. They require
   that the root of the tree include the P2MP TE LSP identifier as the
   tunnel identifier in the BGP advertisements. This identifier contains
   the following information elements:
         - The type of the tunnel is set to RSVP-TE P2MP LSP
         - RSVP-TE P2MP LSP's SESSION Object

   This Tunnel Identifier is described in section 12.1.

   Once the egress PE receives the P2MP TE LSP to VPLS mapping:

     + If the egress PE already has RSVP-TE state for the P2MP TE LSP,
       it MUST begin to assign an MPLS label from the non-reserved label
       range, for the P2MP TE LSP and signal this to the previous hop of
       the P2MP TE LSP.  Further it MUST create forwarding state to
       forward packets received on the P2MP LSP.

     + If the egress PE does not have RSVP-TE state for the P2MP TE LSP,
       it MUST retain this mapping. Subsequently when the egress PE
       receives the RSVP-TE P2MP signaling message, it creates the RSVP-
       TE P2MP LSP state.  It MUST then assign an MPLS label from the
       non-reserved label range, for the P2MP TE LSP, and signal this to
       the previous hop of the P2MP TE LSP.

       Note that if the signaling to set up an RSVP-TE P2MP LSP is
       completed before a given egress PE learns, via a PMSI Tunnel
       attribute, of the VPLS or set of VPLSes to which the LSP is
       bound, the PE MUST discard any traffic received on that LSP until
       the binding is received. In order for the egress PE to be able to
       discard such traffic it needs to know that the LSP is associated
       with one or more VPLSes and that the VPLS A-D route that binds
       the LSP to a VPLS has not yet been received. This is provided by
       extending [RFC4875] with [RFC6511].





Raggarwa, Kamite & Fang                                        [Page 16]


Internet Draft     draft-ietf-l2vpn-vpls-mcast-11.txt          July 2012


9.3. Receiver Initiated MPLS Trees

   Receiver initiated P2MP MPLS trees signaled using LDP [RFC6388] can
   also be used. Procedures in [RFC6388] MUST be used to signal the P2MP
   LSP. The LSP is signaled once the leaves receive the LDP FEC for the
   tree from the root as described in section 7. An ingress PE is
   required to discover the egress PEs when aggregation is used and this
   is achieved using the procedures in section 7.


9.3.1. P2MP LSP - VPLS Mapping

   P2MP LSP to VPLS mapping is learned at the egress PEs using BGP based
   advertisements of the P2MP LSP - VPLS mapping. They require that the
   root of the tree include the P2MP LSP identifier as the tunnel
   identifier in the BGP advertisements. This identifier contains the
   following information elements:
         - The type of the tunnel is set to LDP P2MP LSP
         - LDP P2MP FEC which includes an identifier generated by the
   root.

   Each egress PE SHOULD "join" the P2MP MPLS tree by sending LDP label
   mapping messages for the LDP P2MP FEC, that was learned in the BGP
   advertisement, using procedures described in [RFC6388].


9.4. Encapsulation of Aggregate P-Multicast Trees

   An Aggregate Inclusive P-Multicast tree or an Aggregate Selective P-
   Multicast tree MUST use MPLS encapsulation. The protocol type in the
   data link header is as described in [RFC5332].


10. Inter-AS Inclusive P-Multicast Tree A-D/Binding

   This document supports four options of inter-AS VPLS service, option
   (a), (b), (c) and (e). Of these option (a), (b) and (c) are very
   similar conceptually to option (a), (b) and (c) specified in
   [RFC4364] for IP VPNs. These three options are also similar to the
   three options described in [RFC4761], which in turn extend the
   concepts of [RFC4364] to inter-AS VPLS. An implementation MUST
   support all three of these options. When there are multiple ways for
   implementing one of these options this section specifies which one is
   mandatory.  Option (e) is described further down in section 10.1.2.

   For option (a), (b) and (e) support this section specifies a model
   where inter-AS VPLS service can be offered without requiring a single
   P-Multicast tree to span multiple ASes. This allows individual ASes



Raggarwa, Kamite & Fang                                        [Page 17]


Internet Draft     draft-ietf-l2vpn-vpls-mcast-11.txt          July 2012


   to potentially use different P-tunneling technologies. There are two
   variants of this model. One that requires MAC lookup on the ASBRs and
   applies to option (a) and (e). The other is one that does not require
   MAC lookup on the ASBRs and instead builds segmented inter-AS
   Inclusive or Selective trees.  This applies only to option (b).

   For option (c) support this document specifies a model where Inter-AS
   VPLS service is offered by requiring a single Inclusive P-Multicast
   tree to span multiple ASes. This is referred to as a non-segmented P-
   Multicast tree. This is because in the case of option (c) the ASBRs
   do not exchange BGP-VPLS NLRIs or VPLS A-D routes. Selective inter-AS
   trees for option (c) support may be segmented or non-segmented.


10.1. VSIs on the ASBRs

   When VSIs are configured on ASBRs, the ASBRs MUST perform a MAC
   lookup, in addition to any MPLS lookups, to determine the forwarding
   decision on a VPLS packet. The P-Multicast trees are confined to an
   AS. An ASBR on receiving a VPLS packet from another ASBR is required
   to perform a MAC lookup to determine how to forward the packet. Thus
   an ASBR is required to keep a VSI for the VPLS and MUST be configured
   with its own VE ID for the VPLS. The BGP VPLS A-D routes generated by
   PEs in an AS MUST NOT be propagated outside the AS.


10.1.1. Option (a): VSIs on the ASBRs

   When VSIs are configured on ASBRs and option (a) is used then an ASBR
   in one AS treats an adjoining ASBR in another AS as a CE and
   determines the VSI for packets received from that ASBR based on the
   incoming Ethernet interface or VLAN ID. In option (a) the ASBRs do
   not exchange VPLS A-D routes.

   An implementation MUST support option (a).


10.1.2. Option (e): VSIs on the ASBRs

   The VSIs on the ASBRs scheme can be used such that the interconnect
   between the ASBRs is a PW and MPLS encapsulation is used between the
   ASBRs.  An ASBR in one AS treats an adjoining ASBR in another AS as a
   CE and determines the VSI for packets received from another ASBR
   based on the incoming MPLS encapsulation. This is referred to as
   option (e).  The only VPLS A-D routes that are propagated outside the
   AS are the ones originated by ASBRs.  This MPLS PW connects the VSIs
   on the ASBRs and MUST be signaled using the procedures defined in
   [RFC4761] or [RFC4762].



Raggarwa, Kamite & Fang                                        [Page 18]


Internet Draft     draft-ietf-l2vpn-vpls-mcast-11.txt          July 2012


   The P-Multicast trees for a VPLS are confined to each AS and the VPLS
   auto-discovery/binding MUST follow the intra-AS procedures described
   in section 8. An implementation MAY support option (e).


10.2. Option (b) - Segmented Inter-AS Trees

   In this model, an inter-AS P-Multicast tree, rooted at a particular
   PE for a particular VPLS instance, consists of a number of
   "segments", one per AS, which are stitched together at ASBRs. These
   are known as "segmented inter-AS trees". Each segment of a segmented
   inter-AS tree may use a different multicast transport technology. In
   this model, an ASBR is not required to keep a VSI for the VPLS and is
   not required to perform a MAC lookup in order to forward the VPLS
   packet.  This implies that an ASBR is not required to be configured
   with a VE ID for the VPLS. This model is applicable to option (b). An
   implementation MUST support option (b) using this model.

   The construction of segmented Inter-AS trees requires the BGP-VPLS A-
   D NLRI described in [RFC4761, RFC6074]. A BGP VPLS A-D route for a
   <RD, VE ID> tuple advertised outside the AS, to which the originating
   PE belongs, will be referred to as an inter-AS VPLS A-D route (Though
   this route is originated by a PE as an intra-AS route and is referred
   to as an inter-AS route outside the AS).

   In addition to this, segmented inter-AS trees require support for the
   PMSI Tunnel attribute described in section 12.1. They also require
   additional procedures in BGP to signal leaf A-D routes between ASBRs
   as explained in subsequent sections.


10.2.1. Segmented Inter-AS Trees VPLS Inter-AS A-D/Binding

   This section specifies the procedures for inter-AS VPLS A-D/binding
   for segmented inter-AS trees.

   An ASBR must be configured to support a particular VPLS as follows:

     + An ASBR MUST be configured with a set of (import) Route Targets
       (RTs) that specify the set of VPLSes supported by the ASBR. These
       Route Targets control acceptance of BGP VPLS auto-discovery
       routes by the ASBR. Note that instead of being configured, the
       ASBR MAY obtain this set of (import) Route Targets (RTs) by using
       Route Target Constrain [RFC4684].







Raggarwa, Kamite & Fang                                        [Page 19]


Internet Draft     draft-ietf-l2vpn-vpls-mcast-11.txt          July 2012


     + The ASBR MUST be configured with the tunnel types for the intra-
       AS segments of the VPLSes supported by the ASBR, as well as
       (depending on the tunnel type) the information needed to create
       the PMSI Tunnel attribute for these tunnel types. Note that
       instead of being configured, the ASBR MAY derive the tunnel types
       from the intra-AS A-D routes received by the ASBR from the PEs in
       its own AS.



   If an ASBR is configured to support a particular VPLS, the ASBR MUST
   participate in the intra-AS VPLS auto-discovery/binding procedures
   for that VPLS within the ASBR's own AS, as defined in this document.

   Moreover, in addition to the above the ASBR performs procedures
   specified in the next section.


10.2.2. Propagating BGP VPLS A-D routes to other ASes: Overview

   An A-D route for a given VPLS, originated by an ASBR within a given
   AS, is propagated via BGP to other ASes. The precise rules for
   distributing and processing the inter-AS A-D routes are given in
   subsequent sections.

   Suppose that an ASBR A receives and installs an A-D route for VPLS
   "X" and VE ID "V" that originated at a particular PE, PE1. The BGP
   next hop of that received route becomes A's "upstream neighbor" on a
   multicast distribution tree for (X, V) that is rooted at PE1. When
   the A-D routes have been distributed to all the necessary ASes, they
   define a "reverse path" from any AS that supports VPLS X and VE ID V
   back to PE1. For instance, if AS2 supports VPLS X, then there will be
   a reverse path for VPLS X and VE ID V from AS2 to AS1. This path is a
   sequence of ASBRs, the first of which is in AS2, and the last of
   which is in AS1. Each ASBR in the sequence is the BGP next hop of the
   previous ASBR in the sequence.

   This reverse path information can be used to construct a
   unidirectional multicast distribution tree for VPLS X and VE ID V,
   containing all the ASes that support X, and having PE1 at the root.
   We call such a tree an "inter-AS tree". Multicast data originating in
   VPLS sites for VPLS X connected to PE1 will travel downstream along
   the tree which is rooted at PE1.

   The path along an inter-AS tree is a sequence of ASBRs. It is still
   necessary to specify how the multicast data gets from a given ASBR to
   the set of ASBRs which are immediately downstream of the given ASBR
   along the tree. This is done by creating "segments": ASBRs in



Raggarwa, Kamite & Fang                                        [Page 20]


Internet Draft     draft-ietf-l2vpn-vpls-mcast-11.txt          July 2012


   adjacent ASes will be connected by inter-AS segments, ASBRs in the
   same AS will be connected by "intra-AS segments".

   For a given inter-AS tree and a given AS there MUST be only one ASBR
   within that AS that accepts traffic flowing on that tree. Further for
   a given inter-AS tree and a given AS there MUST be only one ASBR in
   that AS that sends the traffic flowing on that tree to a particular
   adjacent AS.  The precise rules for accomplishing this are given in
   subsequent sections.

   An ASBR initiates creation of an intra-AS segment when the ASBR
   receives an inter-AS A-D route from an EBGP neighbor.  Creation of
   the segment is completed as a result of distributing, via IBGP, this
   route within the ASBR's own AS.

   For a given inter-AS tunnel each of its intra-AS segments could be
   constructed by its own independent mechanism. Moreover, by using
   upstream-assigned labels within a given AS multiple intra-AS segments
   of different inter-AS tunnels of either the same or different VPLSes
   may share the same P-Multicast tree.

   If the P-Multicast tree instantiating a particular segment of an
   inter-AS tunnel is created by a multicast control protocol that uses
   receiver-initiated joins (e.g, mLDP), and this P-Multicast tree does
   not aggregate multiple segments, then all the information needed to
   create that segment will be present in the inter-AS A-D routes
   received by the ASBR from the neighboring ASBR. But if the P-
   Multicast tree instantiating the segment is created by a protocol
   that does not use receiver-initiated joins (e.g., RSVP-TE, ingress
   unicast replication), or if this P-Multicast tree aggregates multiple
   segments (irrespective of the multicast control protocol used to
   create the tree), then the ASBR needs to learn the leaves of the
   segment. These leaves are learned from A-D routes received from other
   PEs in the AS, for the same VPLS as the one that the segment belongs
   to.

   The following sections specify procedures for propagation of inter-AS
   A-D routes across ASes in order to construct inter-AS segmented
   trees.


10.2.2.1. Propagating Intra-AS VPLS A-D routes in EBGP

   For a given VPLS configured on an ASBR when the ASBR receives intra-
   AS A-D routes originated by PEs in its own AS, the ASBR MUST
   propagate each of these route in EBGP. This procedure MUST be
   performed for each of the VPLSes configured on the ASBR. Each of
   these routes is constructed as follows:



Raggarwa, Kamite & Fang                                        [Page 21]


Internet Draft     draft-ietf-l2vpn-vpls-mcast-11.txt          July 2012


     + The route carries a single BGP VPLS A-D NLRI with the RD and VE
       ID being the same as the NLRI in the received intra-AS A-D route.

     + The Next Hop field of the MP_REACH_NLRI attribute is set to a
       routable IP address of the ASBR.

     + The route carries the PMSI Tunnel attribute with the Tunnel Type
       set to Ingress Replication; the attribute carries no MPLS labels.

     + The route MUST carry the export Route Target used by the VPLS.


10.2.2.2. Inter-AS A-D route received via EBGP

   When an ASBR receives from one of its EBGP neighbors a BGP Update
   message that carries an inter-AS A-D route, if (a) at least one of
   the Route Targets carried in the message matches one of the import
   Route Targets configured on the ASBR, and (b) the ASBR determines
   that the received route is the best route to the destination carried
   in the NLRI of the route, the ASBR re-advertises this inter-AS A-D
   route to other PEs and ASBRs within its own AS.  The best route
   selection procedures MUST ensure that for the same destination, all
   ASBRs in an AS pick the same route as the best route.  The best route
   selection procedures are specified in [RFC4761] and clarified in
   [MULTI-HOMING]. The best route procedures ensure that if multiple
   ASBRs, in an AS, receive the same inter-AS A-D route from their EBGP
   neighbors, only one of these ASBRs propagates this route in IBGP.
   This ASBR becomes the root of the intra-AS segment of the inter-AS
   tree and ensures that this is the only ASBR that accepts traffic into
   this AS from the inter-AS tree.

   When re-advertising an inter-AS A-D route the ASBR MUST set the Next
   Hop field of the MP_REACH_NLRI attribute to a routable IP address of
   the ASBR.

   Depending on the type of a P-Multicast tunnel used to instantiate the
   intra-AS segment of the inter-AS tunnel, the PMSI Tunnel attribute of
   the re-advertised inter-AS A-D route is constructed as follows:

     + If the ASBR uses ingress replication to instantiate the intra-AS
       segment of the inter-AS tunnel, the re-advertised route MUST NOT
       carry the PMSI Tunnel attribute.

     + If the ASBR uses a P-Multicast tree to instantiate the intra-AS
       segment of the inter-AS tunnel, the PMSI Tunnel attribute MUST
       contain the identity of the tree that is used to instantiate the
       segment (note that the ASBR could create the identity of the tree
       prior to the actual instantiation of the segment). If in order to



Raggarwa, Kamite & Fang                                        [Page 22]


Internet Draft     draft-ietf-l2vpn-vpls-mcast-11.txt          July 2012


       instantiate the segment the ASBR needs to know the leaves of the
       tree, then the ASBR obtains this information from the A-D routes
       received from other PEs/ASBRs in ASBR's own AS.

     + An ASBR that uses a P-Multicast tree to instantiate the intra-AS
       segment of the inter-AS tunnel MAY aggregate two or more VPLSes
       present on the ASBR onto the same tree. If the ASBR already
       advertises inter-AS A-D routes for these VPLSes, then aggregation
       requires the ASBR to re-advertise these routes. The re-advertised
       routes MUST be the same as the original ones, except for the PMSI
       Tunnel attribute. If the ASBR has not previously advertised
       inter-AS A-D routes for these VPLSes, then the aggregation
       requires the ASBR to advertise (new) inter-AS A-D routes for
       these VPLSes. The PMSI Tunnel attribute in the newly
       advertised/re-advertised routes MUST carry the identity of the P-
       Multicast tree that aggregates the VPLSes, as well as an MPLS
       upstream-assigned label [RFC5331].  Each re-advertised route MUST
       have a distinct label.


   In addition the ASBR MUST send to the EBGP neighbor, from whom it
   receives the inter-AS A-D route, a BGP Update message that carries a
   leaf A-D route. The exact encoding of this route is described in
   section 12. This route contains the following information elements:

     + The route carries a single NLRI with the Route Key field set to
       the <RD, VE ID> tuple of the BGP VPLS A-D NLRI of the inter-AS A-
       D route received from the EBGP neighbor. The NLRI also carries
       the IP address of the ASBR (this MUST be a routable IP address).

     + The leaf A-D route MUST include the PMSI Tunnel attribute with
       the Tunnel Type set to Ingress Replication, and the Tunnel
       Identifier set to a routable address of the advertising router.
       The PMSI Tunnel attribute MUST carry a downstream assigned MPLS
       label that is used to demultiplex the VPLS traffic received over
       a unicast tunnel by the advertising router.

     + The Next Hop field of the MP_REACH_NLRI attribute of the route
       SHOULD be set to the same IP address as the one carried in the
       Originating Router's IP Address field of the route.

     + To constrain the distribution scope of this route the route MUST
       carry the NO_ADVERTISE BGP community ([RFC1997]).

     + The ASBR constructs an IP-based Route Target extended community
       by placing the IP address carried in the next hop of the received
       Inter-AS VPLS A-D route in the Global Administrator field of the
       community, with the Local Administrator field of this community



Raggarwa, Kamite & Fang                                        [Page 23]


Internet Draft     draft-ietf-l2vpn-vpls-mcast-11.txt          July 2012


       set to 0, and sets the Extended Communities attribute of the leaf
       A-D route to that community. Note that this Route Target is the
       same as the ASBR Import RT of the EBGP neighbor from which the
       ASBR received the inter-AS VPLS A-D route.


10.2.2.3. Leaf A-D Route received via EBGP

   When an ASBR receives via EBGP a leaf A-D route, the ASBR accepts the
   route only if (a) at least one of the Route Targets carried in the
   message matches one of the import Route Targets configured on the
   ASBR, and (b) the ASBR determines that the received route is the best
   route to the destination carried in the NLRI of the route.

   If the ASBR accepts the leaf A-D route, the ASBR looks for an
   existing A-D route whose BGP-VPLS A-D NLRI has the same value as the
   <RD, VE-ID> field of the leaf A-D route just accepted. If such an A-D
   route is found, then the MPLS label carried in the PMSI Tunnel
   attribute of the leaf A-D route is used to stitch a one hop ASBR-ASBR
   LSP to the tail of the intra-AS tunnel segment associated with the
   found auto- discovery route.


10.2.2.4. Inter-AS A-D Route received via IBGP

   In the context of this section we use the term "PE/ASBR router" to
   denote either a PE or an ASBR router.

   Note that a given inter-AS A-D route is advertised within a given AS
   by only one ASBR as described above.

   When a PE/ASBR router receives from one of its IBGP neighbors a BGP
   Update message that carries an inter-AS A-D route, if (a) at least
   one of the Route Targets carried in the message matches one of the
   import Route Targets configured on the PE/ASBR, and (b) the PE/ASBR
   determines that the received route is the best route to the
   destination carried in the NLRI of the route, the PE/ASBR performs
   the following operations. The best route determination is based as
   described in [RFC4761] and clarified in [MULTI-HOMING].

   If the router is an ASBR then the ASBR propagates the route to its
   EBGP neighbors. When propagating the route to the EBGP neighbors the
   ASBR MUST set the Next Hop field of the MP_REACH_NLRI attribute to a
   routable IP address of the ASBR.

   If the received inter-AS A-D route carries the PMSI Tunnel attribute
   with the Tunnel Type set to LDP P2MP LSP, the PE/ASBR SHOULD join the
   P-Multicast tree whose identity is carried in the PMSI Tunnel



Raggarwa, Kamite & Fang                                        [Page 24]


Internet Draft     draft-ietf-l2vpn-vpls-mcast-11.txt          July 2012


   attribute.

   If the received inter-AS A-D route carries the PMSI Tunnel attribute
   with the Tunnel Identifier set to RSVP-TE P2MP LSP, then the ASBR
   that originated the route MUST establish an RSVP-TE P2MP LSP with the
   local PE/ASBR as a leaf. This LSP MAY have been established before
   the local PE/ASBR receives the route, or MAY be established after the
   local PE receives the route.

   If the received inter-AS A-D route carries the PMSI Tunnel attribute
   with the Tunnel Type set to LDP P2MP LSP, or RSVP-TE P2MP LSP, but
   the attribute does not carry a label, then the P-Multicast tree, as
   identified by the PMSI Tunnel attribute, is an intra-AS LSP segment
   that is part of the inter-AS Tunnel for the <VPLS, VE ID> advertised
   by the inter-AS A-D route and rooted at the PE that originated the A-
   D route. If the PMSI Tunnel attribute carries a (upstream-assigned)
   label, then a combination of this tree and the label identifies the
   intra-AS segment. If the receiving router is an ASBR, this intra-AS
   segment may further be stitched to ASBR-ASBR inter-AS segment of the
   inter-AS tunnel. If the PE/ASBR has local receivers in the VPLS,
   packets received over the intra-AS segment must be forwarded to the
   local receivers using the local VSI.


10.3. Option (c): Non-Segmented Tunnels

   In this model, there is a multi-hop EBGP peering between the PEs (or
   a Route Reflector) in one AS and the PEs (or Route Reflector) in
   another AS. The PEs exchange BGP-VPLS NLRI or BGP-VPLS A-D NLRI,
   along with PMSI Tunnel attribute, as in the intra-AS case described
   in section 8. An implementation MUST support this model.

   The PEs in different ASes use a non-segmented inter-AS P2MP tunnel
   for VPLS multicast. A non-segmented inter-AS tunnel is a single
   tunnel which spans AS boundaries. The tunnel technology cannot change
   from one point in the tunnel to the next, so all ASes through which
   the tunnel passes must support that technology. In essence, AS
   boundaries are of no significance to a non-segmented inter-AS P2MP
   tunnel.

   This model requires no VPLS A-D routes in the control plane or VPLS
   MAC address learning in the data plane on the ASBRs. The ASBRs only
   need to participate in the non-segmented P2MP tunnel setup in the
   control plane, and do MPLS label forwarding in the data plane.

   The setup of non-segmented inter-AS P2MP tunnels MAY require the P-
   routers in one AS to have IP reachability to the loopback addresses
   of the PE routers in another AS, depending on the tunneling



Raggarwa, Kamite & Fang                                        [Page 25]


Internet Draft     draft-ietf-l2vpn-vpls-mcast-11.txt          July 2012


   technology chosen. If this is the case, reachability to the loopback
   addresses of PE routers in one AS MUST be present in the IGP in
   another AS.

   The data forwarding in this model is the same as in the intra-AS case
   described in section 8.


11. Optimizing Multicast Distribution via Selective Trees

   Whenever a particular multicast stream is being sent on an Inclusive
   P-Multicast tree, it is likely that the data of that stream is being
   sent to PEs that do not require it as the sites connected to these
   PEs may have no receivers for the stream. If a particular stream has
   a significant amount of traffic, it may be beneficial to move it to a
   Selective P-Multicast tree which has at its leaves only those PEs,
   connected to sites that have receivers for the multicast stream (or
   at least includes fewer PEs that are attached to sites with no
   receivers compared to an Inclusive tree).

   A PE connected to the multicast source of a particular multicast
   stream may be performing explicit tracking - i.e., it may know the
   PEs that have receivers in the multicast stream. Section 11.3
   describes procedures that enable explicit tracking. If this is the
   case Selective P-Multicast trees can also be triggered on other
   criteria. For instance there could be a "pseudo wasted bandwidth"
   criteria: switching to a Selective tree would be done if the
   bandwidth multiplied by the number of "uninterested" PEs (PEs that
   are receiving the stream but have no receivers) is above a specified
   threshold.  The motivation is that (a) the total bandwidth wasted by
   many sparsely subscribed low-bandwidth groups may be large, and (b)
   there's no point to moving a high-bandwidth group to a Selective tree
   if all the PEs have receivers for it.

   Switching a (C-S, C-G) stream to a Selective P-Multicast tree may
   require the root of the tree to determine the egress PEs that need to
   receive the (C-S, C-G) traffic. This is true in the following cases:

     + If the tunnel is a P2MP tree, such as a RSVP-TE P2MP Tunnel, the
       PE needs to know the leaves of the tree before it can instantiate
       the Selective tree.

     + If a PE decides to send traffic for multicast streams, belonging
       to different VPLSes, using one P-Multicast Selective tree, such a
       tree is termed an Aggregate tree with a selective mapping. The
       setting up of such an Aggregate tree requires the ingress PE to
       know all the other PEs that have receivers for multicast groups
       that are mapped onto the tree.



Raggarwa, Kamite & Fang                                        [Page 26]


Internet Draft     draft-ietf-l2vpn-vpls-mcast-11.txt          July 2012


     + If ingress replication is used and the ingress PE wants to send
       traffic for (C-S, C-G)s to only those PEs that are on the path to
       receivers to the (C-S,C-G)s.


   For discovering the IP multicast group membership, for the above
   cases, this document describes procedures that allow an ingress PE to
   enable explicit tracking. Thus an ingress PE can request the IP
   multicast membership from egress PEs for one or more C-multicast
   streams. These procedures are described in section 11.3.

   The root of the Selective P-Multicast tree MAY decide to do explicit
   tracking of the IP multicast stream only after it has determined to
   move the stream to a Selective tree, or it MAY have been doing
   explicit tracking all along.  This document also describes explicit
   tracking for a wildcard source and/or group in section 11.3, which
   facilitates a Selective P-Multicast tree only mode in which IP
   multicast streams are always carried on a Selective P-Multicast tree.
   In the description on Selective P-Multicast trees the notation C-S,
   is intended to represent either a specific source address or a
   wildcard. Similarly C-G is intended to represent either a specific
   group address or a wildcard.

   The PE at the root of the tree MUST signal the leaves of the tree
   that the (C-S, C-G) stream is now bound to the Selective Tree. Note
   that the PE could create the identity of the P-Multicast tree prior
   to the actual instantiation of the tunnel.

   If the Selective tree is instantiated by a RSVP-TE P2MP LSP the PE at
   the root of the tree MUST establish the P2MP RSVP-TE LSP to the
   leaves. This LSP MAY have been established before the leaves receive
   the Selective tree binding, or MAY be established after the leaves
   receive the binding. A leaf MUST not switch to the Selective tree
   until it receives the binding and the RSVP-TE P2MP LSP is setup to
   the leaf.


11.1. Protocol for Switching to Selective Trees

   Selective trees provide a PE the ability to create separate P-
   Multicast trees for certain <C-S, C-G> streams. The source PE, that
   originates the Selective tree, and the egress PEs, MUST use the
   Selective tree for the <C-S, C-G> streams that are mapped to it. This
   may require the source and egress PEs to switch to the Selective tree
   from an Inclusive tree if they were already using an Inclusive tree
   for the <C-S, C-G> streams mapped to the Selective tree.

   Once a source PE decides to setup a Selective tree, it MUST announce



Raggarwa, Kamite & Fang                                        [Page 27]


Internet Draft     draft-ietf-l2vpn-vpls-mcast-11.txt          July 2012


   the mapping of the <C-S, C-G> streams (which may be in different
   VPLSes) that are mapped to the tree to the other PEs using BGP. After
   the egress PEs receive the announcement they setup their forwarding
   path to receive traffic on the Selective tree if they have one or
   more receivers interested in the <C-S, C-G> streams mapped to the
   tree. Setting up the forwarding path requires setting up the
   demultiplexing forwarding entries based on the top MPLS label (if
   there is no inner label) or the inner label (if present) as described
   in section 9. The egress PEs MAY perform this switch to the Selective
   tree once the advertisement from the ingress PE is received or wait
   for a preconfigured timer to do so, after receiving the
   advertisement, when the P2MP LSP protocol is mLDP.  When the P2MP LSP
   protocol is P2MP RSVP-TE an egress PE MUST perform this switch to the
   Selective tree only after the advertisement from the ingress PE is
   received and the RSVP-TE P2MP LSP has been setup to the egress PE.
   This switch MAY be done after waiting for a preconfigured timer after
   these two steps have been accomplished.

   A source PE MUST use the following approach to decide when to start
   transmitting data on the Selective tree, if it was already using an
   Inclusive tree. A certain pre-configured delay after advertising the
   <C-S, C-G> streams mapped to an Selective tree, the source PE begins
   to send traffic on the Selective tree. At this point it stops to send
   traffic for the <C-S, C-G> streams, that are mapped on the Selective
   tree, on the Inclusive tree. This traffic is instead transmitted on
   the Selective tree.


11.2. Advertising (C-S, C-G) Binding to a Selective Tree

   The ingress PE informs all the PEs that are on the path to receivers
   of the (C-S, C-G) of the binding of the Selective tree to the (C-S,
   C-G), using BGP. The BGP announcement is done by sending update for
   the MCAST-VPLS address family using what is referred to as the S-PMSI
   A-D route. The format of the NLRI is described in section 12.1. The
   NLRI MUST be constructed as follows:

     +  The RD MUST be set to the RD configured locally for the VPLS.
       This is required to uniquely identify the <C-S, C-G> as the
       addresses could overlap between different VPLSes.  This MUST be
       the same RD value used in the VPLS auto-discovery process.

     +  The Multicast Source field MUST contain the source address
       associated with the C-multicast stream, and the Multicast Source
       Length field is set appropriately to reflect this. If the source
       address is a wildcard the source address is set to 0.





Raggarwa, Kamite & Fang                                        [Page 28]


Internet Draft     draft-ietf-l2vpn-vpls-mcast-11.txt          July 2012


     +  The Multicast Group field MUST contain the group address
       associated with the C-multicast stream, and the Multicast Group
       Length field is set appropriately to reflect this. If the group
       address is a wildcard the group address is set to 0.

     + The Originating Router's IP Address field MUST be set to the IP
       address that the (local) PE places in the BGP next-hop of the
       BGP-VPLS A-D routes. Note that the <RD, Originating Router's IP
       address> tuple uniquely identifies a given VPLS instance on a PE.


   The PE constructs the rest of the Selective A-D route as follows.

   Depending on the type of a P-Multicast tree used for the P-tunnel,
   the PMSI tunnel attribute of the S-PMSI A-D route is constructed as
   follows:

     +  The PMSI tunnel attribute MUST contain the identity of the P-
       Multicast tree (note that the PE could create the identity of the
       tree prior to the actual instantiation of the tree).

     +  If in order to establish the P-Multicast tree the PE needs to
       know the leaves of the tree within its own AS, then the PE
       obtains this information from the leaf A-D routes received from
       other PEs/ASBRs within its own AS (as other PEs/ASBRs originate
       leaf A-D routes in response to receiving the S-PMSI A-D route) by
       setting the Leaf Information Required flag in the PMSI Tunnel
       attribute to 1. This enables explicit tracking for the multicast
       stream(s) advertised by the S-PMSI A-D route.

     +  If a PE originates S-PMSI A-D routes with the Leaf Information
       Required flag in the PMSI Tunnel attribute set to 1, then the PE
       MUST be (auto)configured with an import Route Target, which
       controls acceptance of leaf A-D routes by the PE. (Procedures for
       originating leaf A-D routes by the PEs that receive the S-PMSI A-
       D route are described in section "Receiving S-PMSI A-D routes by
       PEs.")

       This Route Target is IP address specific. The Global
       Administrator field of this Route Target MUST be set to the IP
       address carried in the Next Hop of all the S-PMSI A-D routes
       advertised by this PE (if the PE uses different Next Hops, then
       the PE MUST be (auto)configured with multiple import RTs, one per
       each such Next Hop). The Local Administrator field of this Route
       Target MUST be set to 0.

       If the PE supports Route Target Constrain [RFC4684], the PE
       SHOULD advertise this import Route Target within its own AS using



Raggarwa, Kamite & Fang                                        [Page 29]


Internet Draft     draft-ietf-l2vpn-vpls-mcast-11.txt          July 2012


       Route Target Constrains. To constrain distribution of the Route
       Target Constrain routes to the AS of the advertising PE these
       routes SHOULD carry the NO_EXPORT Community ([RFC1997]).

     +  A PE MAY aggregate two or more S-PMSIs originated by the PE onto
       the same P-Multicast tree. If the PE already advertises S-PMSI A-
       D routes for these S-PMSIs, then aggregation requires the PE to
       re-advertise these routes. The re-advertised routes MUST be the
       same as the original ones, except for the PMSI tunnel attribute.
       If the PE has not previously advertised S-PMSI A-D routes for
       these S-PMSIs, then the aggregation requires the PE to advertise
       (new) S-PMSI A-D routes for these S-PMSIs.  The PMSI Tunnel
       attribute in the newly advertised/re-advertised routes MUST carry
       the identity of the P-Multicast tree that aggregates the S-PMSIs.
       If at least some of the S-PMSIs aggregated onto the same P-
       Multicast tree belong to different VPLSes, then all these routes
       MUST carry an MPLS upstream assigned label [RFC5331].  If all
       these aggregated S-PMSIs belong to the same VPLS, then the routes
       MAY carry an MPLS upstream assigned label [RFC5331].  The labels
       MUST be distinct on a per VPLS basis, and MAY be distinct on a
       per route basis.


   The Next Hop field of the MP_REACH_NLRI attribute of the route SHOULD
   be set to the same IP address as the one carried in the Originating
   Router's IP Address field.

   By default the set of Route Targets carried by the route MUST be the
   same as the Route Targets carried in the BGP-VPLS A-D route
   originated from the VSI. The default could be modified via
   configuration.



11.3. Receiving S-PMSI A-D routes by PEs

   Consider a PE that receives an S-PMSI A-D route. If one or more of
   the VSIs on the PE have their import Route Targets that contain one
   or more of the Route Targets carried by the received S-PMSI A-D
   route, then for each such VSI the PE performs the following.

   Procedures for receiving an S-PMSI A-D route by a PE (both within and
   outside of the AS of the PE that originates the route) are the same
   as specified in Section "Inter-AS A-D route received via IBGP" except
   that (a) instead of Inter-AS A-D routes the procedures apply to S-
   PMSI A-D routes, and (b) the rules for determining whether the
   received S-PMSI A-D route is the best route to the destination
   carried in the NLRI of the route, are the same as BGP path selection



Raggarwa, Kamite & Fang                                        [Page 30]


Internet Draft     draft-ietf-l2vpn-vpls-mcast-11.txt          July 2012


   rules and may be modified by policy, and (c) a PE performs procedures
   specified in that section only if in addition to the criteria
   specified in that section the following is true:

     +  If as a result of multicast state snooping on the PE-CE
       interfaces, the PE has snooped state for at least one multicast
       join that matches the multicast source and group advertised in
       the S-PMSI A-D route. Further if the oifs (outgoing interfaces)
       for this state contains one or more interfaces to the locally
       attached CEs. When the multicast signaling protocol among the CEs
       is IGMP, then snooping and associated procedures are defined in
       [RFC4541]. The snooped state is determined using these
       procedures. When the multicast signaling protocol among the CEs
       is PIM, the procedures in [RFC4541] are not sufficient to
       determine the snooped state. The additional details required to
       determine the snooped state when CE-CE protocol is PIM are for
       further study. When such procedures are defined it is expected
       that the procedures in this section will apply to the snooped
       state created as a result of PIM as PE-CE protocol.


   The snooped state is said to "match" the S-PMSI A-D route if any of
   the following is true:

     +  The S-PMSI A-D route carries (C-S, C-G) and the snooped state is
       for (C-S, C-G) or for (C-*, C-G), OR

     +  The S-PMSI A-D route carries (C-*, C-G) and (a) the snooped
       state is for (C-*, C-G) OR (b) the snooped state is for at least
       one multicast join with the multicast group address equal to C-G
       and there doesn't exist another S-PMSI A-D route that carries (C-
       S, C-G) where C-S is the source address of the snooped state.

     +  The S-PMSI A-D route carries (C-S, C-*) and (a) the snooped
       state is for at least one multicast join with the multicast
       source address equal to C-S, and (b) there doesn't exist another
       S-PMSI A-D route that carries (C-S, C-G) where C-G is the group
       address of the snooped state.

     +  The S-PMSI A-D route carries (C-*, C-*) and there is no other S-
       PMSI A-D route that matches the snooped state as per the above
       conditions.


   Note if the above conditions are true, and if the received S-PMSI A-D
   route has a PMSI Tunnel attribute with the Leaf Information Required
   flag set to 1, then the PE originates a leaf A-D route, constructed
   as follows:



Raggarwa, Kamite & Fang                                        [Page 31]


Internet Draft     draft-ietf-l2vpn-vpls-mcast-11.txt          July 2012


     +  The route carries a single MCAST-VPN NLRI with the Route Key
       field set to the MCAST-VPN NLRI of the received S-PMSI A-D route.

     +  The Originating Router's IP address set to the IP address of the
       PE (this MUST be a routable IP address).

     +  The PE constructs an IP-based Route Target Extended Community by
       placing the IP address carried in the Next Hop of the received S-
       PMSI A-D route in the Global Administrator field of the
       Community, with the Local Administrator field of this Community
       set to 0 and setting the Extended Communities attribute of the
       leaf A-D route to that Community.

     +  The Next Hop field of the MP_REACH_NLRI attribute of the route
       MUST be set to the same IP address as the one carried in the
       Originating Router's IP Address field of the route.

     +  To constrain the distribution scope of this route, the route
       MUST carry the NO_EXPORT Community [RFC1997], except for the
       inter-AS scenario with option (c).

   Once the leaf A-D route is constructed, the PE advertises this route
   into IBGP.

   In addition to the procedures specified in Section "Inter-AS A-D
   route received via IBGP" the PE MUST set up its forwarding path to
   receive traffic, for each multicast stream in the matching snooped
   state, from the tunnel advertised by the S-PMSI A-D route (the PE
   MUST switch to the Selective tree).

   When a new snooped state is created by a PE then the PE MUST first
   determine if there is a S-PMSI route that matches the snooped state
   as per the conditions described above. If such a S-PMSI route is
   found then the PE MUST follow the procedures described in this
   section, for that particular S-PMSI route.


11.4. Inter-AS Selective Tree

   Inter-AS Selective trees support all three options of inter-AS VPLS
   service, option (a), (b) and (c), that are supported by Inter-AS
   Inclusive trees.  They are constructed in a manner that is very
   similar to Inter-AS Inclusive trees.

   For option (a) and option (b) support inter-AS Selective trees are
   constructed without requiring a single P-Multicast tree to span
   multiple ASes. This allows individual ASes to potentially use
   different P-tunneling technologies. There are two variants of this.



Raggarwa, Kamite & Fang                                        [Page 32]


Internet Draft     draft-ietf-l2vpn-vpls-mcast-11.txt          July 2012


   One that requires MAC and IP multicast lookup on the ASBRs and
   another that does not require MAC/IP multicast lookup on the ASBRs
   and instead builds segmented inter-AS Selective trees.

   Segmented Inter-AS Selective trees can also be used with option (c),
   unlike Segmented Inter-AS Inclusive trees. This is because the S-PMSI
   A-D routes can be exchanged via ASBRs (even though BGP VPLS A-D
   routes are not exchanged via ASBRs).

   In the case of Option (c) an Inter-AS Selective tree may also be a
   non-segmented P-Multicast tree that spans multiple ASes.


11.4.1. VSIs on the ASBRs

   The requirements on ASBRs, when VSIs are present on the ABSRs,
   include the requirements presented in section 10. The source ASBR
   (that receives traffic from another AS) may independently decide
   whether it wishes to use Selective trees or not. If it uses Selective
   trees the source ASBR MUST perform a MAC lookup to determine the
   Selective tree to forward the VPLS packet on.


11.4.1.1. VPLS Inter-AS Selective Tree A-D Binding

   The mechanisms for propagating S-PMSI A-D routes are the same as the
   intra-AS case described in section 12.2. The BGP Selective tree A-D
   routes generated by PEs in an AS MUST NOT be propagated outside the
   AS.


11.4.2. Inter-AS Segmented Selective Trees

   Inter-AS Segmented Selective trees MUST be used when option (b) is
   used to provide the inter-AS VPLS service. They MAY be used when
   option (c) is used to provide the inter-AS VPLS service.

   A Segmented inter-AS Selective Tunnel is constructed similar to an
   inter-AS Segmented Inclusive Tunnel. Namely, such a tunnel is
   constructed as a concatenation of tunnel segments. There are two
   types of tunnel segments: an intra-AS tunnel segment (a segment that
   spans ASBRs within the same AS), and inter-AS tunnel segment (a
   segment that spans adjacent ASBRs in adjacent ASes). ASes that are
   spanned by a tunnel are not required to use the same tunneling
   mechanism to construct the tunnel - each AS may pick up a tunneling
   mechanism to construct the intra-AS tunnel segment of the tunnel, in
   its AS.




Raggarwa, Kamite & Fang                                        [Page 33]


Internet Draft     draft-ietf-l2vpn-vpls-mcast-11.txt          July 2012


   The PE that decides to set up a Selective tree, advertises the
   Selective tree to multicast stream binding using an S-PMSI A-D route
   as per procedures in section 11.2, to the routers in its own AS.

   An S-PMSI A-D route advertised outside the AS, to which the
   originating PE belongs, will be referred to as an inter-AS Selective
   Tree A-D route (although this route is originated by a PE as an
   intra-AS route it is referred to as an inter-AS route outside the
   AS).



11.4.2.1. Handling S-PMSI A-D routes by ASBRs

   Procedures for handling an S-PMSI A-D route by ASBRs (both within and
   outside of the AS of the PE that originates the route) are the same
   as specified in Section "Propagating VPLS BGP A-D routes to other
   ASes", except that instead of Inter-AS BGP-VPLS A-D routes and the
   BGP-VPLS A-D NLRI these procedures apply to S-PMSI A-D routes and the
   S-PMSI A-D NLRI.

   In addition to these procedures an ASBR advertises a leaf A-D route
   in response to an S-PMSI A-D route only if:

     +  The S-PMSI A-D route was received via EBGP from another ASBR and
       the ASBR merges the S-PMSI A-D route into an Inter-AS BGP VPLS A-
       D route as described in the next section. OR

     +  The ASBR receives a leaf A-D route from a downstream PE or ASBR
       in response to the S-PMSI A-D route, received from an upstream PE
       or ASBR, that the ASBR propagated inter-AS to downstream ASBRs
       and PEs.

     +  The ASBR has snooped state from local CEs that matches the NLRI
       carried in the S-PMSI A-D route as per the following rules:

       i) The NLRI encodes (C-S, C-G) which is the same as the snooped
       (C-S, C-G)

       ii) The NLRI encodes (*, C-G) and there is snooped state for at
       least one (C-S, C-G) and there is no other matching S-PMSI A-D
       route for (C-S, C-G) OR there is snooped state for (*, C-G)

       iii) The NLRI encodes (*, *) and there is snooped state for at
       least one (C-S, C-G) or (*, C-G) and there is no other matching
       S-PMSI A-D route for that (C-S, C-G) or (*, C-G) respecively.





Raggarwa, Kamite & Fang                                        [Page 34]


Internet Draft     draft-ietf-l2vpn-vpls-mcast-11.txt          July 2012


   The C-multicast data traffic is sent on the Selective tree by the
   originating PE. When it reaches an ASBR that is on the Inter-AS
   segmented tree, it is delivered to local receivers, if any. It is
   then forwarded on any inter-AS or intra-AS segments that exist on the
   Inter-AS Selective Segmented tree. If the Inter-AS Segmented
   Selective Tree is merged onto an Inclusive tree, as described in the
   next section, the data traffic is forwarded onto the Inclusive tree.



11.4.2.1.1. Merging Selective Tree into an Inclusive Tree

   Consider the situation where:

     +  An ASBR is receiving (or expecting to receive) inter-AS (C-S, C-
       G) data from upstream via a Selective tree.

     +  The ASBR is sending (or expecting to send) the inter-AS (C-S, C-
       G) data downstream via an Inclusive tree.


   This situation may arise if the upstream providers have a policy of
   using Selective trees but the downstream providers have a policy of
   using Inclusive trees. To support this situation, an ASBR  MAY, under
   certain conditions, merge one or more upstream Selective trees into a
   downstream Inclusive tree. Note that this can be the case only for
   option (b) and not for option (c) as for option (c) the ASBRs do not
   have Inclusive tree state.

   A Selective tree (corresponding to a particular S-PMSI A-D route) MAY
   be merged by a particular ASBR into an Inclusive tree (corresponding
   to a particular Inter-AS BGP VPLS A-D route) if and only if the
   following conditions all hold:

     +  The S-PMSI A-D route and the Inter-AS BGP VPLS A-D route
       originate in the same AS. The Inter-AS BGP VPLS A-D route carries
       the originating AS in the AS_PATH attribute of the route. The S-
       PMSI A-D route carries the originating AS in the AS_PATH
       attribute of the route.

     +  The S-PMSI A-D route and the Inter-AS BGP VPLS A-D route have
       exactly the same set of RTs.


   An ASBR performs merging by stitching the tail end of the P-tunnel,
   as specified in the PMSI Tunnel attribute of the S-PMSI A-D route
   received by the ASBR, to the head of the P-tunnel, as specified in
   the PMSI Tunnel attribute of the Inter-AS BGP VPLS A-D route re-



Raggarwa, Kamite & Fang                                        [Page 35]


Internet Draft     draft-ietf-l2vpn-vpls-mcast-11.txt          July 2012


   advertised by the ASBR.

   An ASBR that merges an S-PMSI A-D route into an Inter-AS BGP VPLS A-D
   route MUST NOT re-advertise the S-PMSI A-D route.


11.4.3. Inter-AS Non-Segmented Selective trees

   Inter-AS Non-segmented Selective trees MAY be used in the case of
   option (c).

   In this method, there is a multi-hop EBGP peering between the PEs (or
   a Route Reflector) in one AS and the PEs (or Route Reflector) in
   another AS. The PEs exchange BGP Selective tree A-D routes, along
   with PMSI Tunnel attribute, as in the intra-AS case described in
   section 10.3.

   The PEs in different ASes use a non-segmented Selective inter-AS P2MP
   tunnel for VPLS multicast.

   This method requires no VPLS information (in either the control or
   the data plane) on the ASBRs. The ASBRs only need to participate in
   the non-segmented P2MP tunnel setup in the control plane, and do MPLS
   label forwarding in the data plane.

   The data forwarding in this model is the same as in the intra-AS case
   described in section 9.


12. BGP Extensions

   This section describes the encoding of the BGP extensions required by
   this document.


12.1. Inclusive Tree/Selective Tree Identifier

   Inclusive P-Multicast tree and Selective P-Multicast tree
   advertisements carry the P-Multicast tree identifier.

   This document reuses the BGP attribute, called PMSI Tunnel attribute
   that is defined in [RFC6514].

   This document supports only the following Tunnel Types when PMSI
   Tunnel attribute is carried in VPLS A-D or VPLS S-PMSI A-D routes:






Raggarwa, Kamite & Fang                                        [Page 36]


Internet Draft     draft-ietf-l2vpn-vpls-mcast-11.txt          July 2012


     + 0 - No tunnel information present
     + 1 - RSVP-TE P2MP LSP
     + 2 - LDP P2MP LSP
     + 6 - Ingress Replication



12.2. MCAST-VPLS NLRI

   This document defines a new BGP NLRI, called the MCAST-VPLS NLRI.

   Following is the format of the MCAST-VPLS NLRI:

                +-----------------------------------+
                |    Route Type (1 octet)           |
                +-----------------------------------+
                |     Length (1 octet)              |
                +-----------------------------------+
                | Route Type specific (variable)    |
                +-----------------------------------+


   The Route Type field defines encoding of the rest of MCAST-VPLS NLRI
   (Route Type specific MCAST-VPLS NLRI).

   The Length field indicates the length in octets of the Route Type
   specific field of MCAST-VPLS NLRI.

   This document defines the following Route Types for A-D routes:
     + 3 - Selective Tree A-D route;
     + 4 - Leaf A-D route.

   The MCAST-VPLS NLRI is carried in BGP using BGP Multiprotocol
   Extensions [RFC4760] with an AFI of 25 (L2VPN AFI), and an SAFI of
   MCAST-VPLS [To be assigned by IANA]. The NLRI field in the
   MP_REACH_NLRI/MP_UNREACH_NLRI attribute contains the MCAST-VPLS NLRI
   (encoded as specified above).

   In order for two BGP speakers to exchange labeled MCAST-VPLS NLRI,
   they must use BGP Capabilities Advertisement to ensure that they both
   are capable of properly processing such NLRI. This is done as
   specified in [RFC4760], by using capability code 1 (multiprotocol
   BGP) with an AFI of 25 and an SAFI of MCAST-VPLS.

   The following describes the format of the Route Type specific MCAST-
   VPLS NLRI for various Route Types defined in this document.





Raggarwa, Kamite & Fang                                        [Page 37]


Internet Draft     draft-ietf-l2vpn-vpls-mcast-11.txt          July 2012


12.2.1. S-PMSI A-D route

   An S-PMSI A-D route type specific MCAST-VPLS NLRI consists of the
   following:

                +-----------------------------------+
                |      RD   (8 octets)              |
                +-----------------------------------+
                | Multicast Source Length (1 octet) |
                +-----------------------------------+
                |  Multicast Source (Variable)      |
                +-----------------------------------+
                |  Multicast Group Length (1 octet) |
                +-----------------------------------+
                |  Multicast Group   (Variable)     |
                +-----------------------------------+
                |   Originating Router's IP Addr    |
                +-----------------------------------+

   The RD is encoded as described in [RFC4364].

   The Multicast Source field contains the C-S address i.e the address
   of the multicast source. If the Multicast Source field contains an
   IPv4 address, then the value of the Multicast Source Length field is
   32.  If the Multicast Source field contains an IPv6 address, then the
   value of the Multicast Source Length field is 128. The value of the
   Multicast Source Length field may be set to 0 to indicate a wildcard.

   The Multicast Group field contains the C-G address i.e. the address
   of the multicast group. If the Multicast Group field contains an IPv4
   address, then the value of the Multicast Group Length field is 32.
   If the Multicast Group field contains an IPv6 address, then the value
   of the Multicast Group Length field is 128. The Multicast Group
   Length field may be set to 0 to indicate a wildcard.

   Whether the Originating Router's IP Address field carries an IPv4 or
   IPv6 address is determined from the value of the Length field of the
   MCAST-VPLS NLRI. If the Multicast Source field contains an IPv4
   address and the Multicast Group field contains an IPv4 address,  then
   the value of the Length field is 22 bytes if the Originating Router's
   IP address carries an IPv4 address and 34 bytes if it is an IPv6
   address.  If the Multicast Source and Multicast Group fields contain
   IPv6 addresses, then the value of the Length field is 46 bytes if the
   Originating Router's IP address carries an IPv4 address and 58 bytes
   if it is an IPv6 address.  The following table summarizes the above.


      Multicast   Multicast                Originating Router's   Length



Raggarwa, Kamite & Fang                                        [Page 38]


Internet Draft     draft-ietf-l2vpn-vpls-mcast-11.txt          July 2012


      Source      Group                       IP Address

        IPv4      IPv4                        IPv4                  22
        IPv4      IPv4                        IPv6                  34
        IPv6      IPv6                        IPv4                  46
        IPv6      IPv6                        IPv6                  58

   Usage of Selective Tree A-D routes is described in Section
   11.


12.2.2. Leaf A-D route

   A leaf A-D route type specific MCAST-VPLS NLRI consists of the
   following:

                +-----------------------------------+
                |      Route Key (variable)         |
                +-----------------------------------+
                |   Originating Router's IP Addr    |
                +-----------------------------------+

   Whether the Originating Router's IP Address field carries an IPv4 or
   IPv6 address is determined from the Length field of the MCAST-VPLS
   NLRI and the length of the Route Key field. From these two length
   fields one can compute the length of the Originating Router's IP
   Address. If this computed length is 4 then the address is an IPv4
   address and if its 16 then the address is an IPv6 address.

   Usage of leaf A-D routes is described in sections "Inter-AS Inclusive
   P-Multicast tree A-D/Binding" and "Optimizing Multicast Distribution
   via Selective trees".


13. Aggregation Considerations

   In general the heuristic used to decide which VPLS instances or (C-S,
   C-G) entries to aggregate is implementation dependent. It is also
   conceivable that offline tools can be used for this purpose. This
   section discusses some tradeoffs with respect to aggregation.

   The "congruency" of aggregation is defined by the amount of overlap
   in the leaves of the client trees that are aggregated on an SP tree.
   For Aggregate Inclusive trees the congruency depends on the overlap
   in the membership of the VPLSes that are aggregated on the Aggregate
   Inclusive tree. If there is complete overlap aggregation is perfectly
   congruent. As the overlap between the VPLSes that are aggregated
   reduces, the congruency reduces.



Raggarwa, Kamite & Fang                                        [Page 39]


Internet Draft     draft-ietf-l2vpn-vpls-mcast-11.txt          July 2012


   If aggregation is done such that it is not perfectly congruent a PE
   may receive traffic for VPLSes to which it doesn't belong. As the
   amount of multicast traffic in these unwanted VPLSes increases
   aggregation becomes less optimal with respect to delivered traffic.
   Hence there is a tradeoff between reducing multicast state in the
   core and delivering unwanted traffic.

   An implementation should provide knobs to control the congruency of
   aggregation. This will allow an SP to deploy aggregation depending on
   the VPLS membership and traffic profiles in its network.  If
   different PEs or shared roots are setting up Aggregate Inclusive
   trees this will also allow an SP to engineer the maximum amount of
   unwanted VPLSes that a particular PE may receive traffic for.

   The state/bandwidth optimality trade-off can be further improved by
   having a versatile many-to-many association between client trees and
   provider trees. Thus a VPLS can be mapped to multiple Aggregate
   trees. The mechanisms for achieving this are for further study. Also
   it may be possible to use both ingress replication and an Aggregate
   tree for a particular VPLS. Mechanisms for achieving this are also
   for further study.


14. Data Forwarding

14.1. MPLS Tree Encapsulation

14.1.1. Mapping multiple VPLS instances to a P2MP LSP

   The following diagram shows the progression of the VPLS multicast
   packet as it enters and leaves the SP network when MPLS trees are
   being used for multiple VPLS instances. RSVP-TE P2MP LSPs are
   examples of such trees.


      Packets received        Packets in transit      Packets forwarded
      at ingress PE           in the service          by egress PEs
                              provider network



                              +---------------+
                              |MPLS Tree Label|
                              +---------------+
                              | VPLS Label    |
      ++=============++       ++=============++       ++=============++
      ||C-Ether Hdr  ||       || C-Ether Hdr ||       || C-Ether Hdr ||
      ++=============++ >>>>> ++=============++ >>>>> ++=============++



Raggarwa, Kamite & Fang                                        [Page 40]


Internet Draft     draft-ietf-l2vpn-vpls-mcast-11.txt          July 2012


      || C-IP Header ||       || C-IP Header ||       || C-IP Header ||
      ++=============++ >>>>> ++=============++ >>>>> ++=============++
      || C-Payload   ||       || C-Payload   ||       || C-Payload   ||
      ++=============++       ++=============++       ++=============++


   The receiver PE does a lookup on the outer MPLS tree label and
   determines the MPLS forwarding table in which to lookup the inner
   MPLS label. This table is specific to the tree label space. The inner
   label is unique within the context of the root of the tree (as it is
   assigned by the root of the tree, without any coordination with any
   other nodes). Thus it is not unique across multiple roots.  So, to
   unambiguously identify a particular VPLS one has to know the label,
   and the context within which that label is unique. The context is
   provided by the outer MPLS label [RFC5331].

   The outer MPLS label is stripped. The lookup of the resulting MPLS
   label determines the VSI in which the receiver PE needs to do the C-
   multicast data packet lookup. It then strips the inner MPLS label and
   sends the packet to the VSI for multicast data forwarding.


14.1.2. Mapping one VPLS instance to a P2MP LSP

   The following diagram shows the progression of the VPLS multicast
   packet as it enters and leaves the SP network when a given MPLS tree
   is being used for a single VPLS instance. RSVP-TE P2MP LSPs are
   examples of such trees.


      Packets received        Packets in transit      Packets forwarded
      at ingress PE           in the service          by egress PEs
                              provider network



                              +---------------+
                              |MPLS Tree Label|
      ++=============++       ++=============++       ++=============++
      ||C-Ether Hdr  ||       || C-Ether Hdr ||       || C-Ether Hdr ||
      ++=============++ >>>>> ++=============++ >>>>> ++=============++
      || C-IP Header ||       || C-IP Header ||       || C-IP Header ||
      ++=============++ >>>>> ++=============++ >>>>> ++=============++
      || C-Payload   ||       || C-Payload   ||       || C-Payload   ||
      ++=============++       ++=============++       ++=============++


   The receiver PE does a lookup on the outer MPLS tree label and



Raggarwa, Kamite & Fang                                        [Page 41]


Internet Draft     draft-ietf-l2vpn-vpls-mcast-11.txt          July 2012


   determines the VSI in which the receiver PE needs to do the C-
   multicast data packet lookup. It then strips the inner MPLS label and
   sends the packet to the VSI for multicast data forwarding.



15. VPLS Data Packet Treatment

   If the destination MAC address of a VPLS packet received by a PE from
   a VPLS site is a multicast address, a P-Multicast tree SHOULD be used
   to transport the packet, if possible. If the packet is an IP
   multicast packet and a Selective tree exists for that multicast
   stream, the Selective tree MUST be used. Else if a (C-*, C-*)
   Selective tree exists for the VPLS it SHOULD be used. Else if an
   Inclusive tree exists for the VPLS, it SHOULD be used.

   If the destination MAC address of a VPLS packet is a broadcast
   address, it is flooded. If a (C-*, C-*) Selective tree exists for the
   VPLS the PE SHOULD flood over it. Else if Inclusive tree exists for
   the VPLS the PE SHOULD flood over it.  Else the PE MUST flood over
   multiple PWs, based on [RFC4761] or [RFC4762].

   If the destination MAC address of a packet is a unicast address and
   it has not been learned, the packet MUST be sent to all PEs in the
   VPLS.  Inclusive P-Multicast trees or a Selective P-Multicast tree
   bound to (C-*, C-*) SHOULD be used for sending unknown unicast MAC
   packets to all PEs. When this is the case the receiving PEs MUST
   support the ability to perform MAC address learning for packets
   received on a multicast tree. In order to perform such learning, the
   receiver PE MUST be able to determine the sender PE when a VPLS
   packet is received on a P-Multicast tree.  This further implies that
   the MPLS P-Multicast tree technology MUST allow the egress PE to
   determine the sender PE from the received MPLS packet.

   When a receiver PE receives a VPLS packet with a source MAC address,
   that has not yet been learned, on a P-Multicast tree, the receiver PE
   determines the PW to the sender PE. The receiver PE then creates
   forwarding state in the VPLS instance with a destination MAC address
   being the same as the source MAC address being learned, and the PW
   being the PW to the sender PE.

   It should be noted that when a sender PE that is sending packets
   destined to an unknown unicast MAC address over a P-Multicast tree
   learns the PW to use for forwarding packets destined to this unicast
   MAC address, it might immediately switch to transport such packets
   over this particular PW. Since the packets were initially being
   forwarded using a P-Multicast tree, this could lead to packet
   reordering. This constraint should be taken into consideration if



Raggarwa, Kamite & Fang                                        [Page 42]


Internet Draft     draft-ietf-l2vpn-vpls-mcast-11.txt          July 2012


   unknown unicast frames are forwarded using a  P-Multicast tree,
   instead of multiple PWs based on [RFC4761] or [RFC4762].

   An implementation MUST support the ability to transport unknown
   unicast traffic over Inclusive P-Multicast trees. Further an
   implementation MUST support the ability to perform MAC address
   learning for packets received on a P-Multicast tree.


16. Security Considerations

   Security considerations discussed in [RFC4761] and [RFC4762] apply to
   this document. This section describes additional considerations.

   As mentioned in [RFC4761], there are two aspects to achieving data
   privacy in a VPLS: securing the control plane and protecting the
   forwarding path. Compromise of the control plane could result in a PE
   sending multicast data belonging to some VPLS to another VPLS, or
   black-holing VPLS multicast data, or even sending it to an
   eavesdropper; none of which are acceptable from a data privacy point
   of view. The mechanisms in this document use BGP for the control
   plane. Hence techniques such as in [RFC2385] help authenticate BGP
   messages, making it harder to spoof updates (which can be used to
   divert VPLS traffic to the wrong VPLS) or withdrawals (denial-of-
   service attacks).  In the multi-AS methods (b) and (c) described in
   Section 11, this also means protecting the inter-AS BGP sessions,
   between the ASBRs, the PEs, or the Route Reflectors.

   Note that [RFC2385] will not help in keeping MPLS labels, associated
   with P2MP LSPs or the upstream MPLS labels used for aggregation,
   private -- knowing the labels, one can eavesdrop on VPLS traffic.
   However, this requires access to the data path within a Service
   Provider network.

   One of the requirements for protecting the data plane is that the
   MPLS labels are accepted only from valid interfaces. This applies
   both to MPLS labels associated with P2MP LSPs and also applies to the
   upstream assigned MPLS labels. For a PE, valid interfaces comprise
   links from P routers. For an ASBR, valid interfaces comprise links
   from P routers and links from other ASBRs in ASes that have instances
   of a given VPLS. It is especially important in the case of multi-AS
   VPLSes that one accept VPLS packets only from valid interfaces.









Raggarwa, Kamite & Fang                                        [Page 43]


Internet Draft     draft-ietf-l2vpn-vpls-mcast-11.txt          July 2012


17. IANA Considerations

   This document defines a new NLRI, called MCAST-VPLS, to be carried in
   BGP using multiprotocol extensions. It requires assignment of a new
   SAFI. This is to be assigned by IANA.

   This document defines a BGP optional transitive attribute, called
   PMSI attribute. This is the same attribute as the one defined in
   [RFC6514] and the code point for this attribute has already been
   assigned by IANA as 22 [BGP-IANA]. Hence no further action is
   required from IANA regarding this attribute.


18. Acknowledgments

   Many thanks to Thomas Morin for his support of this work. We would
   also like to thank authors of [RFC6514] and [RFC6513] as the details
   of the inter-AS segmented tree procedures in this document have
   benefited from those in [RFC6514] and [RFC6513]. We would also like
   to thank Wim Henderickx for his comments.


19. Normative References

   [RFC2119] "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
   Levels.", Bradner, March 1997

   [RFC4761] K. Kompella, Y. Rekther, "Virtual Private LAN Service using
   BGP for Auto-Discovery and Signaling", January 2007.

   [RFC4762] M. Lasserre, V. Kompella, "Virtual Private LAN Services
   over MPLS Label Distribution Protocol (LDP) Signaling", January 2007.

   [RFC4760] T. Bates, et. al., "Multiprotocol Extensions for BGP-4",
   January 2007

   [RFC5331] R. Aggarwal, Y. Rekhter, E. Rosen, "MPLS Upstream Label
   Assignment and Context Specific Label Space", RFC 5331, August 2008

   [RFC6511]  Z. Ali, G. Swallow, R. Aggarwal, "Non PHP behavior and
   out-of-band mapping for RSVP-TE LSPs", RFC 6511, February 2012.










Raggarwa, Kamite & Fang                                        [Page 44]


Internet Draft     draft-ietf-l2vpn-vpls-mcast-11.txt          July 2012


20. Informative References

   [RFC6074] E. Rosen et. al., "Provisioning, Autodiscovery, and
   Signaling in L2VPNs", RFC 6074

   [RFC5332] T. Eckert, E. Rosen, R. Aggarwal, Y. Rekhter, "MPLS
   Multicast Encapsulations", RFC 5332, August 2008

   [RFC6513] E. Rosen, R. Aggarwal, "Multicast in MPLS/BGP IP VPNs", RFC
   6513, February 2012.

   [RFC6514] R. Aggarwal, E. Rosen, Y. Rekhter, T. Morin, "BGP Encodings
   for Multicast in MPLS/BGP IP VPNs". RFC 6514, February 2012.

   [RFC4875] R. Aggarwal et. al, "Extensions to RSVP-TE for Point to
   Multipoint TE LSPs", RFC 4857, May 2007.

   [RFC6388] I. Minei et. al, "Label Distribution Protocol Extensions
   for Point-to-Multipoint and Multipoint-to-Multipoint Label Switched
   Paths", RFC 6388, Nov. 2011.

   [RFC4364] "BGP MPLS VPNs", E. Rosen, Y.Rekhter, February 2006

   [RFC5501] Y. kamite, et. al., "Requirements for Multicast Support in
   Virtual Private LAN Services", RFC 5501, Jan. 2009.

   [RFC1997] R. Chandra, et. al., "BGP Communities Attribute", August
   1996

   [BGP-IANA] http://www.iana.org/assignments/bgp-parameters

   [RFC4684] P. Marques et. al., "Constrained Route Distribution for
   Border Gateway Protocol/MultiProtocol Label Switching (BGP/MPLS)
   Internet Protocol (IP) Virtual Private Networks (VPNs)", RFC 4684,
   November 2006

   [RFC2385] Heffernan, A., "Protection of BGP Sessions via the TCP MD5
   Signature Option", RFC 2385, August 1998.

   [RFC4447] L. Martini et. al., "Pseudowire Setup and Maintenance Using
   the Label Distribution Protocol (LDP)", RFC 4447 April 2006

   [MULTI-HOMING] K. Kompella et. al., "Multi-homing in BGP-based
   Virtual Private LAN Service", draft-kompella-l2vpn-vpls-
   multihoming-02.txt

   [RFC4541] M. Christensen et. al., "Considerations for Internet Group
   Management Protocol (IGMP) and Multicast Listener Discovery (MLD)



Raggarwa, Kamite & Fang                                        [Page 45]


Internet Draft     draft-ietf-l2vpn-vpls-mcast-11.txt          July 2012


   Snooping Switches", RFC 4541, May 2006

   [RFC4601] B. Fenner, et. al., "PIM-SM Protocol Specification", RFC
   4601



21. Author's Address

   Rahul Aggarwal

   998 Lucky Avenue
   Menlo Park, CA 94025
   USA
   Phone: +1-415-806-5527
   Email: raggarwa_1@yahoo.com

   Yuji Kamite
   NTT Communications Corporation
   Tokyo Opera City Tower
   3-20-2 Nishi Shinjuku, Shinjuku-ku,
   Tokyo 163-1421,
   Japan

   Email: y.kamite@ntt.com

   Luyuan Fang
   Cisco Systems
   111 Wood Avenue South
   Iselin, NJ 08830
   USA

   Email: lufang@cisco.com

   Yakov Rekhter
   Juniper Networks
   1194 North Mathilda Ave.
   Sunnyvale, CA 94089
   USA

   Email: yakov@juniper.net

   Chaitanya Kodeboniya








Raggarwa, Kamite & Fang                                        [Page 46]


Internet Draft     draft-ietf-l2vpn-vpls-mcast-11.txt          July 2012





















































Raggarwa, Kamite & Fang                                        [Page 47]


