A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3462

        Title:      The Multipart/Report Content Type for the
                    Reporting of Mail System Administrative Messages
        Author(s):  G. Vaudreuil
        Status:     Standards Track
        Date:       Janaury 2003
        Mailbox:    GregV@ieee.org
        Pages:      7
        Characters: 12186
        Obsoletes:  1892

        I-D Tag:    draft-vaudreuil-1892bis-02.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3462.txt


The Multipart/Report Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions (MIME)
content-type is a general "family" or "container" type for electronic
mail reports of any kind.  Although this memo defines only the use of
the Multipart/Report content-type with respect to delivery status
reports, mail processing programs will benefit if a single
content-type is used to for all kinds of reports.

This document is part of a four document set describing the delivery
status report service.  This collection includes the Simple Mail
Transfer Protocol (SMTP) extensions to request delivery status
reports, a MIME content for the reporting of delivery reports, an
enumeration of extended status codes, and a multipart container for
the delivery report, the original message, and a human-friendly
summary of the failure.

This is now a Proposed Standard Protocol.

This document specifies an Internet standards track protocol for
the Internet community, and requests discussion and suggestions
for improvements.  Please refer to the current edition of the
"Internet Official Protocol Standards" (STD 1) for the
standardization state and status of this protocol.  Distribution
of this memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.

