A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3464

        Title:      An Extensible Message Format for Delivery Status
                    Notifications
        Author(s):  K. Moore, G. Vaudreuil
        Status:     Standards Track
        Date:       January 2003
        Mailbox:    moore@cs.utk.edu, GregV@ieee.org
        Pages:      40
        Characters: 83060
        Obsoletes:  1894

        I-D Tag:    draft-vaudreuil-1894bis-02.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3464.txt


This memo defines a Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions (MIME)
content-type that may be used by a message transfer agent (MTA) or
electronic mail gateway to report the result of an attempt to deliver
a message to one or more recipients.  This content-type is intended as
a machine-processable replacement for the various types of delivery
status notifications currently used in Internet electronic mail.

Because many messages are sent between the Internet and other
messaging systems (such as X.400 or the so-called "Local Area Network
(LAN)-based" systems), the Delivery Status Notification (DSN) protocol
is designed to be useful in a multi-protocol messaging environment.
To this end, the protocol described in this memo provides for the
carriage of "foreign" addresses and error codes, in addition to those
normally used in Internet mail.  Additional attributes may also be
defined to support "tunneling" of foreign notifications through
Internet mail.

This is now a Draft Standard Protocol.

This document specifies an Internet standards track protocol for
the Internet community, and requests discussion and suggestions
for improvements.  Please refer to the current edition of the
"Internet Official Protocol Standards" (STD 1) for the
standardization state and status of this protocol.  Distribution
of this memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.
