





Network Working Group                                          Yiqun Cai
Internet Draft                                    Eric C. Rosen (Editor)
Intended Status: Proposed Standard                         Rajesh Sharma
Expires: August 2, 2010                                IJsbrand Wijnands
                                                     Cisco Systems, Inc.

                                                        February 2, 2010


MVPN: Extranets, Anycast-Sources, 'Hub & Spoke', with PIM Control Plane


                 draft-rosen-l3vpn-mvpn-extranet-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.


Copyright and License Notice

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors. All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document. Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document. Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of



Rosen, et al.                                                   [Page 1]


Internet Draft   draft-rosen-l3vpn-mvpn-extranet-00.txt    February 2010


   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Abstract

   This document provides the specification for using the PIM control
   plane of to provide Multicast Virtual Private Network support for
   extranets, for anycast sources, and for "hub and spoke"
   configurations.


Table of Contents

 1          Specification of requirements  .........................   3
 2          Introduction  ..........................................   3
 3          Extranets using PIM as the MVPN Control Plane  .........   3
 3.1        Default PMSI  ..........................................   4
 3.2        Red method  ............................................   4
 3.2.1      Control Plane RPF Check  ...............................   5
 3.2.2      Data Plane RPF Check  ..................................   5
 3.3        Blue method  ...........................................   5
 3.4        Binding Specific Extranet C-Flows to S-PMSIs  ..........   6
 3.5        Two VRFs on One PE  ....................................   7
 4          Supporting Anycast Sources with PIM Control Plane  .....   7
 5          Hub and Spoke MVPNs  ...................................   8
 5.1        Unicast Hub and Spoke VPNs  ............................   8
 5.2        Multicast Hub and Spoke VPNs  ..........................  10
 6          IANA Considerations  ...................................  13
 7          Security Considerations  ...............................  13
 8          Acknowledgments  .......................................  13
 9          Authors' Addresses  ....................................  13
10          Normative References  ..................................  14














Rosen, et al.                                                   [Page 2]


Internet Draft   draft-rosen-l3vpn-mvpn-extranet-00.txt    February 2010


1. Specification of requirements

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].


2. Introduction

   This document extends the PIM control plane of [MVPN] to provide
   support for the following features:

     - MVPN Extranets

       In an MVPN "extranet", the transmitter of a multicast traffic
       flow is in a different VPN than the receivers.  Additional
       procedures are defined to determine how the traffic is associated
       with a particular MI-PMSI [MVPN]or MS-PMSI [MVPN_MSPMSI], and how
       the RPF checks are done.

     - Support for Anycast Sources

     - Support for "Hub and Spoke" VPNs


3. Extranets using PIM as the MVPN Control Plane

   Suppose there are two VPNs.  VPN1 consists of a set of VRFs, each of
   which has been configured with RT1 as it export and import Route
   Target.  VPN2 consists of a set of VRFs, each of which has been
   configured with RT2 as it export and import Route Target.  For
   convenience, we will use the term "blue" instead of "RT1" and the
   term "red" instead of "RT2".  Thus we will call VPN1 the "blue VPN"
   and VPN2 the "red VPN".  Similarly, the blue VPN consists of a number
   of "blue sites" containing "blue systems"; these sites are attached
   to PEs via VRF interfaces that are associated with "blue VRFs".

   We want to create an MVPN extranet in which blue receivers can join
   multicast groups whose sources and/or RPs are red.

   The first step is to ensure that the blue VRFs (or the subset of blue
   VRFs whose attached sites are allowed to receive multicasts from red
   sources) import routes to the red sources.  This is done as follows:

     - The red VRFs are configured so that the subset of red routes that
       are to be part of the extranet are exported with a seconds RT
       value (call it RT3), as well as with RT2.  For convenience, we
       will call RT3 "violet".



Rosen, et al.                                                   [Page 3]


Internet Draft   draft-rosen-l3vpn-mvpn-extranet-00.txt    February 2010


     - The blue VRFs are configured so that they import violet routes as
       well as blue routes.

   There are two different methods of providing the extranets, which
   will shall call the "red method" and the "blue method".  (Remember
   that the red VPN contains the transmitter, and the blue VPN contains
   the receivers.)

   This document assumes that in the case of non-SSM extranet multicast
   groups, the mapping between a group address and an RP is
   pre-configured in the PEs.

   This document does not provide support for bidirectional C-trees in
   extranets.


3.1. Default PMSI

   Some of the procedures subsequently specified in this section are
   largely independent of whether PIM is used with (a) an MI-PMSI or (b)
   with an MS-PMSI that has been bound to the double wildcard.  We will
   use the term "default PMSI" as a general term to mean either (a) or
   (b), depending upon which technique is actually being used in a given
   network.


3.2. Red method

   In the "red method", extranet multicasts are carried by default in
   the default PMSI of the red VPN, which we will of course call the
   "red PMSI".

   To use this method, blue VRFs must be configured to import "red"
   I-PMSI A-D routes and red S-PMSI A-D routes.  If MI-PMSIs are being
   used, the blue VRFs must immediately join the P-tunnels specified in
   the red I-PMSI A-D routes.  If MS-PMSIs are being used, a blue VRF
   need not join the MS-PMSI P-tunnel rooted at a particular PE unless a
   PIM Join needs to be sent to that PE.

   The PIM C-instance associated with a blue VRF will treat the red and
   blue default PMSIs as two different PIM interfaces.

   The blue VRFs must also be configured to "associate" violet unicast
   routes with the red default PMSI.  What this means is that the red
   default PMSI will be considered to be the RPF interface for the
   violet unicast routes.  The RPF interface for the blue unicast routes
   remains, as usual, the blue default PMSI.




Rosen, et al.                                                   [Page 4]


Internet Draft   draft-rosen-l3vpn-mvpn-extranet-00.txt    February 2010


   All that remains to be specified is how the control plane and data
   plane RPF checks are done.  Apart from these MVPN-specific procedures
   for the RPF check, ordinary PIM procedures are used.


3.2.1. Control Plane RPF Check

   Suppose a PE receives a PIM Join(S,G) from a CE, over a VRF interface
   that is associated with a blue VRF.  The PE does the RPF check for S
   by looking up S in the blue VRF.  If the route matching S is a blue
   route (i.e., carries the blue RT but not the violet RT), then a Join
   is sent over the blue default PMSI.  However, if the route matching S
   is a violet route (i.e., carries the violet RT), a Join is sent over
   the red default PMSI.

   If the PE receives a PIM Join(*,G) from a CE, the RPF check is done
   against the address of the corresponding RP; otherwise the procedure
   is the same.


3.2.2. Data Plane RPF Check

   Suppose a red default PMSI has been associated with a blue VRF, as
   specified above, and an (S,G) multicast data packet is received from
   the red default PMSI.  Then S is looked up in the (blue) VRF.  If it
   matches a violet route, the packet is forwarded normally.  However,
   if it matches a blue route, the packet is discarded as having failed
   the RPF check.

   This prevents the blue sites from receiving packets from red
   transmitters, except in the case where routes to the red receivers
   have been explicitly imported into the blue VRF.


3.3. Blue method

   In the "blue method", extranet multicasts are carried by default in
   the default PMSI of the blue VPN.

   In the blue method, the red VRFs must be configured to import "blue"
   I-PMSI and S-PMSI A-D routes.  If MI-PMSIs are being used the
   P-tunnels specified therein must be joined immediately.  If MS-PMSIs
   are being used, the P-tunnels need not be joined unless and until it
   is necessary to send a PIM Join to the root of the P-tunnel.

   The PIM C-instance associated with a red VRF will treat the red
   default PMSI and the blue default PMSI as two different PIM
   interfaces.



Rosen, et al.                                                   [Page 5]


Internet Draft   draft-rosen-l3vpn-mvpn-extranet-00.txt    February 2010


   PIM Joins from blue receivers are then received at the red VRF over
   the blue PMSI, whereas PIM Joins from red receivers are received at
   the red VRF over the red PMSI.  As a result, PIM may add one or the
   other or both PMSIs to a particular multicast tree's olist.

   In this method, the blue VRFs are associated with only one default
   PMSI, so the RPF check for both blue and violet sources (and RPs)
   always resolves to that PMSI.  Hence the special RPF check procedures
   of the red method are not necessary.  However, a PE with a red VRF
   may need to transmit multicast traffic on more than one MI-PMSI.

   Note that since the data plane RPF check of section 3.2.2 is not
   needed, one does not really need a "violet" RT value.  Rather, one
   may simply configure certain routes from the red VRF to be exported
   with both the red and the blue RTs.


3.4. Binding Specific Extranet C-Flows to S-PMSIs

   If the procedure of [MVPN] section 7.4.2 is used, the S-PMSI Join
   message MUST be sent on whatever default PMSI or default PMSIs are
   used to carry the C-flow identified in the message.

   If the procedure of [MVPN]section 7.4.1 is used, then procedures
   differ slightly depending upon whether the red method or the blue
   method is in use.

   If the red method is in use, and if a C-flow whose target source is
   exported from a red VRF is bound to an S-PMSI, then the S-PMSI A-D
   route that specifies the binding must carry both the red RT and the
   violet RT.  Blue VRFs must be configured to import the violet S-PMSI
   A-D routes.

   If the blue method is in use, and if a C-flow whose target source is
   exported from a red VRF is bound to an S-PMSI, then the S-PMSI A-D
   route that specifies the binding:

     - must carry the red RT if the C-flow has any receivers on the red
       default PMSI, and

     - must carry the blue RT if the C-flow has any receivers on the
       blue default PMSI.









Rosen, et al.                                                   [Page 6]


Internet Draft   draft-rosen-l3vpn-mvpn-extranet-00.txt    February 2010


3.5. Two VRFs on One PE

   It is possible that a red VRF and a blue VRF will exist on the same
   PE.  Then by the above procedures, one of these VRFs will need to
   join a PMSI that it can use for sending control packets to and
   receiving data packets from the other.  However, the protocol used to
   construct the P-tunnels instantiating the PMSI may not provide a
   mechanism by which a given PE can join a P-tunnel of which it is the
   root.  In this case, the PE implementation MUST support a local
   function whereby a given VRF, say VRF1, can "join" a P-tunnel whose
   root is another VRF, say VRF2, on the same PE.  The PE MUST also
   support a local function whereby packets can be transmitted from one
   VRF to another just as if the VRFs had been on separate PEs.


4. Supporting Anycast Sources with PIM Control Plane

   Suppose that some customer site contains router C-R1 and some other
   customer site in the same VPN contains router C-R2.  And that each
   sends a PIM Join(C-S,C-G) messages towards C-S.  Ordinarily, the
   result will be to create a single C-tree whose root is C-S and whose
   leaves include C-R1 and C-R2.

   However, in some deployment scenarios, C-S may be an anycast address
   that belongs to two or more different sources, say C-S1 and C-S2.
   Let's suppose that these two sources attach to the VPN backbone
   through two different PEs, and let's further suppose that C-S1 is
   "close" to C-R1, and C-S2 is "close" to C-R2.  Then even though both
   C-R1 and C-R2 send Join(S,G) messages, what is really desired is to
   create two C-trees, one rooted at C-S1 (with C-R1 as a leaf) and one
   rooted at C-S2 (with C-R2 as a leaf).

   If the data traffic traveling along both C-trees is carried on a
   single MI-PMSI, it is important that a (C-S,C-G) data packet is
   forwarded towards C-R1 only if the packet is actually traveling on
   the C-tree rooted at C-S1, and not on the C-tree rooted as C-S2.

   To ensure this, if a particular MVPN is providing anycast service,
   its PEs MUST use the procedure described in section 9.1.1 of [MVPN],
   and MUST NOT use the procedures described in sections 9.1.2 and 9.1.3
   of [MVPN].

   This also enables the use of C-RPs that have anycast addresses.

   Furthermore, if anycast source support is provided for a particular
   multicast group C-G, all PEs MUST execute the procedure described in
   section 4.2.1 of [PIM], and MUST act as if SwitchToSPTDesired(S,G)
   (defined in [PIM] section 4.2.1) is true when the first (S,G) packet



Rosen, et al.                                                   [Page 7]


Internet Draft   draft-rosen-l3vpn-mvpn-extranet-00.txt    February 2010


   (from any PE) is received.  (This procedure MUST be executed by each
   PE even if the PE is not the "last hop" of the C-tree.)  This will
   ensure that each PE receives and forwards (C-S,C-G) traffic from the
   appropriate source C-tree, even if PE has received only Join(C-*,C-G)
   messages but not Join(C-S,C-G) messages from its directly attached
   CEs.


5. Hub and Spoke MVPNs

   The Layer 3 Virtual Private Network (L3VPN) technology of [RFC4364]
   generally provides an "any-to-any" network service, where any system
   at one site of a VPN can send traffic to and receive traffic from a
   system at any other site.  Or more precisely, nothing in the
   procedures governing the distribution of routing information in the
   VPN prevents any-to-any communication.

   In some deployments, however, it has been convenient to distinguish
   between two kinds of VPN site, the "hub site" and the "spoke sites".
   In this section, we first describe how the "hub and spoke"
   configuration affects the distribution of unicast routing.  We then
   specify a means of providing multicast VPN service in the hub and
   spoke configuration.


5.1. Unicast Hub and Spoke VPNs

   In a unicast hub and spoke VPN:

     - any system in a hub site can send traffic to and receive traffic
       from any other system in a hub site;

     - any system in a hub site can send traffic to and receive traffic
       from any system in a spoke site;

     - any system in a spoke site can send traffic to and receive
       traffic from any system in a hub site;

     - a system in one spoke site cannot send traffic to and cannot
       receive traffic from a system in a different spoke site.

   Using the technology of [RFC4364], it is possible to create this sort
   of "hub and spoke" VPN by suitable restricting the flow of routing
   information among the sites.  One way to construct a hub and spoke
   VPN is as follows:






Rosen, et al.                                                   [Page 8]


Internet Draft   draft-rosen-l3vpn-mvpn-extranet-00.txt    February 2010


     - Within a given VPN, every site is denoted as either a hub site or
       a spoke site.

     - On a given PE, every spoke site is attached to a distinct VRF
       (i.e., all interfaces of that VRF lead to the same spoke site).
       We will call these "Spoke VRFs".

     - On a given PE, any number of hub sites can be attached to a
       single "Hub VRF".

     - Each Hub VRF is configured with an export-RT that we shall call
       "Hub_Route", and with a pair of import-RTs, one of which is
       "Hub_Route", and the other of which we shall call "Spoke_Route".
       (Of course, each hub and spoke VPN has its unique Hub_Route RT
       and its unique Spoke_Route RT.)

     - Each Spoke VRF is configured with export-RT "Spoke_Route" and
       import-RT "Hub_Route".

   With this configuration, the Spoke VRFs will contain only routes to
   systems at hub sites, whereas the Hub VRFs will contain routes to
   systems at both hub and spoke sites.  Even if two spoke sites attach
   to the same PE, they cannot communicate directly, because they are
   associated with different VRFs, and their respective VRFs do not
   import each others' routes.  (There are implementation techniques
   that can eliminate the need to configure a separate VRF for each
   spoke site on a PE, but these are out of scope of this document.)

   There are several different variations on this theme.  For example,
   in a particular VPN, spoke-to-spoke communication may be allowed, but
   only if the spoke-to-spoke traffic first enters a hub site.  Some
   system at the hub site would be responsible for "turning the traffic
   around", i.e., sending it back to VPN backbone for delivery to the
   target spoke site.  This can be useful if the "turnaround system" at
   the hub site performs some sort of inspection of the spoke-to-spoke
   traffic and then applies authorization policies of some sort.  To
   provide this sort of Hub and Spoke VPN:

     - The total set of routes exported by the Hub VRFs must include
       routes that "summarize" all the routes exported by the Spoke
       VRFs.  For example, one or more Hub VRFs may export a default
       route.  In the Hub VRFs, each of these summary routes will have
       one of the VRF interfaces as its next hop interface.

     - When such a summary route is exported as a VPN-IP route, it MUST
       be advertised with a label for which the Next Hop Label
       Forwarding Entry (see section 3.10 of [RFC3031]) specifies on of
       the VRF interfaces as the next hop interface.



Rosen, et al.                                                   [Page 9]


Internet Draft   draft-rosen-l3vpn-mvpn-extranet-00.txt    February 2010


   In this scenario, if a PE receives traffic from a spoke site, and the
   IP destination address of that traffic is a system in another spoke
   site, the traffic will be tunneled to a PE that attaches to a hub,
   and then sent over one of the Hub VRF's "VRF interfaces", i.e., sent
   to a Hub CE router.  The Hub PE, when it receives the tunneled
   packet, does not look up the packet's IP destination address in the
   Hub VRF, but rather forwards based on the MPLS label.  If the Hub CE
   decides (possibly after inspecting the packet and authorizing the
   transmission) to "turn the packet around", sending it back to the PE,
   the PE will look up the IP destination address in the Hub VRF, find
   that it matches one of the routes imported from a spoke VRF, and
   tunnel the packet to the PE attaches to the corresponding spoke site.

   Note that setting up a hub and spoke VPN is just a matter of proper
   configuration.  There are no protocol differences between a Hub and
   Spoke VPN and any other kind of RFC 4364 VPN.


5.2. Multicast Hub and Spoke VPNs

   Sometimes it is necessary to support multicast service over a Hub and
   Spoke VPN.  In this scenario, it is generally desired to provide an
   MVPN service with the following properties:

     - A receiver at a hub site may receive multicast traffic from a
       transmitter at a spoke site (including the case where the RP is
       at a spoke site)

     - A receiver at a spoke site may receive multicast traffic from a
       transmitter at a hub site (including the case where the RP is at
       a hub site)

     - A receiver at a spoke site must not be allowed to join a shared
       tree (i.e., a (C-*,C-G) tree whose root (i.e., the RP) is at a
       different spoke site.

     - A receiver at a spoke site must not be allowed to receive
       multicast traffic from a transmitter at a different spoke site,
       except possibly in the case where the traffic traverses a hub
       site on its path from one spoke site to the other.

   This type of MVPN service can be provided by using a variation of the
   "PIM over MS-PMSI" model described in [MVPN_MSPMSI].  In this model,
   each PE advertises an MS-PMSI for each VRF.  If these advertisements
   are made using BGP S-PMSI A-D routes, the A-D route originating at a
   Hub VRF carries the "Hub_Route" RT; an A-D route originating at a
   spoke VRF carries the "Spoke_Route" RT.  That is, the S-PMSI A-D
   routes originating at a given VRF carry the same RT as the unicast



Rosen, et al.                                                  [Page 10]


Internet Draft   draft-rosen-l3vpn-mvpn-extranet-00.txt    February 2010


   routes originating at that VRF.

   To support Hub and Spoke functionality, the MS-PMSIs originating at
   the spoke VRFs may all specify the same P-tunnel identifier.
   Similarly, the MS-PMSIs originating at the hub VRFs may all specify
   the same P-tunnel identifier, but this must be a different P-tunnel
   identifier than the one specified for the MS-PMSIs originating from
   the spoke VRFs.  In this case, it is convenient to speak of the Hub
   and Spoke infrastructure as consisting of two MS-PMSIs, a
   "spoke-rooted" MS-PMSI and a "hub-rooted" MS-PMSI.

   As discussed in [MVPN_MSPMSI], it is possible to instantiate an
   MS-PMSI as a set of PIM-SM trees.  This means of instantiation can be
   useful in Hub and Spoke scenarios when GRE/PIM tunneling is used.  In
   this case, for a given VPN, there MAY be a single sparse mode group
   address associated with the MS-PMSIs rooted at the spoke VRFs, and a
   second sparse mode group address associated with the MS-PMSIs rooted
   at the hub VRFs.  The result is the creation of two distinct sets of
   P-tunnels for the VPN, one set used to carry data traffic fromspoke
   sites to hub sites (and PIM control traffic in the opposite
   direction), and the other set used to carry data traffic from hub
   sites to spoke sites (and PIM control traffic in the opposite
   direction).

   Suppose that a spoke VRF and a hub VRF are on the same PE, and that
   an MS-PMSI advertisement exported by one of those VRFs is imported by
   the other.  The PE implementation MUST support a local function
   whereby the importing VRF can "join" the MS-PMSI exported by the
   other VRF, and MUST support a local function whereby packets
   transmitted from one VRF onto the MS-PMSI are received by the other
   VRF (if and only if the latter VRF has joined the MS-PMSI exported by
   the former).

   Since spoke VRFs do not import each others' S-PMSI A-D routes, and do
   not import each other's unicast routes, and since there is no
   MI-PMSI, there is no way for a C-Join to be transmitted directly from
   one spoke VRF to another.  If a CE at a spoke site sends a Join(S,G)
   to its PE, the PE will forward it on the hub-rooted MS-PMSI
   advertised by the hub site that is the BGP next hop for S; no spoke
   VRF can receive PIM control packets on that MS-PMSI.

   In this scheme, each hub VRF joins two MS-PMSIs, the one spoke-rooted
   MS-PMSI and the hub-rooted MS-PMSI.  Normal PIM procedures would see
   these as two PIM interfaces.  If a hub VRF at PE1 receives a
   Join(S,G) from the hub-rooted MS-PMSI, where S is at a spoke site,
   normal PIM/MVPN procedures would cause PE1 to send a Join(S,G) over
   the spoke-rooted PMSI towards a PE that attaches to S's site.  If
   these procedures are followed, a receiver at a spoke site could get



Rosen, et al.                                                  [Page 11]


Internet Draft   draft-rosen-l3vpn-mvpn-extranet-00.txt    February 2010


   multicast data from a different spoke site; the data would get
   "turned around" at a PE that attaches to a hub site.  Since this
   violates the requirements as stated above, a PE providing Hub and
   Spoke MVPN service MUST NOT send a Join message on one MS-PMSI as a
   result of having received a Join message over another.

   Note that this does not completely prevent a receiver in a spoke site
   from being able to receive multicast data from a transmitter in a
   different spoke site. This can happen in the following situation:

     - A receiver R1 at a hub site, Site1, joins a (C-*,C-G) tree,

     - The RP for (C-*,C-G) is at a different hub site, Site2,

     - A system S1 at a spoke site, Site3, transmits multicast traffic
       to group C-G.

   In this situation, the PE attached to Site 2 may need to turn the
   (S1,G) data around and transmit it on the hub-rooted PMSI, so that R1
   can receive it.  This also allows spoke sites to receive it.
   However, turnaround at a PE is never a desirable traffic pattern, and
   implementations are NOT required to support it.  An alternative
   procedure which enables R1 to receive the (S1,G) traffic is for the
   PE at Site3 to generate a BGP Source Active A-D route, carrying the
   "spoke route" RT, when it receives a Join(S1,G) on the spoke-rooted
   MS-PMSI.  This route would be withdrawn when the PE no longer has the
   corresponding (S1,G) state.  The PE attached to Site1 will see this
   SA route, and if it has (*,G) state, will then generate (S1,G) state
   and expect to receive (S1,G) traffic from the spoke-rooted MS-PMSI.

   Another situation in which a receiver in a spoke site may be able to
   receive multicast data from a transmitter in a different spoke site
   is the following:

     - A receiver R1 at a spoke site, Site1, joins a (C-*,C-G) tree,

     - The RP for (C-*,C-G) is at a hub site

     - A system S2 at a different spoke site, Site2, transmits multicast
       traffic to group C-G,

     - The hub site containing the RP is multiply connected to the SP
       backbone,

     - The best path from R1 to the RP enters the RP's hub site via a
       particular PE-CE link, link1,





Rosen, et al.                                                  [Page 12]


Internet Draft   draft-rosen-l3vpn-mvpn-extranet-00.txt    February 2010


     - The best path from S2 to the RP enters the RP's hub site via a
       different PE-CE link, link2.

   In this case, it is possible for multicast data traffic to travel
   from S2 to link1 to the RP to link2 to R1.  In some situations, a SP
   and its customer may wish to explicitly set up this scenario in order
   to allow spoke sites to receive selected multicast traffic from other
   spoke sites.

   The procedures described in this section are compatible with the
   procedures of section 4.



6. IANA Considerations

   This document does not specify any actions for IANA.



7. Security Considerations

   There are no additional security considerations beyond those of
   [MVPN] and [MVPN-BGP].


8. Acknowledgments

   The authors wish to thank DP Ayadevara, Rayen Mohanty, Maria
   Napierala, and Karthik Subramanian.


9. Authors' Addresses

   Yiqun Cai
   Cisco Systems, Inc.
   170 Tasman Drive
   San Jose, CA, 95134
   E-mail: ycai@cisco.com



   Eric C. Rosen
   Cisco Systems, Inc.
   1414 Massachusetts Avenue
   Boxborough, MA, 01719
   E-mail: erosen@cisco.com




Rosen, et al.                                                  [Page 13]


Internet Draft   draft-rosen-l3vpn-mvpn-extranet-00.txt    February 2010


   Rajesh Sharma
   Cisco Systems, Inc.
   170 Tasman Drive
   San Jose, CA, 95134
   E-mail: rajshr@cisco.com



   IJsbrand Wijnands
   Cisco Systems, Inc.
   De kleetlaan 6a Diegem 1831
   Belgium
   E-mail: ice@cisco.com



10. Normative References

   [MVPN_MSPMSI] "MVPN: Multidirectional Selective PMSIs", Cai, Rosen,
   Wijnands, draft-rosen-l3vpn-mvpn-mspmsi-06.txt, January 2010

   [MVPN] "Multicast in MPLS/BGP IP VPNs", Rosen, Aggarwal, et. al.,
   draft-ietf-l3vpn-2547bis-mcast-10.txt, January 2010

   [MVPN-BGP]  "BGP Encodings and Procedures for Multicast in MPLS/BGP
   IP VPNs", Rahul  Aggarwal, Eric Rosen, Thomas Morin, Yakhov Rekhter,
   draft-ietf-l3vpn-2547bis-mcast-bgp-08.txt, September 2009

   [PIM] "Protocol Independent Multicast - Sparse Mode (PIM-SM):
   Protocol Specification (Revised)", Fenner, Handley, Holbrook,
   Kouvelas, RFC 4601, August 2006

   [RFC2119] "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
   Levels.", Bradner, March 1997

   [RFC3031] "MPLS Architecture", Rosen, Viswanathan, Callon, January
   2001

   [RFC4364] "BGP/MPLS IP VPNs", Rosen, Rekhter, et. al., February 2006












Rosen, et al.                                                  [Page 14]
