





L3VPN Working Group                                            Yiqun Cai
Internet Draft                                    Eric C. Rosen (Editor)
Intended Status: Proposed Standard                     IJsbrand Wijnands
Expires: August 1, 2011                              Cisco Systems, Inc.

                                                             Arjen Boers
                                                         ZTE Corporation

                                                        February 1, 2011


                  MVPN: Using Bidirectional P-Tunnels


                  draft-rosen-l3vpn-mvpn-bidir-03.txt

Abstract

   The documents specifying multicast support for BGP/MPLS IP VPNs allow
   customer multicast data to be transported through a service
   provider's network through a set multicast tunnels.  Such tunnels are
   advertised by BGP in a BGP attribute known as the "Provider Multicast
   Service Interface (PMSI) Tunnel Attribute".  The base specifications
   allow the PMSI Tunnel Attribute to advertise bidirectional multicast
   distribution trees as "PMSI Tunnels"; however, those documents do not
   provide all the necessary details for using those tunnels.  These
   details are provided in this document.  This document also specifies
   the procedures for assigning customer multicast flows to specific
   bidirectional PMSI tunnels.


Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as
   Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.



Rosen, et al.                                                   [Page 1]


Internet Draft     draft-rosen-l3vpn-mvpn-bidir-03.txt     February 2011


   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.


Copyright and License Notice

   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors. All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document. Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document. Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

































Rosen, et al.                                                   [Page 2]


Internet Draft     draft-rosen-l3vpn-mvpn-bidir-03.txt     February 2011


Table of Contents

 1          Specification of requirements  .........................   3
 2          Introduction  ..........................................   4
 3          Advertising Bidirectional P-tunnels  ...................   5
 3.1        BIDIR-PIM P-Tunnels  ...................................   5
 3.2        MP2MP LSPs  ............................................   6
 3.2.1      Partial Mesh of MP2MP LSPs  ............................   6
 3.2.2      Single MP2MP LSP without PE Distinguisher Labels  ......   7
 3.2.3      Single MP2MP LSP with PE Distinguisher Labels  .........   8
 3.2.4      Identifying a MP2MP LSP  ...............................   8
 4          Associating Received Packets with VRFs  ................   9
 5          Data Transmission and Reception  .......................   9
 5.1        Partial Mesh of MP2MP LSPs  ............................   9
 5.1.1      Binding (C-S,C-G) to Bidirectional P-tunnels  ..........   9
 5.1.2      Binding (C-*,C-G) Flows from Unidirectional C-trees  ...  10
 5.1.3      Binding (C-*,C-G) Flows from Bidirectional C-trees  ....  10
 5.1.4      Binding (C-*,C-*)  .....................................  11
 5.2        Single MP2MP LSP With PE Distinguisher Labels  .........  13
 5.3        Single MP2MP LSP Without PE Distinguisher Labels  ......  13
 5.4        BIDIR-PIM P-Tunnel  ....................................  13
 5.4.1      Single BIDIR-PIM P-Tunnel  .............................  14
 5.4.2      Partial Mesh of BIDIR-PIM P-Tunnels  ...................  14
 6          IANA Considerations  ...................................  14
 7          Security Considerations  ...............................  14
 8          Acknowledgments  .......................................  14
 9          Authors' Addresses  ....................................  15
10          Normative References  ..................................  15
11          Informative References  ................................  16






1. Specification of requirements

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].








Rosen, et al.                                                   [Page 3]


Internet Draft     draft-rosen-l3vpn-mvpn-bidir-03.txt     February 2011


2. Introduction

   The base documents for MVPN, [MVPN] and [MVPN-BGP], define a "PMSI
   Tunnel Attribute" (PTA) that may be carried in the BGP "I-PMSI A-D
   routes" and BGP "S-PMSI A-D routes" that are defined therein.  The
   base documents define the way that bidirectional P-tunnels are
   identified in the PTA, and the way in which the identifier of a
   bidirectional P-tunnel is encoded in the PTA.

   However, those documents do not contain the full set of
   specifications governing the use of the PTA to advertise
   bidirectional P-Tunnels.  These specifications are provided in this
   document.

   This document also specifies the procedures for assigning customer
   multicast flows to specific bidirectional PMSI tunnels.

   Two kinds of bidirectional P-tunnel are discussed in this document:

     - Multicast distribution trees that are created through the use of
       BIDIR-PIM [BIDIR-PIM].

     - Multipoint-to-multipoint Label Switched Paths (MP2MP LSPs),
       created by Label Distribution Protocol (LDP) Multipoint-to-
       Multipoint extensions [mLDP].

   This document also specifies three methods of using MP2MP LSPs as
   P-tunnels:

     - Partial mesh of MP2MP LSPs.  In this method, when a set of PEs
       have multicast data to send and/or receive to/from each other,
       each PE becomes the root of a MP2MP LSP.  This method is
       presented in [MVPN], section 11.2.3.  The detailed specification
       is provided in this document.

     - Single MP2MP LSP with PE Distinguisher Labels.  This method is
       presented in [MVPN], section 11.2.2.  The detailed specification
       is provided in this document.

     - Single MP2MP LSP without PE Distinguisher Labels.

   In the following, we will sometimes speak of an S-PMSI A-D route
   being "ignored".  When we say the route is "ignored", we do not mean
   that it's normal BGP processing is not done, but that the route is
   not considered when determining which P-tunnel to use when sending
   multicast data, and that the MPLS label values it conveys are not
   used.  We will generally use "ignore" in quotes to indicate this
   meaning.



Rosen, et al.                                                   [Page 4]


Internet Draft     draft-rosen-l3vpn-mvpn-bidir-03.txt     February 2011


3. Advertising Bidirectional P-tunnels

   In this specification, we consider the use of bidirectional P-tunnels
   as advertised in the PTA of a BGP S-PMSI A-D route.


3.1. BIDIR-PIM P-Tunnels

   A BIDIR-PIM P-tunnel may be advertised in the PTA of an Intra-AS
   I-PMSI A-D route or in the PTA of an S-PMSI A-D route.

   As is the case with other PIM-created P-tunnels, to transmit packets
   on a BIDIR-PIM P-tunnel, one uses the GRE encapsulation as specified
   in [MVPN] section 12.

   Each BIDIR-PIM P-Tunnel is identified by a unique P-group address
   [MVPN, section 3.1].  (The P-group address is called a "P-Multicast
   Group" in [MVPN-BGP]).  A BIDIR-PIM P-group address is always
   associated with a unique "Rendezvous Point Address" (RPA).


   Every PE that needs to join a particular BIDIR-PIM P-tunnel must be
   able to determine the RPA that corresponds to the P-tunnel's P-group
   address.  PIM Join/Prune messages are sent along the path from the PE
   to the RPA.  Any P routers along that path must also be able to
   determine the RPA, so that they too can send PIM Join/Prune messages
   towards the RPA.  The method of mapping a P-group address to an RPA
   may be static configuration, or some automated means of RPA discovery
   that is outside the scope of this specification.

   If a BIDIR-PIM P-tunnel is to be used, it is RECOMMENDED that the
   path from each PE in the tunnel to the RPA consist entirely of
   point-to-point links.  On a point-to-point link, there is no
   ambiguity in determining which router is upstream towards a
   particular RPA, so the BIDIR-PIM "Designated Forwarder Election" is
   very quick and simple.  Use of a BIDIR-PIM P-tunnel containing
   multiaccess links is possible, but considerably more complex.

   When a BGP A-D route's PTA specifies a BIDIR-PIM P-tunnel, the PE
   Distinguisher Labels attribute SHOULD NOT be included; if it is
   included, it MUST be ignored. The PE Distinguisher Labels attribute
   is not needed because the "distinguished PE" for a particular packet
   can be identified by placing its IP address in the IP source address
   field of the GRE encapsulation used to send that packet on the
   P-tunnel.

   There are two different methods of using BIDIR-PIM P-Tunnels, the
   "Single BIDIR-PIM P-Tunnel method", and the "Partial Mesh of



Rosen, et al.                                                   [Page 5]


Internet Draft     draft-rosen-l3vpn-mvpn-bidir-03.txt     February 2011


   BIDIR-PIM P-Tunnels method".  The choice of method is determined by
   provisioning.

   If the "Single BIDIR-PIM P-Tunnel" method is being used, all PEs in a
   given MVPN MUST identify the same P-tunnel.  The identity of this
   P-tunnel is known by provisioning.  For example, by using this
   method, and identifying the tunnel in the PTA of the Intra-AS I-PMSI
   A-D routes, one may use a BIDIR-PIM P-tunnel to instantiate an MI-
   PMSI.

   If the Partial Mesh of BIDIR-PIM P-Tunnels method is being used, the
   PEs MUST identify different P-Tunnels (by advertising different P-
   group addresses in their PTAs).  If a particular P-group address is
   advertised by a particular PE, then one of that PE's addresses MUST
   be the RPA corresponding to that P-group.

   For example, by using this method, and identifying the tunnel in the
   PTA of an S-PMSI A-D route, one may implement the "Partitioned Sets
   of PEs" method of supporting C-BIDIR, as discussed in section 11.2 of
   [MVPN] and section 3.6 of [CONSID].


3.2. MP2MP LSPs

   An MP2MP LSP is identified by an "MP2MP FEC element" [mLDP].  The FEC
   element contains the IP address of the "root", followed by an "opaque
   value" that identifies the MP2MP LSP uniquely in the context of the
   root's IP address.  This opaque value may be configured or
   autogenerated, and within an MVPN, there is no need for different
   roots to use the same opaque value.

   The method of using MP2MP LSPs (partial mesh, single with PE
   Distinguisher Labels, single without PE Distinguisher Labels) is
   determined by provisioning.  It SHOULD be possible to configure this
   on a per-MVPN basis.


3.2.1. Partial Mesh of MP2MP LSPs

   A partial mesh of MP2MP LSPs is not useful for instantiating an
   I-PMSI.  The LSPs of the partial mesh are therefore only advertised
   in the PTAs of S-PMSI A-D routes.

   A partial mesh of MP2MP LSPs is useful for implementing the
   "Partitioned Sets of PEs" method of supporting C-BIDIR, as discussed
   in section 11.2 of [MVPN] and section 3.6 of [CONSID].

   Section 5.1 of this document specifies the procedures for



Rosen, et al.                                                   [Page 6]


Internet Draft     draft-rosen-l3vpn-mvpn-bidir-03.txt     February 2011


   transmitting all kinds of customer data flows, whether unidirectional
   or bidirectional, on a partial mesh of MP2MP LSPs.  The sending and
   receiving of PE-PE PIM control packets on a partial mesh of MP2MP
   LSPs is outside the scope of this specification.

   When this method is being used:

     - Each PE that is participating in the mesh MUST advertise, in the
       PTA of an S-PMSI A-D route, a MP2MP LSP of which it is the root.
       (The LSP root address is part of the P-tunnel identifier field
       carried in the PTA.)  A PE MUST "participate in the mesh" if any
       of the following conditions holds:

         * The "Partitioned Sets of PEs" method of supporting C-BIDIR
           traffic is being used, and the PE's route to the Rendezvous
           Point Address (RPA) for one or more C-BIDIR groups is via a
           VRF interface.

         * The "Partitioned Sets of PEs" method is being used, it is
           desired to transmit some or all of the customer
           unidirectional multicast traffic (for the given MVPN) on the
           same LSPs used for carrying C-BIDIR traffic, and the PE has
           customer multicast traffic to transmit to other PEs.

       There may be other conditions under which a PE needs to
       participate in a partial mesh of MP2MP LSPs; these are outside
       the scope of the current specification.

     - The PE Distinguisher Labels Attribute [MVPN-BGP] MUST NOT be
       included; if included, it MUST be ignored.


3.2.2. Single MP2MP LSP without PE Distinguisher Labels

   When this method is being used:

     - the MP2MP LSP can be advertised in the PTA of an Intra-AS I-PMSI
       A-D route, or in the PTA of an S-PMSI A-D route.  When advertised
       in the PTA of an Intra-AS I-PMSI A-D route, the MP2MP LSP can be
       used to instantiate an MI-PMSI.

     - The LSP does not have to be advertised by its root.  In fact, the
       root of the LSP does not even need to be a PE router.

     - The PE Distinguisher Labels Attribute MUST NOT be included, but
       if included, it MUST be ignored.





Rosen, et al.                                                   [Page 7]


Internet Draft     draft-rosen-l3vpn-mvpn-bidir-03.txt     February 2011


     - If two or more PEs of the same MVPN advertise a MP2MP LSP in
       their Intra-AS I-PMSI A-D routes, they SHOULD advertise the same
       MP2MP LSP.  Any scenario in which they do not advertise the same
       MP2MP LSP in their Intra-0I A-D routes is outside the scope of
       this document.

   This method cannot be used to support the "Partitioned Set of PEs"
   method discussed in [MVPN] section 11.2 and [CONSID] section 3.6.
   Also, this method is not compatible with the procedures of [MVPN]
   section 9.1.1.


3.2.3. Single MP2MP LSP with PE Distinguisher Labels

   In this method, the MP2MP LSP MUST be advertised in the PTA of an
   Intra-AS I-PMSI A-D route or an S-PMSI A-D route originated by the
   root of the LSP.  That route MUST include a "PE Distinguisher Labels"
   Attribute.  Violation of these conditions MUST cause the route to be
   ignored.

   The PE at the root of the LSP SHOULD use the PE Distinguisher Labels
   Attribute to bind an upstream-assigned MPLS label to the IP address
   of some or all of the other PEs that attach to the same MVPN (as
   determined by the RTs of the A-D route).  That is, the PE at the root
   of the P-tunnel assigns a distinct label to some or all of the other
   PEs attaching to the same MVPN.

   An MP2MP LSP with PE Distinguisher Labels can be used to instantiate
   an MI-PMSI.  In this case, the PE at the root MUST use the PE
   Distinguisher Labels Attribute to bind an upstream-assigned MPLS
   label to the IP address of each other PE that attaches to the same
   MVPN.  This set of PEs is learned via the reception of Intra-AS
   I-PMSI A-D routes.

   An MP2MP LSP with PE Distinguisher Labels can also be used to support
   the "Partitioned Set of PEs" method discussed in [MVPN] section 11.2
   and [CONSID] section 3.6.  In this case, it is not necessary to bind
   an upstream-assigned label to the IP address of a particular PE in
   the MVPN unless that PE has advertised a unicast VPN-IP route to one
   of the C-RPAs of that MVPN.


3.2.4. Identifying a MP2MP LSP

   To identify a MP2MP LSP, the PTA of a BGP A-D route contains an MP2MP
   FEC Element [mLDP] in its "Tunnel Identifier" field.  This contains
   the IP address of the root of the LSP, as well as an "Opaque Value"
   which is unique at the root.  The mLDP specification supports the use



Rosen, et al.                                                   [Page 8]


Internet Draft     draft-rosen-l3vpn-mvpn-bidir-03.txt     February 2011


   of several different ways of constructing the tunnel identifiers.
   This specification does not place any restrictions on the types of
   tunnel identifier that might be used.  However, a given
   implementation might not support every possible type of tunnel
   identifier.  Future revisions of this specification will establish
   one or two types of tunnel identifier as being "mandatory to
   support".


4. Associating Received Packets with VRFs

   When a packet is received from a bidirectional P-tunnel, the packet
   is first associated one or more VRFs, and then processed in the
   context of that VRF or VRFs.  If the bidirectional P-tunnel was
   advertised in the PTA of an A-D route that did not specify an MPLS
   label, then all packets received from the P-tunnel are associated
   with the same set of VRFs.  If the bidirectional P-tunnel was
   advertised in the PTA of an A-D route, and the PTA does specify an
   MPLS label, then received packets will carry a label that must be
   processed in order to determine the context.  If the P-tunnel is a
   MP2MP LSP, this label appears below the label that identifies the LSP
   itself.



5. Data Transmission and Reception

5.1. Partial Mesh of MP2MP LSPs

5.1.1. Binding (C-S,C-G) to Bidirectional P-tunnels

   When PE1 advertises an S-PMSI A-D route that binds a (C-S,C-G) flow
   to a bidirectional P-tunnel, or when PE1 sends an S-PMSI Join message
   that binds a (C-S,C-G) flow to a bidirectional P-tunnel, the
   semantics are as follows.  PE1 is stating that any (C-S,C-G) traffic
   that it needs to transmit to other PEs will be transmitted on the
   specified P-tunnel.  Any other PE that needs to receive such traffic
   from PE1 (i.e., any other PE that needs to receive (C-S,C-G) traffic
   and which has selected PE1 as the upstream PE for C-S) MUST join that
   P-tunnel.

   If a PE has joined the P-tunnel, but does not need to receive the
   (C-S,C-G) traffic, or if it needs to receive (C-S,C-G) traffic but
   has not selected PE1 as the upstream PE for C-S, then the PE MUST
   discard any such received traffic.






Rosen, et al.                                                   [Page 9]


Internet Draft     draft-rosen-l3vpn-mvpn-bidir-03.txt     February 2011


5.1.2. Binding (C-*,C-G) Flows from Unidirectional C-trees

   When PE1 advertises an S-PMSI A-D route or sends an S-PMSI Join
   message that binds (C-*,C-G) [MVPN-WILD] to a bidirectional P-tunnel,
   where C-G is not a "Source-Specific Multicast" (SSM) group, and the
   (C-*,C-G) traffic is traveling on a unidirectional shared C-tree, the
   semantics are as follows.  PE1 is stating that any traffic to C-G
   that is traveling the shared C-tree and which PE1 needs to transmit
   to other PEs will be transmitted on the specified P-tunnel.

   Any other PE that needs to receive such traffic from PE1 (i.e., any
   other PE that needs to receive (C-*,C-G) traffic and which has
   selected PE1 as the upstream PE for the C-RP corresponding to the C-G
   group) MUST join that P-tunnel.

   If a PE has joined the P-tunnel, but does not need to receive the
   (C-*,C-G) traffic, or if it needs to receive (C-*,C-G) traffic but
   has not selected PE1 as the upstream PE for the C-RP that corresponds
   to C-G, then the PE MUST discard any such received traffic.


5.1.3. Binding (C-*,C-G) Flows from Bidirectional C-trees

   When PE1 advertises an S-PMSI A-D route or sends an S-PMSI Join
   message that binds (C-*,C-G) to a bidirectional P-tunnel, where C-G
   is not an SSM group, and the (C-*,C-G) traffic is traveling on a
   bidirectional shared C-tree, the semantics are as follows:

     - PE1 is stating that any traffic to C-G that it (PE1) needs to
       send downstream will be sent on the specified P-tunnel

     - Any other PE that is interested in receiving (C-*,C-G) traffic
       MUST join the specified P-tunnel

     - Any other PE, say PE2, that (a) has traffic to C-G to send
       upstream and (b) has selected PE1 as its upstream PE for the
       C-RPA corresponding to C-G, MUST join the specified P-tunnel, and
       MUST send such traffic on the specified P-tunnel.

     - If a PE, say PE3, has joined the specified P-tunnel, but does not
       need to receive the (C-*,C-G) traffic, or has not selected PE1 as
       the upstream PE for the C-RPA corresponding to C-G, then PE3 MUST
       NOT send any (C-*,C-G) traffic on that P-tunnel, and MUST discard
       any (C-*,C-G) traffic it received on that P-tunnel.

   These procedures implement the "Partitioned Set of PEs" scheme
   described in section 11.2 of [MVPN].




Rosen, et al.                                                  [Page 10]


Internet Draft     draft-rosen-l3vpn-mvpn-bidir-03.txt     February 2011


   The specification given so far requires an S-PMSI A-D route or an
   S-PMSI Join message to be sent for each (C-*,C-G) that is using a
   bidirectional C-tree.  A more efficient method is given in the next
   section.


5.1.4. Binding (C-*,C-*)

   With regard to the procedures of this section, the "all BIDIR-PIM"
   wildcard [MVPN-WILD] is treated identically to the (C-*,C-*)
   wildcard, except that it applies only to customer BIDIR-PIM flows.

   When PE1 advertises an S-PMSI A-D route or sends an S-PMSI Join
   message that binds (C-*,C-*) to a specified bidirectional P-tunnel of
   which PE1 is the root, the semantics are as that the bidirectional
   P-tunnel is to be used to carry C-multicast traffic in the following
   sets of cases:

      1. If PE1 has (C-S,C-G) traffic that is traveling on a
         source-specific C-tree, and PE1 needs to transmit that data to
         one or more other PEs, and PE1 has not bound (C-S,C-G) or
         (C-*,C-G) to a different P-tunnel, then the (C-S,C-G) traffic
         is sent by PE1 on the specified bidirectional P-tunnel.

      2. If PE1 has (C-*,C-G) traffic that is traveling on a
         unidirectional shared C-tree, and PE1 needs to transmit that
         data to one or more other PEs, and PE1 has not bound (C-*,C-G)
         to a different P-tunnel, then the (C-*,C-G) traffic is sent by
         PE1 on the specified bidirectional P-tunnel.

      3. If PE1 has (C-*,C-G) traffic that is traveling on a
         bidirectional shared C-tree, and PE1 needs to transmit that
         data to one or more other PEs, and PE1 has not bound (C-*,C-G)
         to a different P-tunnel, then the (C-*,C-G) traffic is sent by
         PE1 on the specified bidirectional P-tunnel.

      4. Consider some other PE, PE2, that has received the S-PMSI A-D
         route or S-PMSI Join message from PE1.  If PE2 has (C-*,C-G)
         traffic that is traveling on a bidirectional shared C-tree, and
         PE2 needs to transmit that traffic UPSTREAM, and PE2 has
         selected PE1 as the upstream PE for the C-RPA corresponding to
         C-G, and PE1 has not bound (C-*,C-G) to any other P-tunnel,
         then the (C-*,C-G) traffic is sent by by PE2 on the specified
         bidirectional P-tunnel.







Rosen, et al.                                                  [Page 11]


Internet Draft     draft-rosen-l3vpn-mvpn-bidir-03.txt     February 2011


      5. If a PE receives traffic from a particular bidirectional
         P-tunnel, and the traffic is traveling a unidirectional
         (C-*,C-G) or (C-S,C-G) tree, and the root of the bidirectional
         P-tunnel is not the PE's selected upstream PE for the (C-*,C-G)
         or (C-S,C-G), the PE MUST discard the traffic.

      6. If a PE receives traffic from a particular bidirectional
         P-tunnel, and the traffic is traveling a bidirectional
         (C-*,C-G) tree, and the PE's selected upstream PE for the C-RPA
         corresponding to C-G is not the root of the bidirectional
         P-tunnel, then the PE MUST discard the traffic.

   With respect to traffic traveling a bidirectional C-tree, these
   procedures implement, for S-PMSIs, the "partitioning" scheme
   described in section 11.2 of [MVPN], without the need to send an
   S-PMSI A-D route for each (C-*,C-G) that is using a bidirectional
   C-tree.  Each PE becomes the root of a bidirectional P-tunnel, and
   binds the double wildcard selector to it.  The bidirectional
   P-tunnels serve as the "partitions".  The bidirectional P-tunnel
   rooted at PE1 becomes the default P-tunnel for all traffic that PE1
   needs to send downstream to other PEs.  It also becomes the default
   P-tunnel for all traffic that others PEs need to send upstream, as
   long as those other PEs have selected PE1 as the upstream PE for the
   C-RPA corresponding to that traffic.

   Note that other PEs SHOULD NOT join the specified bidirectional
   P-tunnel unless they have a need to send or receive data over it.  A
   PE knows when it needs to receive data by virtue of having certain
   multicast state in its C-PIM instance.  With regard to multicast data
   traveling on a bidirectional (C-*,C-G) tree, a PE may not know
   whether it has to send data until such data actually arrives over a
   VRF interface; the PE may be on a "sender-only" branch.  However, the
   PE in this case would have to know, through provisioning or some
   automatic procedure such as "Bootstrap Routing Protocol for PIM"
   (BSR) [BSR], the set of C-RPAs that are being used to support
   (C-*,C-G) traffic.  For each C-RPA, the PE could join the
   bidirectional P-tunnel advertised by its selected upstream PE for
   that C-RPA.  Alternatively the PE could defer joining the P-tunnel
   until it actually has data to send.












Rosen, et al.                                                  [Page 12]


Internet Draft     draft-rosen-l3vpn-mvpn-bidir-03.txt     February 2011


5.2. Single MP2MP LSP With PE Distinguisher Labels

   The procedures for transmitting data on a single MP2MP LSP with PE
   Distinguisher Labels differ from the procedures for transmitting data
   on a partial mesh of MP2MP LSPs only in the following way.  Let PE1
   be the root of the P-tunnel.  When a packet that is traveling on a
   unidirectional C-tree is transmitted on the P-tunnel by a particular
   PE, say PE2, PE2 must push on the packet's label stack the label that
   PE1 assigned to PE2 via the procedure above.  When a packet that is
   traveling on a bidirectional C-tree is transmitted on the P-tunnel by
   PE2, PE2 must push on the packet's label stack the label that PE1
   assigned to PE3, where PE3 is the upstream PE that PE2 has selected
   for the C-RPA corresponding to C-G.

   For unidirectional flows, this allows the transmitter to be
   identified, and for bidirectional flows, this allows the partition to
   be identified.  Packets received from the wrong upstream PE or from
   the wrong partition MUST be discarded.  (In effect, this is a case of
   tunnel hierarchy, where the PE Distinguisher Labels represent a set
   of MP2MP LSPs that are being tunneled through a single bidirectional
   P-tunnel.)

   If the PTA identifying the bidirectional P-tunnel contains an MPLS
   label, then that label shall appear in the label stack immediately
   preceding the label specified in the PE Distinguisher Labels
   attribute.


5.3. Single MP2MP LSP Without PE Distinguisher Labels

   No special rules are needed for this case; the general procedures
   specified in [MVPN] and [MVPN-BGP] are used.


5.4. BIDIR-PIM P-Tunnel

   Packets are transmitted using GRE encapsulation as described in
   sections 12.1.1 and 12.2.1 of [MVPN].

   It is possible to implement the "Partitioned Sets of PEs" scheme
   ([MVPN] section 11.2 and [CONSID] section 3.6) using either a single
   BIDIR-PIM P-Tunnel or using a partial mesh of BIDIR-PIM P-Tunnels.









Rosen, et al.                                                  [Page 13]


Internet Draft     draft-rosen-l3vpn-mvpn-bidir-03.txt     February 2011


5.4.1. Single BIDIR-PIM P-Tunnel

   In this method, the rules for transmitting packets of a given C-flow
   on a BIDIR-PIM P-Tunnel are essentially the same as the rules given
   in section 5.2, except that a particular "distinguished PE" is
   identified not by the use of a PE Distinguisher Label, but by the use
   of the IP Source Address field of the GRE header.  For unidirectional
   C-flows, the IP source address field of the GRE header identifies the
   PE that transmitted the packet onto the P-tunnel.  For bidirectional
   C-flows, suppose that PE1 is transmitting a packet over the P-tunnel,
   that the packet's C-group address is C-G, and that PE1 has selected
   PE2 as the upstream PE corresponding to the C-RPA that corresponds to
   C-G.  Then when PE1 transmits the packet over the P-tunnel, the IP
   source address field of the GRE header will contain the IP address of
   PE2.


5.4.2. Partial Mesh of BIDIR-PIM P-Tunnels

   In this method, the rules for for transmitting packets of a given
   C-flow on a BIDIR-PIM P-Tunnel are essentially the same as the rules
   given in section 5.1.


6. IANA Considerations

   Both [MVPN] and [MVPN-BGP] discuss the use of the "PE Distinguisher
   Labels" Attribute, but neither document has asked IANA to define a
   codepoint for it.  We now ask IANA to assign a codepoint for this
   attribute, as an optional transitive attribute, referencing [MVPN],
   [MVPN-BGP], and this document.


7. Security Considerations

   There are no additional security considerations beyond those of
   [MVPN] and [MVPN-BGP].


8. Acknowledgments

   The authors wish to thank Karthik Subramanian, Rajesh Sharma, and
   Apoorva Karan for their input.  We also thank Yakov Rekhter for his
   valuable critique.







Rosen, et al.                                                  [Page 14]


Internet Draft     draft-rosen-l3vpn-mvpn-bidir-03.txt     February 2011


9. Authors' Addresses

   Arjen Boers
   ZTE Corporation
   114 Rue Gallieni
   92100 Boulogne Billancourt
   France

   E-mail: arjen.boers@zte.com.cn



   Yiqun Cai
   Cisco Systems, Inc.
   170 Tasman Drive
   San Jose, CA, 95134
   E-mail: ycai@cisco.com



   Eric C. Rosen
   Cisco Systems, Inc.
   1414 Massachusetts Avenue
   Boxborough, MA, 01719
   E-mail: erosen@cisco.com



   IJsbrand Wijnands
   Cisco Systems, Inc.
   De kleetlaan 6a Diegem 1831
   Belgium
   E-mail: ice@cisco.com



10. Normative References

   [BIDIR-PIM] "Bidirectional Protocol Independent Multicast", Handley,
   Kouvelas, Speakman, Vicisano, RFC 5015, October 2007

   [mLDP] "Label Distribution Protocol Extensions for
   Point-to-Multipoint and Multipoint-to-Multipoint Label Switched
   Paths", Minei, Kompella, Wijnands, Thomas,
   draft-ietf-mpls-ldp-p2mp-11.txt, October 2010

   [MVPN] "Multicast in MPLS/BGP IP VPNs", Rosen, Aggarwal, et. al.,
   draft-ietf-l3vpn-2547bis-mcast-10.txt, January 2010



Rosen, et al.                                                  [Page 15]


Internet Draft     draft-rosen-l3vpn-mvpn-bidir-03.txt     February 2011


   [MVPN-BGP] "BGP Encodings and Procedures for Multicast in MPLS/BGP IP
   VPNs", Aggarwal, Rosen, Morin, Rekhter,
   draft-ietf-l3vpn-2547bis-mcast-bgp-08.txt, September 2009

   [MVPN-WILD] "MVPN: S-PMSI Wild Card Selectors", Cai, Rosen, Wijnands,
   draft-rosen-l3vpn-mvpn-wildcards-03.txt, February 2011

   [RFC2119] "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
   Levels.", Bradner, March 1997


11. Informative References

   [BSR] "Bootstrap Router (BSR) Mechanism for PIM", N. Bhaskar, et.al.,
   RFC 5059, January 2008

   [CONSID] "Mandatory Features in a Layer 3 Multicast BGP/MPLS VPN
   Solution", Morin, Niven-Jenkins, Kamite, Zhang, Leymann, Bitar,
   draft-ietf-l3vpn-mvpn-considerations-06.txt, February 2010
































Rosen, et al.                                                  [Page 16]
