





Network Working Group                                          Yiqun Cai
Internet Draft                                    Eric C. Rosen (Editor)
Intended Status: Proposed Standard                     IJsbrand Wijnands
Expires: August 2, 2010                              Cisco Systems, Inc.

                                                             Arjen Boers

                                                        February 2, 2010


                  MVPN: Using Bidirectional P-Tunnels


                  draft-rosen-l3vpn-mvpn-bidir-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.


Copyright and License Notice

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors. All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document. Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document. Code Components extracted from this document must



Rosen, et al.                                                   [Page 1]


Internet Draft     draft-rosen-l3vpn-mvpn-bidir-00.txt     February 2010


   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Abstract

   The documents specifying multicast support for BGP/MPLS IP VPNs allow
   customer multicast data to be transported through a service
   provider's network through a set multicast tunnels.  Such tunnels are
   advertised by BGP in a BGP attribute known as the "Provider Multicast
   Service Interface (PMSI) Tunnel Attribute".  The base specifications
   allow the PMSI Tunnel Attribute to advertise bidirectional multicast
   distribution trees as "PMSI Tunnels"; however, those document do not
   provide all the necessary details for doing so.  Those details are
   provided in this document.  These additional details are also
   applicable when bidirectional PMSI Tunnels are advertised in the
   datagram messages known as "S-PMSI Join Messages".  This document
   also specifies the procedures for assigning customer multicast flows
   to specific bidirectional PMSI tunnels.































Rosen, et al.                                                   [Page 2]


Internet Draft     draft-rosen-l3vpn-mvpn-bidir-00.txt     February 2010


Table of Contents

 1          Specification of requirements  .........................   3
 2          Introduction  ..........................................   4
 3          Advertising Bidirectional P-tunnels  ...................   5
 3.1        BIDIR-PIM P-Tunnels with GRE Encapsulation  ............   5
 3.2        MP2MP LSPs  ............................................   6
 3.2.1      MP2MP LSPs without PE Distinguisher Labels  ............   6
 3.2.2      MP2MP LSPs with PE Distinguisher Labels  ...............   6
 3.2.3      Default Tunnel Identifier for MP2MP LSPs  ..............   7
 4          Associating Received Packets with VRFs  ................   7
 5          Data Transmission and Reception  .......................   8
 5.1        Without PE Distinguisher Labels  .......................   8
 5.1.1      Binding (C-S,C-G) to Bidirectional P-tunnels  ..........   8
 5.1.2      Binding (C-*,C-G) Flows from Unidirectional C-trees  ...   8
 5.1.3      Binding (C-*,C-G) Flows from Bidirectional C-trees  ....   9
 5.1.4      Binding (C-*,C-*)  .....................................   9
 5.2        With PE Distinguisher Labels  ..........................  11
 6          IANA Considerations  ...................................  12
 7          Security Considerations  ...............................  12
 8          Authors' Addresses  ....................................  12
 9          Normative References  ..................................  13
10          Informative References  ................................  13






1. Specification of requirements

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].












Rosen, et al.                                                   [Page 3]


Internet Draft     draft-rosen-l3vpn-mvpn-bidir-00.txt     February 2010


2. Introduction

   The base documents for MVPN, [MVPN] and [MVPN-BGP], define a "PMSI
   Tunnel Attribute" (PTA) that may be carried in the BGP I-PMSI A-D
   routes and BGP S-PMSI A-D routes that are defined therein.  However,
   those documents do not contain the full set of specifications
   governing the use of the PTA to advertise bidirectional P-Tunnels.
   Those specifications are provided in this document.

   The base documents do define the way that bidirectional P-tunnels are
   identified in the PTA, and the way in which the identifier of a
   bidirectional P-tunnel is encoded in the PTA.  The corresponding
   encodings used in "S-PMSI Join Messages" [MVPN] are defined in
   [MVPN_SPMSI_JOINS].  Those identifiers and encodings are not changed
   by this specification.

   This document also specifies the procedures for assigning customer
   multicast flows to specific bidirectional PMSI tunnels.

   Two kinds of bidirectional P-tunnels are discussed in this document:

     - Multicast distribution trees that are created through the use of
       BIDIR-PIM [BIDIR-PIM], and that use GRE to encapsulate packets
       transmitted on the tunnels

     - Multipoint-to-multipoint Label Switched Paths (MP2MP LSPs),
       created by Label Distribution Protocol (LSP) Multipoint-to-
       Multipoint extensions [mLDP].

   This document also specifies two different methods for using MP2MP
   LSPs as P-tunnels:

     - MP2MP LSPs with PE Distinguisher Labels

     - MP2MP LSPs without PE Distinguisher Labels.

   In the following, we will sometimes talk of a PE receiving traffic
   from a PMSI and then discarding it.  If PIM [PIM] is being used as
   the multicast control protocol between PEs, this always implies that
   the discarded traffic will not be seen by PIM on the receiving PE,
   and thus will not cause PIM state changes on that PE.

   In the following, we will sometimes speak of an S-PMSI A-D route
   being "ignored".  When we say the route is "ignored", we do not mean
   that it's normal BGP processing is not done, but that the route is
   not considered when determining which P-tunnel to use when sending
   multicast data, and that the MPLS label values it conveys are not
   used.  We will generally use "ignore" in quotes to indicate this



Rosen, et al.                                                   [Page 4]


Internet Draft     draft-rosen-l3vpn-mvpn-bidir-00.txt     February 2010


   meaning.


3. Advertising Bidirectional P-tunnels

   In this specification, we consider the use of bidirectional P-tunnels
   as advertised in the PTA of a BGP S-PMSI A-D route, or as advertised
   in the P-Group field or the FEC Element field of an S-PMSI Join
   message.


3.1. BIDIR-PIM P-Tunnels with GRE Encapsulation

   Each BIDIR-PIM P-Tunnel is identified by a unique P-group address
   [MVPN, section 3.1].  (The P-group address is called a "P-Multicast
   Group" in [MVPN-BGP]). The P-group address for a BIDIR-PIM P-tunnel
   must be configured at the PE that is to be the root of the P-tunnel.
   Associated with each such P-group address is a "Rendezvous Point
   Address" (RPA).  Every PE that needs to join a particular BIDIR-PIM
   P-tunnel must be able to determine the RPA that corresponds to the
   P-tunnel's P-group address.  This may be known through configuration,
   or by some automated means of RPA discovery.  The RPA for a given
   P-group MUST uniquely identify the PE that is to be the root of the
   BIDIR-PIM tunnel.

   If a BIDIR-PIM P-tunnel is to be used, the path from each PE in the
   tunnel to the RPA MUST consist entirely of point-to-point links.

   In order to set up a BIDIR-PIM P-Tunnel, the P routers must also be
   able to determine the RPA associated with the PE at the root of the
   tunnel.  If this is not known via some automated means of RP
   discovery, it can be determined from the PIM Join messages
   themselves, where the RPA is encoded in the source address field.

   The advertisement of a BIDIR-PIM P-Tunnel MUST be originated by the
   root of the tunnel.  Any advertisement that is not originated by the
   root MUST be "ignored".  If the "ignored" advertisement is a BGP A-D
   route, any MPLS label specified in its PTA MUST be ignored, and any
   PE Distinguisher Labels [MVPN-BGP] specified in the route MUST be
   ignored.











Rosen, et al.                                                   [Page 5]


Internet Draft     draft-rosen-l3vpn-mvpn-bidir-00.txt     February 2010


3.2. MP2MP LSPs

   An MP2MP LSP is identified by an "MP2MP FEC element" [mLDP].  The FEC
   element contains the IP address of the "root", followed by an "opaque
   value" that identifies the MP2MP LSP uniquely in the context of the
   root's IP address.  This opaque value may be configured or
   autogenerated, and within an MVPN, there is no need for different
   roots to use the same opaque value.

   Whether a particular VPN uses MP2MP LSPs with or without PE
   Distinguisher Labels is determined by provisioning.


3.2.1. MP2MP LSPs without PE Distinguisher Labels

   If an MP2MP LSP without PE Distinguisher Labels is being used, then
   the PE Distinguisher Labels attribute [MVPN-BGP] MUST NOT be included
   in any S-PMSI A-D route containing a PTA identifying that LSP.

   The advertisement of an "MP2MP LSP without PE Distinguisher Labels"
   P-tunnel MUST be originated by the PE that is the root (as specified
   in the advertised "FEC element") of the MP2MP LSP.  Any such
   advertisement that is not originated by the root MUST be "ignored".
   If the "ignored" advertisement is a BGP A-D route, any MPLS label
   specified in its PTA MUST be ignored, and any PE Distinguisher Labels
   specified in the route MUST be ignored.


3.2.2. MP2MP LSPs with PE Distinguisher Labels

   If an MP2MP LSP with PE Distinguisher Labels is being used, it MUST
   be advertised in the PTA of a BGP A-D route originated by the root of
   the LSP.  That route MUST include a "PE Distinguisher Labels"
   attribute.  The PE at the root of the LSP MUST use the PE
   Distingusiher Labels attribute to bind an upstream-assigned MPLS
   label to the IP address of each other PE that attaches to the same
   MVPN (as determined by the RTs of the A-D route).  That is, the PE at
   the root of the P-tunnel assigns a distinct label to each of the
   other PEs attaching to the same MVPN. This set of PEs is learned via
   the reception of Intra-AS I-PMSI A-D routes.

   An MP2MP LSP with PE Distinguisher Labels may also be advertised in
   an S-PMSI A-D route by a PE that is not at the root of the LSP.  In
   this case, the PE Distinguisher Labels attribute MUST be omitted.







Rosen, et al.                                                   [Page 6]


Internet Draft     draft-rosen-l3vpn-mvpn-bidir-00.txt     February 2010


3.2.3. Default Tunnel Identifier for MP2MP LSPs

   This section applies only to MP2MP LSPs without PE Distinguisher
   Labels.

   To identify a MP2MP LSP, the S-PMSI Join message or the PTA of a BGP
   A-D route contains an MP2MP FEC Element [mLDP] in its "Tunnel
   Identifier" field.  This contains the IP address of the PE at the
   root of the LSP, as well as an "opaque value" which is unique at that
   PE.  Each PMSI Tunnel is associated at its root PE with a particular
   VRF, and each VRF in a given PE has a unique default RD.  Therefore
   one way to uniquely identify a MP2MP LSP is to use a MP2MP FEC
   Element whose Opaque Value length is 8 and whose Opaque Value value
   is the default RD of the associated VRF.  This method of assigning a
   Tunnel Identifier MUST be the default method for any PMSI Tunnel
   which is bound to (C-*,C-*) traffic.  Other methods MAY be available
   as well.

   Note that if aggregation of multiple VPNs onto a single default MP2MP
   LSP is not being supported, this method of assigning the Tunnel
   Identifier allows each PE to algorithmically determine the Tunnel
   Identifier that has been assigned by a particular upstream PE.  A PE
   decides to join a particular MP2MP LSP because it has chosen that
   LSP's root as the upstream PE for a particular VPN-IP address.  The
   RD of that VPN-IP address is the contents of the Opaque Value field
   of the corresponding MP2MP LSP FEC Element.


4. Associating Received Packets with VRFs

   When a packet is received from a bidirectional P-tunnel, the packet
   is first associated one or more VRFs, and then processed in the
   context of that VRF or VRFs.  If the bidirectional P-tunnel was
   advertised in an S-PMSI Join message or in the PTA of an  A-D route
   that did not specify an MPLS label, then all packets received from
   the P-tunnel are associated with the same set of VRFs.  If the
   bidirectional P-tunnel was advertised in the PTA of an A-D route, and
   the PTA does specify an MPLS label, then received packets will carry
   a label that must be processed in order to determine the context.  If
   the P-tunnel is a MP2MP LSP, this label appears below the label that
   identifies the LSP itself.

   If the procedure of section 3.2.3 is being used, the association of a
   received packet with a VRF can be determined algorithmically.







Rosen, et al.                                                   [Page 7]


Internet Draft     draft-rosen-l3vpn-mvpn-bidir-00.txt     February 2010


5. Data Transmission and Reception

5.1. Without PE Distinguisher Labels

   The procedures in this section apply to P-tunnels on which PE
   Distinguisher Labels are not used.  See section 5.2 for the
   specification of the use of P-tunnels on which PE Distinguisher
   Labels are used.


5.1.1. Binding (C-S,C-G) to Bidirectional P-tunnels

   When PE1 advertises an S-PMSI A-D route that binds a (C-S,C-G) flow
   to a bidirectional P-tunnel, or when PE1 sends an S-PMSI Join message
   that binds a (C-S,C-G) flow to a bidirectional P-tunnel, the
   semantics are as follows.  PE1 is stating that any (C-S,C-G) traffic
   that it needs to transmit to other PEs will be transmitted on the
   specified P-tunnel.  Any other PE that needs to receive such traffic
   from PE1 (i.e., any other PE that needs to receive (C-S,C-G) traffic
   and which has selected PE1 as the upstream PE for C-S) MUST join that
   P-tunnel.

   If a PE has joined the P-tunnel, but does not need to receive the
   (C-S,C-G) traffic, or if it needs to receive (C-S,C-G) traffic but
   has not selected PE1 as the upstream PE for C-S, then the PE MUST
   discard any such received traffic.  Please note that if PIM is being
   used as the multicast control protocol, any traffic that is discarded
   will not be seen by PIM, and hence will not cause the generation of
   Assert messages.


5.1.2. Binding (C-*,C-G) Flows from Unidirectional C-trees

   When PE1 advertises an S-PMSI A-D route or sends an S-PMSI Join
   message that binds (C-*,C-G) [MVPN_WILD] to a bidirectional P-tunnel,
   where C-G is not a "Source-Specific Multicast" (SSM) group, and the
   (C-*,C-G) traffic is traveling on a unidirectional shared C-tree, the
   semantics are as follows.  PE1 is stating that any traffic to C-G
   that is traveling the shared C-tree and which PE1 needs to transmit
   to other PEs will be transmitted on the specified P-tunnel.

   Any other PE that needs to receive such traffic from PE1 (i.e., any
   other PE that needs to receive (C-*,C-G) traffic and which has
   selected PE1 as the upstream PE for the C-RP corresponding to the C-G
   group) MUST join that P-tunnel.

   If a PE has joined the P-tunnel, but does not need to receive the
   (C-*,C-G) traffic, or if it needs to receive (C-*,C-G) traffic but



Rosen, et al.                                                   [Page 8]


Internet Draft     draft-rosen-l3vpn-mvpn-bidir-00.txt     February 2010


   has not selected PE1 as the upstream PE for the C-RP that corresponds
   to C-G, then the PE MUST discard any such received traffic.  Please
   note that if PIM is being used as the multicast control protocol,
   traffic that is discarded will not be seen by PIM.


5.1.3. Binding (C-*,C-G) Flows from Bidirectional C-trees

   When PE1 advertises an S-PMSI A-D route or sends an S-PMSI Join
   message that binds (C-*,C-G) to a bidirectional P-tunnel, where C-G
   is not an SSM group, and the (C-*,C-G) traffic is traveling on a
   bidirectional shared C-tree, the semantics are as follows:

     - PE1 is stating that any traffic to C-G that it (PE1) needs to
       send downstream will be sent on the specified P-tunnel

     - Any other PE that is interested in receiving (C-*,C-G) traffic
       MUST join the specified P-tunnel

     - Any other PE, say PE2, that (a) has traffic to C-G to send
       upstream and (b) has selected PE1 as its upstream PE for the
       C-RPA corresponding to C-G, MUST join the specified P-tunnel, and
       MUST send such traffic on the specified P-tunnel.

     - If a PE, say PE3, has joined the specified P-tunnel, but does not
       need to receive the (C-*,C-G) traffic, or has not selected PE1 as
       the upstream PE for the C-RPA corresponding to C-G, then PE3 MUST
       NOT send any (C-*,C-G) traffic on that P-tunnel, and MUST discard
       any (C-*,C-G) traffic it received on that P-tunnel.

   These procedures implement, for S-PMSIs, the "partitioning" scheme
   described in section 11.2 of [MVPN].

   The specification given so far requires an S-PMSI A-D route or an
   S-PMSI Join message to be sent for each (C-*,C-G) that is using a
   bidirectional C-tree.  A more efficient method is given in the next
   section.


5.1.4. Binding (C-*,C-*)

   When PE1 advertises an S-PMSI A-D route or sends an S-PMSI Join
   message that binds (C-*,C-*) to a specified bidirectional P-tunnel of
   which PE1 is the root, the semantics are as that the bidirectional
   P-tunnel is to be used to carry C-multicast traffic in the following
   sets of cases:





Rosen, et al.                                                   [Page 9]


Internet Draft     draft-rosen-l3vpn-mvpn-bidir-00.txt     February 2010


      1. If PE1 has (C-S,C-G) traffic that is traveling on a
         source-specific C-tree, and PE1 needs to transmit that data to
         one or more other PEs, and PE1 has not bound (C-S,C-G) or
         (C-*,C-G) to a different P-tunnel, then the (C-S,C-G) traffic
         is sent by PE1 on the specified bidirectional P-tunnel.

      2. If PE1 has (C-*,C-G) traffic that is traveling on a
         unidirectional shared C-tree, and PE1 needs to transmit that
         data to one or more other PEs, and PE1 has not bound (C-*,C-G)
         to a different P-tunnel, then the (C-*,C-G) traffic is sent by
         PE1 on the specified bidirectional P-tunnel.

      3. If PE1 has (C-*,C-G) traffic that is traveling on a
         bidirectional shared C-tree, and PE1 needs to transmit that
         data to one or more other PEs, and PE1 has not bound (C-*,C-G)
         to a different P-tunnel, then the (C-*,C-G) traffic is sent by
         PE1 on the specified bidirectional P-tunnel.

      4. Consider some other PE, PE2, that has received the S-PMSI A-D
         route or S-PMSI Join message from PE1.  If PE2 has (C-*,C-G)
         traffic that is traveling on a bidirectional shared C-tree, and
         PE2 needs to transmit that traffic UPSTREAM, and PE2 has
         selected PE1 as the upstream PE for the C-RPA corresponding to
         C-G, and PE1 has not bound (C-*,C-G) to any other P-tunnel,
         then the (C-*,C-G) traffic is sent by by PE2 on the specified
         bidirectional P-tunnel.

      5. If a PE receives traffic from a particular bidirectional
         P-tunnel, and the traffic is traveling a unidirectional
         (C-*,C-G) or (C-S,C-G) tree, and the root of the bidirectional
         P-tunnel is not the PE's selected upstream PE for the (C-*,C-G)
         or (C-S,C-G), the PE MUST discard the traffic.

      6. If a PE receives traffic from a particular bidirectional
         P-tunnel, and the traffic is traveling a bidirectional
         (C-*,C-G) tree, and the PE's selected upstream PE for the C-RPA
         corresponding to C-G is not the root of the bidirectional
         P-tunnel, then the PE MUST discard the traffic.

   With respect to traffic traveling a bidirectional C-tree, these
   procedures implement, for S-PMSIs, the "partitioning" scheme
   described in section 11.2 of [MVPN], without the need to send an
   S-PMSI A-D route for each (C-*,C-G) that is using a bidirectional
   C-tree.  Each PE becomes the root of a bidirectional P-tunnel, and
   binds the double wildcard selector to it.  The bidirectional
   P-tunnels serve as the "partitions".  The bidirectional P-tunnel
   rooted at PE1 becomes the default P-tunnel for all traffic that PE1
   needs to send downstream to other PEs.  It also becomes the default



Rosen, et al.                                                  [Page 10]


Internet Draft     draft-rosen-l3vpn-mvpn-bidir-00.txt     February 2010


   P-tunnel for all traffic that others PEs need to send upstream, as
   long as those other PEs have selected PE1 as the upstream PE for the
   C-RPA corresponding to that traffic.

   Note that other PEs SHOULD NOT join the specified bidirectional
   P-tunnel unless they have a need to send or receive data over it.  A
   PE knows when it needs to receive data by virtue of having certain
   multicast state in its C-PIM instance.  With regard to multicast data
   traveling on a bidirectional (C-*,C-G) tree, a PE may not know
   whether it has to send data until such data actually arrives over a
   VRF interface; the PE may be on a "sender-only" branch.  However, the
   PE in this case would have to know, through provisioning or some
   automatic procedure such as "Bootstrap Routing Protocol for PIM"
   (BSR) [BSR], the set of C-RPAs that are being used to support
   (C-*,C-G) traffic.  For each C-RPA, the PE could join the
   bidirectional P-tunnel advertised by its selected upstream PE for
   that C-RPA.  Alternatively the PE could defer joining the P-tunnel
   until it actually has data to send.


5.2. With PE Distinguisher Labels

   The procedures for transmitting data on an MP2MP LSP with PE
   Distinguisher Labels differ from the procedures for transmitting data
   on other bidirectional P-tunnels only in the following way.  Let PE1
   be the root of the P-tunnel.  When a packet that is traveling on a
   unidirectional C-tree is transmitted on the P-tunnel by a particular
   PE, say PE2, PE2 must push on the packet's label stack the label that
   PE1 assigned to PE2 via the procedure above.  When a packet that is
   traveling on a bidirectional C-tree is transmitted on the P-tunnel by
   PE2, PE2 must push on the packet's label stack the label that PE1
   assigned to PE3, where PE3 is the upstream PE that PE2 has selected
   for the C-RPA corresponding to C-G.

   For unidirectional flows, this allows the transmitter to be
   identified, and for bidirectional flows, this allows the partition to
   be identified.  Packets received from the wrong upstream PE or from
   the wrong partition MUST be discarded.  (In effect, this is a case of
   tunnel hierarchy, where the PE Distinguisher Labels represent a set
   of MP2MP LSPs, each of which instantiates an MS-PMSI, but those LSPs
   are all tunneled through a single bidirectional P-tunnel.)

   If the PTA identifying the bidirectional P-tunnel contains an MPLS
   label, then that label shall appear in the label stack immediately
   preceding the label specified in the PE Distinguisher Labels
   attribute.





Rosen, et al.                                                  [Page 11]


Internet Draft     draft-rosen-l3vpn-mvpn-bidir-00.txt     February 2010


6. IANA Considerations

   This document has no actions for IANA.


7. Security Considerations

   There are no additional security considerations beyond those of
   [MVPN] and [MVPN-BGP].


8. Authors' Addresses

   Arjen Boers
   E-mail: arjen@boers.com



   Yiqun Cai
   Cisco Systems, Inc.
   170 Tasman Drive
   San Jose, CA, 95134
   E-mail: ycai@cisco.com



   Eric C. Rosen
   Cisco Systems, Inc.
   1414 Massachusetts Avenue
   Boxborough, MA, 01719
   E-mail: erosen@cisco.com



   IJsbrand Wijnands
   Cisco Systems, Inc.
   De kleetlaan 6a Diegem 1831
   Belgium
   E-mail: ice@cisco.com












Rosen, et al.                                                  [Page 12]


Internet Draft     draft-rosen-l3vpn-mvpn-bidir-00.txt     February 2010


9. Normative References

   [BIDIR-PIM] "Bidirectional Protocol Independent Multicast", Handley,
   Kouvelas, Speakman, Vicisano, RFC 5015, October 2007

   [mLDP] "Label Distribution Protocol Extensions for
   Point-to-Multipoint and Multipoint-to-Multipoint Label Switched
   Paths", Minei, Kompella, Wijnands, Thomas,
   draft-ietf-mpls-ldp-p2mp-08.txt, October 2009

   [MVPN] "Multicast in MPLS/BGP IP VPNs", Rosen, Aggarwal, et. al.,
   draft-ietf-l3vpn-2547bis-mcast-10.txt, January 2010

   [MVPN-BGP] "BGP Encodings and Procedures for Multicast in MPLS/BGP IP
   VPNs", Aggarwal, Rosen, Morin, Rekhter,
   draft-ietf-l3vpn-2547bis-mcast-bgp-08.txt, September 2009

   [MVPN_WILD] "MVPN: S-PMSI Wild Card Selectors", Cai, Rosen, Wijnands,
   draft-rosen-l3vpn-mvpn-wildcards-00.txt, February 2010

   [PIM] "Protocol Independent Multicast - Sparse Mode (PIM-SM):
   Protocol Specification (Revised)", Fenner, Handley, Holbrook,
   Kouvelas, RFC 4601, August 2006

   [RFC2119] "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
   Levels.", Bradner, March 1997


10. Informative References

   [BSR] "Bootstrap Router (BSR) Mechanism for PIM", N. Bhaskar, et.al.,
   RFC 5059, January 2008



















Rosen, et al.                                                  [Page 13]
