 



Network Working Group                                  M.O. van Deventer
Internet-Draft                                        R. van Brandenburg
Intended status: Informational                                       TNO
Expires: January 2, 2012                                    July 1, 2011


               Content Terminology in CDN Interconnection
               draft-deventer-cdni-content-terminology-01

Abstract

   This internet-draft describes how the term content might take on
   various meanings in different Content Delivery Network (CDN)
   interconnection scenarios.  In order to solve this ambiguity, some
   additional terminology to describe content in CDNs is introduced, in
   alignment with terminology developed by the ETSI MCD CDN-I Working
   Group.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 2, 2012.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
 


van Deventer & van BrandenburgExpires January 2, 2012           [Page 1]

Internet-Draft        Content Terminology in CDN-I          July 1, 2011


   described in the Simplified BSD License.















































 


van Deventer & van BrandenburgExpires January 2, 2012           [Page 2]

Internet-Draft        Content Terminology in CDN-I          July 1, 2011


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     1.1.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.  Newspaper metaphor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     2.1.  Introduction to newspaper metaphor . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     2.2. Different stages of content . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   3. Content Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   4. IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   5. Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   6. Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8




































 


van Deventer & van BrandenburgExpires January 2, 2012           [Page 3]

Internet-Draft        Content Terminology in CDN-I          July 1, 2011


1.  Introduction

   The goal of this document is to present some terminology to be used
   when talking about content in the different stages of CDN
   interconnection. The additional terminology is aligned with CDN
   interconnect terminology developed by the ETSI MCD Working Group on
   CDN Interconnection (MCD WG CDN-I). Documents developed by ETSI MCD
   in the CDN area are publicly available from the ETSI MCD Open Area
   http://docbox.etsi.org/MCD/Open/.

   This document introduces a metaphor for the electronic content
   delivery ecosystem to provide a better understanding of the different
   phases of content in this ecosystem. The metaphor of a newspaper
   distribution ecosystem was chosen, as that ecosystem is well
   understood and it has many aspects in common with content delivery. 
   Of course, any metaphor should be used with care, as there will
   always be (subtle) differences.

1.1.  Terminology

   This document uses the terminology defined in section 1.1 of [I-
   D.jenkins-cdni-problem-statement] and [I-D.bertrand-cdni-use-cases]
   and terminology used in [ETSI TS 102 990 v0.0.7].

2.  Newspaper metaphor

   Using the metaphor of the newspaper distribution ecosystem, this
   section will describe why the term Content might have a different
   meaning depending on which phase in the Content Delivery chain one is
   talking about.

2.1.  Introduction to newspaper metaphor

   A Newspaper company can be compared to a Content Provider (or Content
   Aggregator); its business is to generate and/or collect news items
   and other articles, and bring those together into newspapers.  The
   audience for the newspapers are Newspaper Readers (End Users).  Just
   as Content Providers, different Newspaper Companies may have
   different business models, including subscription-based, advertising-
   based or other.

   Getting newspapers to Newspaper Readers is essential to the Newspaper
   Company, just as it essential for a Content Provider to bring content
   to an End User. Some Newspapers Companies may have their own printing
   press, trucks to move the printed newspapers, outlets for Readers to
   pick up the newspapers and personnel to get newspapers delivered to
   mailboxes of Newspaper Readers. However, Newspaper Companies may also
   decide to outsource some or all of those newspaper-distribution
 


van Deventer & van BrandenburgExpires January 2, 2012           [Page 4]

Internet-Draft        Content Terminology in CDN-I          July 1, 2011


   activities to specialized companies.

   o  Printing Companies have one or more printing presses to print
      newspapers.

   o  Postal Companies have one or more trucks and personnel to move and
      deliver printed newspapers.

   o  Newsstand Companies have one or more newsstands where people can
      pick up newspapers.

   These different companies in the Newspaper delivery chain can be
   compared to the different roles in the Content Delivery Network
   chain. There is a role for companies to replicate, or transcode,
   content. There is a role for companies to perform the large scale
   distribution of content and there is a role for companies to perform
   the actual delivery of content to End Users. Just as is common in the
   newspaper world, companies in the Content Delivery world may take on
   multiple roles.

2.2. Different stages of content

   While the contents of the newspaper do not change during the
   newspaper distribution path from Newspaper Company all the way to
   Newspaper Reader, the form the newspaper takes during the
   distribution path does change. The Newspaper Company does not
   directly create the final newspaper that Readers find on their
   doorstep. What the Newspaper Company creates and delivers to the
   Printing Company is a printing plate, a mastercopy, of the newspaper.
   The Printing Company then uses this printing plate to create a number
   of replicas (mastercopy replicas) to use in all of its printing
   facilities. Based on these replicas, the actual newspapers (the
   consumables) are printed. These printed newspapers are then
   distributed by a network of trucks to one or more distribution
   centers. How the newspapers end up in the hands of to the Newspaper
   Reader depends on the preferences (and location) of that Reader. Some
   Readers might pick it up at a Newsstand Company, while others will
   have it delivered by a Postal Company.

   A path similar to the one taken by the newspaper is also taken by a
   piece of Content in the Content Delivery Network chain. The Content
   Provider does not necessarily create the final piece of content, or
   the form it takes, that is received by the End User. Along the way
   the Content might be transcoded to use a different codec, repackaged
   in a different video container, and delivered using different
   transport mechanisms and protocols.

   In some situations, it might be useful to be able to distinguish
 


van Deventer & van BrandenburgExpires January 2, 2012           [Page 5]

Internet-Draft        Content Terminology in CDN-I          July 1, 2011


   between the different fases and forms content goes through in the
   content delivery chain. For example, in the case of CDN
   Interconnection: When talking about how an Upstream CDN ingests
   content into a Downstream CDN, it is important to know what the term
   'content' in this case means. Is it the content in the form as it was
   first ingested into the Upstream CDN by the Content Provider? Or is
   it the content in its multiple transcoded forms as stored on the
   Upstream CDN?

   The current terminology does not allow for distinguishing between
   these different fases and forms of content in the content delivery
   chain.


3. Content Terminology

   As shown in the previous section, the term content might take on a
   different meaning depending on which phase in the delivery chain one
   is talking about. It would therefore be useful to create some
   additional terminology to describe these different content phases.
   What follows is a first attempt at describing the different forms of
   content as found in a CDN.

   Mastercopy: The content as it is delivered by the Content Provider to
   the (Upstream) CDN during the Content Ingestion process.

   Replica: The content as it is transferred between the Upstream CDN
   and the Downstream CDN.

   Consumable: The content as it is stored on a CDN delivery node
   directly prior to being delivered to an End User.

   Note that, depending on the agreed arrangements with the Content
   Provider, a Consumable might be a repackaged or transcoded version
   from the origal Mastercopy or Replica in order to make it suitable
   for a specific type of end device. Furthermore, a Consumable might be
   a single file or consist of multiple files/segments that are the
   result of a segmentation operation having been performed on the
   content, e.g. to allow for specific transport mechanisms such as HTTP
   Adapative Streaming (HAS) to be used.

   It should be noted that this terminology is purely meant for
   indicating the role of a particular piece of content in a particular
   situation; it does not mean that a Consumable and a Mastercopy cannot
   be bit-for-bit equivalent.


4. IANA Considerations
 


van Deventer & van BrandenburgExpires January 2, 2012           [Page 6]

Internet-Draft        Content Terminology in CDN-I          July 1, 2011


   This memo includes no request to IANA.


5. Security Considerations

   This memo includes no security considerations.










































 


van Deventer & van BrandenburgExpires January 2, 2012           [Page 7]

Internet-Draft        Content Terminology in CDN-I          July 1, 2011


6. Informative References

   [I-D.bertrand-cdni-use-cases]
              Bertrand, G., Stephan, E., Watson, G., Burbridge, T., and
              P. Eardley, "Use Cases for Content Distribution Network
              Interconnection", draft-bertrand-cdni-use-cases-01 (work
              in progress), January 2011.

   [I-D.jenkins-cdni-problem-statement]
              Niven-Jenkins, B., Faucheur, F., and N. Bitar, "Content
              Distribution Network Interconnection (CDNI) Problem
              Statement", draft-jenkins-cdni-problem-statement-02 (work
              in progress), March 2011.

   [ETSI TS 102 990 v0.0.7]
              ETSI MCD CDN-I Working Group, "Media Content Distribution
              (MCD); Media CDN Interconnection, use cases and
              requirements", http://docbox.etsi.org/MCD/Open/
              Latest_Drafts/ts_102990v000007p.pdf 

Authors' Addresses

   M. Oskar van Deventer
   TNO
   Brassersplein 2
   Delft,
   the Netherlands

   Phone: +31 6 51 914 918
   Email: oskar.vandeventer@tno.nl


   Ray van Brandenburg
   TNO
   Brassersplein 2
   Delft,
   the Netherlands

   Phone: +31 88 86 63609
   Email: ray.vanbrandenburg@tno.nl











van Deventer & van BrandenburgExpires January 2, 2012           [Page 8]
