

TRILL Working Group                                              H. Zhai
Internet-Draft                                                       ZTE
Intended status: Standards Track                         T. Senevirathne
Expires: February 27, 2013                                 Cisco Systems
                                                              R. Perlman
                                                              Intel Labs
                                                         D. Eastlake 3rd
                                                                M. Zhang
                                                                  Huawei
                                                                   F. Hu
                                                                     ZTE
                                                         August 26, 2012


                        RBridge: Pseudo-Nickname
                 draft-hu-trill-pseudonode-nickname-03

Abstract

   At the edg of TRILL campus, some RBridges provide end-station
   services to their attached end stations; these RBridges are called
   edge RBridges.  To avoid potential frame duplication or loops in
   TRILL campus, only one edge RBridge is permitted to provide such
   services in a VLAN at all times to its attached end stations even
   they are also attached to other edge RBridges.  However, in some
   application scenarios, for example in Link Aggregation Group (LAG),
   more than one edge RBridge is required to provide such services to an
   end station even in a VLAN to improve resiliency and maximize the
   available network bandwidth, which causes the flip-flopping of the
   egress RBridge nickname for such an end station in remote RBridges'
   forwarding tables.  In this document, the concept of Virtual RBridge,
   along with its pseudo-nickname, is introduced to address the above
   problem.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."



Zhai, et al.            Expires February 27, 2013               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft               Pseudo-Nickname                 August 2012


   This Internet-Draft will expire on February 27, 2013.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2012 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.



































Zhai, et al.            Expires February 27, 2013               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft               Pseudo-Nickname                 August 2012


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     1.1.  Terminology and Acronyms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   2.  Problem Statement  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     2.1.  Appointed Forwarders on Shared Links . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     2.2.  Multi-homing and Link Aggregation to TRILL Network . . . .  6
   3.  Concept of Virtual RBridge and Pseudo-nickname . . . . . . . .  7
     3.1.  VLAN-x Appointed Forwarder for member interfaces in RBv  .  8
     3.2.  Announcing Pseudo-Nickname of RBv  . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   4.  Distribution Trees for Member RBridges in RBv  . . . . . . . .  8
   5.  Frame Processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     5.1.  Data Frames  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
       5.1.1.  Native Frames Ingressing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
       5.1.2.  TRILL Data Frames Egressing  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
         5.1.2.1.  Unicast TRILL Data Frames  . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
         5.1.2.2.  Multi-Destination TRILL Data Frames  . . . . . . . 11
   6.  Member Link Failure in RBv . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   7.  OAM Frames . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   8.  Configuration Consistency  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   9.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   10. Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   11. Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   12. Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   Appendix A.  Reasons for MAC Sharing among Member RBriges  . . . . 14
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15

























Zhai, et al.            Expires February 27, 2013               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft               Pseudo-Nickname                 August 2012


1.  Introduction

   The IETF TRILL protocol [RFC6325] provides optimal pair-wise data
   frame forwarding without configuration, safe forwarding even during
   periods of temporary loops, and support for multi-pathing of both
   unicast and multicast traffic.  TRILL accomplishes this by using
   [IS-IS] [RFC1195] link state routing and encapsulating traffic using
   a header that includes a hop count.  The design supports VLANs and
   optimization of the distribution of multi-destination frames based on
   VLANs and IP derived multicast groups.  Devices that implement TRILL
   are called RBridges.

   In TRILL protocol, RBridges are identified by nicknames (16-bits).
   Different RBridge has different nickname(s).  At the edge of TRILL
   network, some RBridges connect to legacy networks on one side and to
   TRILL network on the other side.  These RBridges are called edge
   RBridges.  For the connectivity between the two types of network,
   edge RBridges provide end-station services to end stations located in
   legacy networks.  When receiving a native frame from such a local end
   station S, the service edge RBridge RB1 encapsulates the frame in a
   TRILL header, addressing the packet to RBridge RBx to which the
   destination end station D is attached.  The TRILL header contains an
   "ingress RBridge nickname" field (RB1's nickname), an "egress RBridge
   nickname" field (RBx's nickname), and a hop count.  On receiving such
   a frame, RBx removes the TRILL header and forwards it onto D in its
   native form.  Meanwhile, based on the de-capsulation of such a frame,
   RBx learns the (ingress RBridge nickname, source MAC address, VLAN
   ID) triplet.  Edge RBridges maintain such triplets in their
   forwarding table for the potential following transmission of native
   frames.

   Due to failures, reconfiguration and other network dynamics, service
   edge RBridge for S may change over from RB1 to another edge RBridge.
   In this event, remote traffic addressed to S will be still forwarded
   to RB1 by remote RBridge RBx before perceiving this change, and then
   the traffic gets dropped at RB1, causing traffic disruption.
   Furthermore, to improve resiliency and maximize the available network
   bandwidth, an end station typically is multi-homed to several edge
   RBridges and treats all the uplink links as a Link Aggregation Group
   (LAG) bundle.  In this scenario, all those edge RBridges work in an
   active-active load sharing model to provide end-station services for
   an end station even in same VLAN.  When remote RBridge RB2 receives
   different frames, which are originated by such an end station S and
   ingressed into TRILL campus by different such edge RBridge, flip-
   flopping of ingress RBridge nickname for MAC of S will be observed by
   RBx during de-capsulating such frames.  This flip-flopping will cause
   disorder of different frames in traffic, worsening the traffic
   disruption.



Zhai, et al.            Expires February 27, 2013               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft               Pseudo-Nickname                 August 2012


   In this document, concept of Virtual RBridge group, together with its
   Pseudo-nickname, is introduced to address the above issues.  For a
   member RBridge in such a group, it uses the pseudo-nickname of this
   group, instead of its own device nickname, as ingress RBridge
   nickname when encapsulating a frame to its TRILL form with a TRILL
   header.  So, in a RBridge Group, even if there are more than one
   RBridge providing end-station services for a end station or the
   service RBridge changes over from one member RBridge to another in
   same set of VLANs, the ingress RBridge nickname for the MAC of this
   end station will still remain unchanged in remote RBridges'
   forwarding tables.

   This document is organized as following: Section 2 is problem
   statement, which describes why virtual RBridge and its pseudo-
   nickname are required.  Section 3 gives the concept of virtual
   RBridge.  Section 4 describes the consideration for pseudo-nickname
   used in ingressing multi-destination frames.  Section 5 covers
   processing of transit frame traffic when considering pseudo-nickname.

   Familiarity with [RFC6325] is assumed in this document.

1.1.  Terminology and Acronyms

   This document uses the acronyms defined in [RFC6325] and the
   following additional acronym:

   AF - Appointed Forwarder

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].

   When used in lower case, these words convey their typical use in
   common language, and are not to be interpreted as described in
   [RFC2119].


2.  Problem Statement

2.1.  Appointed Forwarders on Shared Links

   If there are multiple RBridges on a shared link, together with end
   stations, only one RBridge is permitted to provide end-station
   services in a VLAN at all times for the end stations to avoid
   possible frame duplication or loops in TRILL campus.  The service
   RBridge is called VLAN-x Appointed Forwarder (AF) on a shared link.

   However, AF for any set of VLANs on a shared link may change over



Zhai, et al.            Expires February 27, 2013               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft               Pseudo-Nickname                 August 2012


   from one RBridge to another, due to failure, configurations and other
   network dynamics, etc.  If such change occurs, local end stations may
   not perceive it, so the end station cannot timely notify remote
   RBridges to update the correspondence between ingress RBridge
   nickname and the MAC of this end station in their forwarding tables.
   As a result, remote RBridges may continue to forward traffic to the
   previous AF and the traffic may be dropped at the previous egress
   RBridge, causing traffic disruption.

2.2.  Multi-homing and Link Aggregation to TRILL Network

   In order to improve the reliability of connection to TRILL network,
   multi-homing technique may be employed by a legacy device, such as a
   switch or end host.  For example, in Figure 1, switch SW1 multi-homes
   to TRILL network by connecting to both RBridge RB1 and RB2 with
   respective links.  Then the end stations (e.g., S1), attached to SW1,
   still get end-station services from TRILL network even if one
   connection of SW1 to TRILL network, e.g., SW1-RB1, fails.  That is to
   say, the service RBridge for S1 changes over from RB1 to RB2 after
   the connection of SW1-RB1 fails, which causes traffic disruption
   temporarily (e.g., traffic from Sx to S1), similar to AF changing in
   Section 2.1.


                     ...........................................
                    :                            TRILL Network  :
                    : +-----+      /\-/\-/\-/\-/\               :
               +------| RB1 |-----/              \              :
               |    : +-----+    /                \             :
            +-----+ :    |      /      Transit     \    +-----+ :
      S1 o--| SW1 | :    |     <      RBridges      >---| RBx |---o Sx
            +-----+ :    |      \      Campus      /    +-----+ :
               |    : +-----+    \                /             :
               +------| RB2 |-----\              /              :
                    : +-----+      \/\-/\-/\-/\-/               :
                    :                                           :
                     ...........................................

                  Figure 1
Multi-homing to TRILL Network

   Furthermore, SW1 may treat the two links as a LAG (Link Aggregation
   Group) bundle, so that the two links form active-active load sharing
   model instead of previous active-stanby model.  That is to say, in
   Figure 1, two service RBridges (e.g., RB1 and RB2) must provide end-
   station services simultaneously to S1 in that VLAN.  And this will
   result in flip-flopping of the ingress RBridge for the MAC of S1 in
   remote RBridges' (e.g., RBx) forwarding tables.  AS a result, this
   flip-flopping will cause much more disorder packets and worsen the



Zhai, et al.            Expires February 27, 2013               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft               Pseudo-Nickname                 August 2012


   traffic disruption.

   Besides switches, end stations can also directly multi-home to TRILL
   network and treat the multi-homing links as a LAG bundle.  The issue
   of traffic disruption also occurs in this scenario if such an end
   station balances different traffic load in a same VLAN among the
   member links.

   In the following sections, concept of RBridge Group, together with
   its nickname, is introduced to fix these issues.


3.  Concept of Virtual RBridge and Pseudo-nickname

   A Virtual RBridge (RBv) represents a group of different ports on
   different edge RBridges, on which these RBridges provide end-station
   service to a set of their attached end stations.  After joining RBv,
   such an RBridge port is called a member port of RBv, and such an
   RBridge becomes a member RBridge of RBv.  In an RBridge RBv is
   identified by its virtual nickname in TRILL campus, and virtual
   nickname is also referred to as pseudo-nickname in this
   specification.

   After joining an RBv, a member RBridge will announce its connection
   to RBv by including the information of that RBv, e.g., the pseudo-
   nickname of RBv, in its self-originated LSP.  From such LSPs, remote
   RBridges that are not a members of RBv can deduce that, one or more
   shortest paths are available from itself to RBv.

   When receiving a native frame on such a port, the member RBridge uses
   the RBv's nickname, instead of its own nickname, as ingress nickname
   in TRILL header if necessary to encapsulate the frame into TRILL data
   form.  By de-capsulating such a TRILL-encapsulated data frame, a
   remote RBridge learns that S is reachable through RBv.

   NOTE: An RBridge port can join at most one RBv at any time, but
   different ports on the same RBridge can join the same RBv or
   different RBvs.  After joining an RBv, such a port becomes a member
   port of the RBv, and the RBridge becomes a member RBridge of the RBv.
   Furthermore, for a member RBridge, it MUST move out of RBv and clear
   the RBv's information from its self-originated LSPs when it loses the
   last member port from this group, due to port down, configuration,
   etc.

   Use of the Appointed Forwarder framework specified in [RFC6325], this
   specification allows to utilize a single framework for both shared
   LAN and point-point edge connectivity.  Additionally this allows to




Zhai, et al.            Expires February 27, 2013               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft               Pseudo-Nickname                 August 2012


   o  Detect and protect against mis-configuration at the edge, e.g., on
      the device SW1 the two interfaces are not configured as LAG or

   o  Accept TRILL and native frames on the RBridge interface connecting
      S1 in above Figure 1.

   o  Avoid loops in the event S1 and S2 were connected by a native
      Ethernet Link.

3.1.  VLAN-x Appointed Forwarder for member interfaces in RBv

   If member RBridges in RBv cannot see each others' Hellos on their
   member ports (e.g., in the LAG scenario), then each RBridge becomes
   Designated RBridge (DRB) for that port and appoints itself as AF for
   all VLANs as it does not see any TRILL hellos on that port.  However,
   it MAY acts as appointed forwarders only for parts of VLANs on that
   port, if it knows explicitly the sets of service VLANs on that port
   via other means.  For example, administrator can statically
   configured the sets of service VLANs on that port, or a lower
   protocol (e.g., LAG protocol) informs TRILL the sets of service VLANs
   on that port, etc.

   However, if they can see each others' Hellos on the member ports in
   RBv (e.g., in the shared link scenario), the TRILL Hello protocol in
   [RFC6325] is used for DRB election and for VLAN-x AFs appointment on
   those ports.  Then the DRB appoints different member ports as AFs for
   different sets of VLANs.

   Among the member RBridges of RBv, only the VLAN-x forwarder is
   responsible to ingress native traffic (both unicast and non-unicast
   traffic) in this VLAN into TRILL campus, but non-forwarder member
   RBridge is also permitted to egress unicast TRILL data traffic out of
   TRILL campus.  For the multi-destination TRILL data frames, only the
   VLAN-x forwarder can egress their out of TRILL campus.

3.2.  Announcing Pseudo-Nickname of RBv

   Each member RBridge advertises the RBv's pseudo-nickname using the
   nickname sub-TLV [rfc6326bis], along with its regular nickname or
   nicknames, in its LSPs.  When a member RBridge leaves from RBv due to
   losing its last member ports in RBv, it MUST clear RBv's pseudo-
   nickname from its update LSPs.


4.  Distribution Trees for Member RBridges in RBv

   In TRILL, RBridges use distribution trees to forward multi-
   destination frames.  When a native frame either to destinations whose



Zhai, et al.            Expires February 27, 2013               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft               Pseudo-Nickname                 August 2012


   location is unknown or to multicast/broadcast groups is necessary to
   be ingressed into TRILL campus, the ingress RBridge encapsulates it
   into multi-destination TRILL data frame and forwards it along a
   chosen distribution tree.  In the TRILL header of the TRILL frame,
   the ingress nickname identifies the ingress RBridge and the egress
   nickname represents the root of the chosen tree.  After receiving a
   multi-destination TRILL data frame, the RBridge performs Reverse Path
   Forwarding (RPF) check, along with other checks, on the multi-
   destination frame to further control potentially looping traffic.

   RPF specifies that a multi-destination TRILL data frame ingressed by
   an RBridge and forwarded along a distribution tree can only be
   received by an RBridge on an expected port.  If not on that port,
   that frame MUST be dropped by that RBridge.

   However, member RBridges employ RBv's pseudo-nickname other than
   their own nicknames as ingress nickname when they ingress native
   frames received on member ports, regardless unicast or non-unicast
   frames, into TRILL campus.  Therefore, when these frames reach a
   remote RBridge, they will be treated, by that RBridge, as frames
   ingressed by the same RBridge, i.e., RBv.  If they are multi-
   destination frames and the same distribution tree is chosen by
   different member RBridges to forward these frames, they will travel
   along the tree and reach a remote RBridge on different ports.  Then
   the RPF check is violated, and some of the frames reaching the
   RBridge on unexpected ports are dropped by the RBridge.

   To fix the above issue, a scalable and resilient approach is proposed
   in [CMT], where different member RBridges are assigned different
   distribution trees for forwarding the multi-destination TRILL data
   frames that using RBv's pseudo-nickname as ingress nickname in their
   TRILL header.  And a new TLV, named Affinity sub-TLV, is also
   introduced for a member RBridge to announce its assigned distribution
   tree for RBv in its self-originated LSPs.  After receiving such LSPs,
   remote RBridges can calculate their RPF check information for RBv on
   those specified trees.

   In this specification, the approach proposed in [CMT] is employed for
   RBv to assign different distribution trees to different member
   RBridges and the Affinity sub-TLV for member RBridges to announce
   their assigned trees in LSPs.

   When a member RBridge joins into or leaves from a virtual RBridge
   group RBv due to its last member ports up/down or its configuration
   changing, etc., the distribution trees assigned to different member
   RBridges may change.  That change and its influence on frame
   processing are beyond the scope of this document.




Zhai, et al.            Expires February 27, 2013               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft               Pseudo-Nickname                 August 2012


5.  Frame Processing

   Although, there are five types of Layer 2 frames in [RFC6325], e.g.,
   native frame, TRILL data frame, TRILL control frames, etc., pseudo-
   nickname of RBv is only used for native frame and TRILL data frame in
   this specification.

5.1.  Data Frames

5.1.1.  Native Frames Ingressing

   When RB1 receives a native frame on one of its valid member ports of
   RBv, it uses the pseudo-nickname of RBv, instead of its own nickname,
   as ingress nickname, if it is the appointed forwarder for the VLAN of
   the frame on the port.  If the frame is not received on a member
   port, RB1 MUST NOT use RBv's pseudo-nickname as ingress nickname when
   doing TRILL-encapsulation on the frame.  Otherwise, the reverse
   traffic may be forwarded to another member RBridge that does not
   connect to the link containing the destination, which may cause the
   traffic disruption.

   If the above native frame is ingressed by RB1 as a multi-destination
   TRILL data frame, e.g., its destination is unknown to RB1 or it is
   non-unicast frame, RB1 can only choose one of its assigned
   distribution trees for RBv to distribute the TRILL-encapsulated frame
   [CMT].  If not so, the multi-destination TRILL data frame will fail
   RPF check on another RBridge and be dropped.

   Furthermore, for such a frame, its source MAC address information ( {
   VLAN, Outer.MacSA, port } ) is learned by default if its source
   address is unicast.  Then the learned information is shared with
   other member RBridges of RBv (See Appendix A for more details for the
   information sharing).

5.1.2.  TRILL Data Frames Egressing

   This section describes egress processing of the received TRILL data
   frames on a member RBridge(RBn, say) in virtual RBridge group of RBv.
   Section 5.1.2.1 describes unicast TRILL data frames egress
   processing.  Section 5.1.2.2 covers multi-destination TRILL data
   frames egress processing.

5.1.2.1.  Unicast TRILL Data Frames

   When receiving a unicast TRILL data frame, RBn checks the egress
   nickname in the TRILL header of the frame.  If the egress nickname is
   one of RBn's own nicknames, the frame is processed as Section 4.6.2.4
   in [RFC6325].



Zhai, et al.            Expires February 27, 2013              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft               Pseudo-Nickname                 August 2012


   If the egress nickname is RBv's pseudo-nickname and RBn is a valid
   member RBridge of RBv, the Inner.MacSA and Inner.VLAN ID are, by
   default, learned associated with the ingress nickname, unless that
   nickname is unknown or reserved or the Inner.MacSA is not unicast.
   If the learned {Inner.MacSA, Inner.VLAN ID, ingress nickname} triplet
   is a new one or updates the locally stored one, this triplet is
   shared with other member RBridges of RBv (See Appendix A for more
   details for the triplet sharing).

   Then the frame being forwarded is de-capsulated to native form.  The
   Inner.MacDA and Inner.VLAN ID are looked up in RBn's local forwarding
   address cache, and one of the three following cases occurs:

   o  If the destination end station identified by the Inner.MacDA and
      Inner.VLAN ID is on a local link to RBv, this frame is sent onto
      the link containing the destination.

   o  else if RBn can reach the destination through another RBridge RBk,
      it re-encapsulate the native frame into a unicast TRILL data frame
      and sends it to RBk.  RBn uses RBk's own nickname, instead of
      RBv's pseudo-nickname as egress nickname for the re-encapsulation,
      and remains the ingress nickname unchanged.

   o  Else, RBn does not know how to reach the destination; it sends the
      native frame out of all its member ports of RBv on which it is
      appointed forwarders for the Inner.VLAN.

5.1.2.2.  Multi-Destination TRILL Data Frames

   If the RBn is an appointed forwarder for the Inner.VLAN ID of the
   frame, the Inner.MacSA and Inner.VLAN ID are, by default, learned as
   associated with the ingress nickname unless that nickname is unknown
   or reserved or the Inner.MacSA is not unicast.  If the learned
   {Inner.MacSA, Inner.VLAN ID, ingress nickname} triplet is a new one
   or updates the locally stored one, this triplet is shared among the
   members RBridges in virtual RBridge group RBv (See Appendix A for
   more details for the triplet sharing).

   Then a copy of the frame is de-capsulated into its native form.
   Before the native frame is sent out of ports on which RBn is
   appointed forwarder for the frame's VLAN, the following extra check
   is performed:

   o  Assigned Distribution Trees Check (ADTC): If the flag for this
      check (ADTC_flag) is not zero on such a port, the distribution
      tree T along which the TRILL data frame arrives at RBn is checked.
      Only if T is one of RBn's assigned distribution trees in RBv, the
      native frame can be send out of this port.  If not, the frame



Zhai, et al.            Expires February 27, 2013              [Page 11]

Internet-Draft               Pseudo-Nickname                 August 2012


      cannot be sent out of this port.

   The value of ADTC_flag on a RBridge's end-station-servicing port
   depends on whether the port is a member port of RBv and RBn can not
   receive Hellos from other member RBridges on that port or not.

   If a port is a member port of RBv and RBn is the appointed forwarder
   for all VLANs on that port, the ADTC_flag MUST be set 1.  For all
   other cases ADTC_flag MUST be set to zero.


6.  Member Link Failure in RBv

   In Figure 1, if the link SW1-RB1 fails, RB1 loses its only local link
   to S1.  When that failure is detected, the MAC entries through the
   failed link to S1 are removed from RB1's forwarding table
   immediately, and other MAC entries to S1 shared by other member
   RBridges of RBv (See Appendix A for more details), e.g., RB2, are
   installed into RB1's forwarding table when RB1 still has at least one
   valid member port in RBv.  Then when the TRILL-encapsulated traffic
   to S1 is delivered to RB1, it can be re-encapsulated by RB1 and
   forwarded, based on the available MAC entries, to another member
   RBridge which has direct link to S1 and egresses the traffic to S1.

   On the other hand, if RB1 has lost all its member ports of RBv, it
   MUST updates its self-orignated LSPs to announce its giving up of
   membership of RBv and no longer utilizes pseudo-nickname of RBv to
   ingress/egress traffic into/out of TRILL campus until one of its
   member ports of RBv becomes valid.

   NOTE: Although on an edge RBridge different ports that connect to
   different LAGs or LANs can join the same RBv, for simplicity, it is
   RECOMMENDED that on an edge RBridge different ports connecting to
   different LAGs or LANs join different RBvs in practical deployment,
   each RBv per LAG or per LAN.  Then for such an edge RBridge, when all
   its member ports connecting to a LAG or LAN failed, it can move out
   of this RBv and no longer uses the RBv's pseudo-nickname to ingress/
   egress data traffic into/out of TRILL campus.


7.  OAM Frames

   Special attention must be paid when generate the OAM frames.  When an
   OAM frame is generated with ingress nickname of RBv, originator
   RBridge's nickname MUST be included in the OAM message to ensure
   response is returned to the originating member of RBv group.





Zhai, et al.            Expires February 27, 2013              [Page 12]

Internet-Draft               Pseudo-Nickname                 August 2012


8.  Configuration Consistency

   It is important that VLAN membership of member ports of end switch
   SW1 is consistent across all of the member ports it is attaching to
   member RBridges of RBv in the point-piont scenario.  Any
   inconsistencies in VLAN membership may result in packet loss or
   having to through an extra hop RBridge before the packet reaches its
   destination end station.

   As an example consider, in Figure 1, on RB1 link SW1-RB1 has VLAN1
   and VLAN2 configured.  Consider only VLAN1 is configured on RB2 on
   SW1-RB2 link.  Both RB1 and RB2 use the same ingress nickname RBv for
   all frames originating from S1.  Hence, RBx will learn MAC address
   from S1 on VLAN2 as originating from RBv.  As a result, on the return
   path RBx may deliver VLAN2 traffic to RB2.  RB2, does not have VLAN2
   configured on SW1-RB2 link and hence may drop the frame or has to
   forward the frame to RB1 to egress it to S1 if RB2 knows RB1 can
   reach S1 in VLAN2.


9.  IANA Considerations

   TBD.


10.  Security Considerations

   TBD.


11.  Acknowledgements

   We would like to thank Mingjiang Chen for his contributions to this
   document.  Additionally, we would like to thank Erik Nordmark, Les
   Ginsberg, Ayan Banerjee, Dinesh Dutt, Anoop Ghanwani, Janardhanan
   Pathang, and Jon Hudson for their good questions and comments.


12.  Normative References

   [CMT]      Senevirathne, T., Pathangi, J., and J. Hudson,
              "Coordinated Multicast Trees (CMT)for TRILL",
              draft-ietf-trill-cmt-00.txt Work in Progress, April 2012.

   [RFC1195]  Callon, R., "Use of OSI IS-IS for routing in TCP/IP and
              dual environments", RFC 1195, December 1990.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate



Zhai, et al.            Expires February 27, 2013              [Page 13]

Internet-Draft               Pseudo-Nickname                 August 2012


              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC6325]  Perlman, R., Eastlake, D., Dutt, D., Gai, S., and A.
              Ghanwani, "Routing Bridges (RBridges): Base Protocol
              Specification", RFC 6325, July 2011.

   [rfc6326bis]
              Eastlake 3rd, D., Banerjee, A., Ghanwani, A., and R.
              Perlman, "Transparent Interconnection of Lots of Links
              (TRILL) Use of IS-IS",
              draft-eastlake-isis-rfc6326bis-07.txt Work in Progress,
              March 2012.


Appendix A.  Reasons for MAC Sharing among Member RBriges

   With the introduction of virtual RBridge, MAC flip-flopping problem
   in LAN or LAG is resolved.  However, in order to forward traffic
   effectively, member RBridges should share some of their learned MAC
   addresses with each other.  For example, see Figure 2 shown below.


                   ...........................................
                  :                            TRILL Network  :
               ^  : +-----+      /\-/\-/\-/\-/\               :
              +-----| RB1 |-----/              \              :
             /    : +-----+    /                \             :
            /     :    |      /      Transit     \    +-----+ :
        S1 o  RBv :    |     <      RBridges      >---| RBx |---o Sx
            \     :    |      \      Campus      /    +-----+ :
             \    : +-----+    \                /             :
              +-----| RB2 |-----\              /              :
               V  : +-----+      \/\-/\-/\-/\-/               :
                  :                                           :
                   ...........................................


                       Figure 2 RBv in
LAG scenario

   In VLAN-x, native frames from S1 to Sx will enter TRILL campus
   through one member RBridge of the RBv, such as RB1 in Figure 2, so
   RB1 learns the location of S1 in VLAN-x; but with regard to reverse
   traffic, RBx may deliver it to RB2 if it thinks the shortest path to
   RBv is through RB2.  Then, if RB2 knows the location of S1 and the
   link RB2-S1 is good, it egresses the traffic directly to S1.
   However, if the link fails and RB2 has not learn the location of S1
   in VLAN-x, RB2 cannot transmit the traffic properly to S1.




Zhai, et al.            Expires February 27, 2013              [Page 14]

Internet-Draft               Pseudo-Nickname                 August 2012


   Thus, the MAC addresses of attached end stations on one member
   RBridge SHOULD be shared with the rest member RBridges in an RBv.
   With these informations shared, when RB2 receives reverse frames, it
   can determine how to forward them to S1, for example, forward them to
   RB1 if the link RB2-S1 fails.

   On the other hand, RBx always delivers the reverse traffic to RB2 if
   it thinks the shortest path to RBv is through RB2.  Then RB2 egresses
   the traffic and learns the location of Sx in the case its link to S1
   is good.  RB1 will not know where Sx is if neighbor it has other ways
   to get the location of Sx nor RB2 shares this information with it.
   As a result, it has to always treat the traffic from S1 to Sx as
   unknown destination traffic and multicast it in TRILL.  Always multi-
   casting such traffic adds additional forwarding burden on TRILL
   network.

   Therefore, in addition to local attached end station MAC addresses,
   the learned remote MAC addresses should also be shared among all
   other member RBridges in an RBv.  With such information sharing, RB1
   can treat the traffic to Sx as known destination traffic and unicast
   it to RBx.

   Although we can extend ESADI (End Stations Address Distribution
   Information) protocol or LAG protocol, etc., for such MAC sharing,
   ways for the sharing are beyond the scope of this document.


Authors' Addresses

   Hongjun Zhai
   ZTE
   68 Zijinghua Road, Yuhuatai District
   Nanjing, Jiangsu  210012
   China

   Phone: +86 25 52877345
   Email: zhai.hongjun@zte.com.cn


   Tissa Senevirathne
   Cisco Systems
   375 East Tasman Drive
   San Jose, CA  95134
   USA

   Phone: +1-408-853-2291
   Email: tsenevir@cisco.com




Zhai, et al.            Expires February 27, 2013              [Page 15]

Internet-Draft               Pseudo-Nickname                 August 2012


   Radia Perlman
   Intel Labs
   2200 Mission College Blvd
   Santa Clara, CA  95054-1549
   USA

   Phone: +1-408-765-8080
   Email: Radia@alum.mit.edu


   Donald Eastlake 3rd
   Huawei
   155 Beaver Street
   Milford, MA  01757
   USA

   Phone: +1-508-333-2270
   Email: d3e3e3@gmail.com


   Mingui Zhang
   Huawei
   Huawei Building, No.156 Beiqing Rd.
   Beijing, Beijing  100095
   China

   Email: zhangmingui@huawei.com


   Fangwei Hu
   ZTE
   889 Bibo Road, Pudong District
   Shanghai, Shanghai  201203
   China

   Phone: +86 21 68896273
   Email: hu.fangwei@zte.com.cn














Zhai, et al.            Expires February 27, 2013              [Page 16]


