

TRILL Working Group                                              H. Zhai
Internet-Draft                                                     F. Hu
Intended status: Standards Track                                     ZTE
Expires: November 16, 2012                                    R. Perlman
                                                              Intel Labs
                                                         D. Eastlake 3rd
                                                                  Huawei
                                                            MAY 15, 2012


                        RBridge: Pseudo-Nickname
                 draft-hu-trill-pseudonode-nickname-02

Abstract

   At the edg of TRILL campus, some RBridges provide end-station
   services to their attached end stations, these RBridges are called
   edge RBridges.  To avoid potential frame duplication or loops in
   TRILL campus, only one edge RBridge is permitted to provide end-
   station services in a VLAN x at all times for its attached end
   stations.  However, in some application scenarios, for example in
   Link Aggregation Group (LAG), more than one edge RBridge is required
   to provide end-station services to an end stations even in a VLAN,
   which causes the flip-flopping of the egress RBridge nickname for
   such an end node in remote RBridges' forwarding tables if nothing to
   do.  In this document, the concept of Virtual RBridge, along with its
   pseudo-nickname, is introduced to fix the above problem.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on November 16, 2012.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2012 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the



Zhai, et al.            Expires November 16, 2012               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft               Pseudo-Nickname                    MAY 2012


   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.1.  Terminology and Acronyms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.  Problem Statement  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     2.1.  Appointed Forwarders on Shared Links . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     2.2.  Multi-homing and Link Aggregation to TRILL Network . . . .  5
   3.  Concept of Virtual RBridge and Pseudo-nickname . . . . . . . .  6
     3.1.  VLAN-x Appointed Forwarder for member interfaces in RBv  .  7
     3.2.  Announcing Pseudo-Nickname of RBv  . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   4.  Distribution Trees for Member RBridges in RBv  . . . . . . . .  7
   5.  Frame Processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     5.1.  Data Frames  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
       5.1.1.  Native Frames Ingressing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
       5.1.2.  TRILL Data Frames Egressing  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
         5.1.2.1.  Unicast TRILL Data Frames  . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
         5.1.2.2.  Multi-Destination TRILL Data Frames  . . . . . . . 10
     5.2.  OAM Frames . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   6.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   7.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   8.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   9.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11















Zhai, et al.            Expires November 16, 2012               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft               Pseudo-Nickname                    MAY 2012


1.  Introduction

   The IETF TRILL protocol [RFC6325] provides optimal pair-wise data
   frame forwarding without configuration, safe forwarding even during
   periods of temporary loops, and support for multi-pathing of both
   unicast and multicast traffic.  TRILL accomplishes this by using
   [IS-IS] [RFC1195] link state routing and encapsulating traffic using
   a header that includes a hop count.  The design supports VLANs and
   optimization of the distribution of multi-destination frames based on
   VLANs and IP derived multicast groups.  Devices that implement TRILL
   are called RBridges.

   In TRILL protocol, RBridges are identified by nicknames (16-bits).
   Different RBridge has different nickname(s).  At the edge of TRILL
   network, some RBridges connect to legacy networks on one side and to
   TRILL network on the other side.  These RBridges are called edge
   RBridges.  For the connectivity between the two types of network,
   edge RBridges provide end-station services to end stations located in
   legacy networks.  When receiving a native frame from such a local end
   station S, the servicing edge RBridge RB1 encapsulates the frame in a
   TRILL header, addressing the packet to RBridge RB2 which the
   destination end station D is attached to.  The TRILL header contains
   an "ingress RBridge nickname" field (RB1's nickname), an "egress
   RBridge nickname" field (RB2's nickname), and a hop count.  On
   receiving such a frame, RB2 removes the TRILL header and forwards it
   onto D in its native form.  Meanwhile, based on the de-capsulation of
   such a frame, RB2 learns the (ingress RBridge nickname, source MAC
   address, VLAN ID) triplet.  Edge RBridges maintain such triplets in
   their forwarding table for the potential following transmission of
   native frames.

   Due to failures, reconfiguration and other network dynamics,
   servicing edge RBridge for S may change, i.e., no longer is RB1.  In
   this event, remote traffic addressed to S will be still forwarded to
   RB1 by remote RBridge RB2 before perceiving this change, and then the
   traffic gets dropped at R1, causing traffic disruption.  Furthermore,
   to improve resiliency and maximize the available network bandwidth,
   an end station typically is multi-homed to several edge RBridges and
   treats all the uplink links as a Link Aggregation Group (LAG) buddle.
   In this scenario, all those edge RBridges work in an active-active
   load sharing model to provide end-station services for an end station
   even in same VLAN.  When remote RBridge RB2 receives different
   frames, which are originated by such an end station S and ingressed
   into TRILL campus by different such edge RBridge, flip-flopping of
   ingress RBridge nickname for MAC of S will be observed by RB2 during
   de-capsulating such frames.  This flip-flopping will cause disorder
   of different frames in traffic, worsening the traffic disruption.




Zhai, et al.            Expires November 16, 2012               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft               Pseudo-Nickname                    MAY 2012


   In this document, concept of Virtual RBridge group, together with its
   Pseudo-nickname, is introduced to address the above issues.  For a
   member RBridge in such a group, it uses the pseudo-nickname of this
   group, instead of its own device nickname, as ingress RBridge
   nickname when encapsulating a frame to its TRILL form with a TRILL
   header.  So, in a RBridge Group, even if there are more than one
   RBridge providing end-station services for a end station or the
   servicing RBridge changes over from one member RBridge to another in
   same set of VLANs, the ingress RBridge nickname for the MAC of this
   end station will still remain unchanged in remote RBridges'
   forwarding tables.

   This document is organized as following: Section 2 is problem
   statement, which describes why virtual RBridge and its pseudo-
   nickname are required.  Section 3 gives the concept of virtual
   RBridge.  Section 4 describes the consideration for pseudo-nickname
   used in ingressing multi-destination frames.  Section 5 covers
   processing of transit frame traffic when considering pseudo-nickname.

   Familiarity with [RFC6325] is assumed in this document.

1.1.  Terminology and Acronyms

   This document uses the acronyms defined in [RFC6325] and the
   following additional acronym:

   AF - Appointed Forwarder

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].

   When used in lower case, these words convey their typical use in
   common language, and are not to be interpreted as described in
   [RFC2119].


2.  Problem Statement

2.1.  Appointed Forwarders on Shared Links

   In TRILL, RBridges can co-exist with legacy bridges in a traditional
   Ethernet.  A set of links connected by bridges will be perceived by
   RBridges as a single shared link connecting the RBridges on that
   link.  If there are multiple RBridges on a shared link, together with
   end stations, only one RBridge is permitted to provide end-station
   services in a VLAN x at all times for the end stations to avoid
   possible frame duplication or loops in TRILL campus.  The service



Zhai, et al.            Expires November 16, 2012               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft               Pseudo-Nickname                    MAY 2012


   RBridge is called VLAN-x Appointed Forwarder (AF) on a shared link.

   However, AF for any set of VLANs on a shared link may change over
   from one RBridge to another, due to failure, configurations and other
   network dynamics, etc.  If such change occurs, local end stations may
   not perceive it, so the end station cannot timely notify remote
   RBridges to update the correspondence between ingress RBridge
   nickname and the MAC of this end station in their forwarding tables.
   As a result, remote RBridges may continue to forward traffic to the
   previous AF and the traffic may be dropped at the previous egress
   RBridge, causing traffic disruption.

2.2.  Multi-homing and Link Aggregation to TRILL Network

   In order to improve the reliability of connection to TRILL network,
   multi-homing technique may be employed by a legacy device, such as a
   switch or end host.  For example, in Figure 1, switch SW1 multi-homes
   to TRILL network by connecting to both RBridge RB1 and RB2 with
   respective links.  Then the end stations (e.g., S1), attached to SW1,
   still get end-station services from TRILL network even if one
   connection of SW1 to TRILL network, e.g., SW1-RB1, fails.  That is to
   say, the service RBridge for S1 changes over from RB1 to RB2 after
   the connection of SW1-RB1 fails, which causes traffic disruption
   temporarily (e.g., traffic from Sx to S1), similar to AF changing in
   Section 2.1.


                     ..........................................
                    :                            TRILL Network  :
                    : +-----+      /\-/\-/\-/\-/\               :
               +------| RB1 |-----/              \              :
               |    : +-----+    /                \             :
            +-----+ :    |      /      Transit     \    +-----+ :
      S1 o--| SW1 | :    |     <      RBridges      >---| RBx |---o Sx
            +-----+ :    |      \      Campus      /    +-----+ :
               |    : +-----+    \                /             :
               +------| RB2 |-----\              /              :
                    : +-----+      \/\-/\-/\-/\-/               :
                    :                                           :
                     ...........................................

                  Figure 1 Multi-homing to TRILL Network

   Furthermore, SW1 may treat the two links as a LAG (Link Aggregation
   Group) bundle, so that the two links form active-active load sharing
   model instead of previous active-stanby model.  That is to say, in
   Figure 1, two service RBridges (e.g., RB1 and RB2) provide end-
   station services simultaneously to S1 in that VLAN.  And this will



Zhai, et al.            Expires November 16, 2012               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft               Pseudo-Nickname                    MAY 2012


   result in flip-flopping of the ingress RBridge for the MAC of S1 in
   remote RBridges' (e.g., RBx) forwarding tables.  AS a result, this
   flip-flopping will cause much more disorder packets and worsen the
   traffic disruption.

   Besides switches, end stations can also directly multi-home to TRILL
   network and treat the multi-homing links as a LAG bundle.  The issue
   of traffic disruption also occurs in this scenario if such an end
   station balances different traffic load in a same VLAN among the
   member links.

   In the following sections, concept of RBridge Group, together with
   its nickname, is introduced to fix these issues.


3.  Concept of Virtual RBridge and Pseudo-nickname

   A Virtual RBridge (RBv) represents a group of different ports on
   different edge RBridges, on which these RBridges end-station service
   provide to a set of their attached end stations.  After joining RBv,
   such an RBridge port is called a member port of RBv, and such an
   RBridge becomes a member RBridge of RBv. in TRILL campus, an RBv is
   identified by its virtual nickname in TRILL campus, and virtual
   nickname is also described as pseudo-nickname in this specification.

   After joining an RBv, a member RBridge will announce its connection
   to RBv by including the information of this RBv, e.g., the pseudo-
   nickname of RBv, in its self-originated LSP.  From such LSPs, a
   remote RBridge that is not a member of RBv can obtain that, through
   one or more of such member RBridges, one or more shortest paths are
   available from itself to RBv by running Shortest-Path-First (SPF)
   algorithm.

   When receiving a native frame on such a port, the member RBridge uses
   the RBv's nickname, instead of its own nickname, as ingress nickname
   in TRILL header if necessary to encapsulate the frame into TRILL data
   form.  By de-capsulating such a TRILL-encapsulated data frame, a
   remote RBridge learns that S is reachable through RBv.

   NOTES: An RBridge port can join at most one RBv at any time, but
   different ports on the same RBridge can join the same RBv or
   different RBvs.  After joining an RBv, such a port becomes a member
   port of the RBv, and the RBridge becomes a member RBridge of the RBv.
   Furthermore, for a member RBridge, it MUST move out of RBv and clear
   the RBv's information from its self-originated LSPs when it loses the
   last member port from this group, due to port down, configuration,
   etc.




Zhai, et al.            Expires November 16, 2012               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft               Pseudo-Nickname                    MAY 2012


3.1.  VLAN-x Appointed Forwarder for member interfaces in RBv

   If member RBridges in RBv cannot see each others' Hellos on their
   member interfaces (e.g., in the LAG scenario), then each RBridge
   becomes Designated RBridge (DRB) for that interface and appoints
   itself as AF for all VLANs as it does not see any TRILL hellos on
   that interface.

   However, if they can see each others' Hellos on the member interfaces
   in RBv (e.g., in the shared link scenario), the TRILL Hello protocol
   in RFC 6325 is used for DRB election and for VLAN-x AFs appointment
   for those interfaces.  Then the DRB appoints different member
   interfaces as AFs for different VLANs.

   Among the member RBridges of RBv, when receiving a local native frame
   in VLAN-x, only the AF for this VLAN can ingress the frame into TRILL
   campus if necessary.  However, in this specification, when receiving
   a TRILL data frame addressed to RBv, an member RBridge that is not AF
   for the inner VLAN of the frame can de-capsulate the frame and
   forward it in native form directly to the destination end station.

3.2.  Announcing Pseudo-Nickname of RBv

   Each member RBridge advertises the RBv's pseudo-nickname using the
   nickname sub-TLV [rfc6326bis], along with its regular nickname or
   nicknames, in its LSPs.  When a member RBridge leaves from RBv due to
   losing its last member ports in RBv, it MUST clear RBv's pseudo-
   nickname from its LSPs.


4.  Distribution Trees for Member RBridges in RBv

   In TRILL, RBridges use distribution trees to forward multi-
   destination frames.  When a native frame either to destinations whose
   location is unknown or to multicast/broadcast groups is necessary to
   be ingressed into TRILL campus, the ingress RBridge encapsulates it
   into multi-destination TRILL data frame with a TRILL header and
   forwards the TRILL frame along a chosen distribution tree.  In the
   TRILL header, the ingress nickname identifies the ingress RBridge,
   the egress nickname represents the root of the chosen tree.  After
   receiving a multi-destination TRILL data frame, the RBridge performs
   Reverse Path Forwarding (RPF) check, along with other checks, on the
   multi-destination frame to further control potentially looping
   traffic.

   RPF specifies that a multi-destination TRILL data frame ingressed by
   an RBridge and forwarded along a distribution tree can only be
   received by an RBridge from an expected port.  If not from that port,



Zhai, et al.            Expires November 16, 2012               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft               Pseudo-Nickname                    MAY 2012


   this frame MUST be dropped by the receiving RBridge.

   However, member RBridges in RBv employs RBv's pseudo-nickname other
   than their own nicknames as ingress nickname when they ingress a
   native frame, regardless unicast or multicast frame, into TRILL
   campus.  So if different member RBridges chose same distribution
   tree(s) to forward different multi-destination TRILL data frames,
   these frames may reach a remote RBridge from different ports, which
   violates the RPF check.  Then some of these frames will be dropped by
   the remote RBridge.

   To fix the above issue, a scalable and resilient approach is proposed
   in [cmt], where different member RBridges are assigned different
   distribution trees for forwarding the multi-destination TRILL data
   frames that using RBv's pseudo-nickname as ingress nickname in their
   TRILL header.  And a new TLV, named Affinity sub-TLV, is also
   introduced for a member RBridge to announce its assigned distribution
   tree for RBv in its self-originated LSPs.  After receiving such LSPs,
   a remote RBridge can calculate RPF check information for RBv on those
   specified trees.

   In this specification, the approach proposed in [cmt] is employed for
   RBv to assign different distribution trees to different member
   RBridges (more exactly, to member ports on different member RBridges)
   and for these members to announce their assigned trees in LSPs.


5.  Frame Processing

   Although, there are five types of Layer 2 frames in [RFC6325], e.g.,
   native frame, TRILL data frame, TRILL control frames, etc., pseudo-
   nickname of RBv is only used for native frame and TRILL data frame in
   this specification.

5.1.  Data Frames

5.1.1.  Native Frames Ingressing

   When RB1 receives a native frame on one of its valid member ports of
   RBv, it uses the pseudo-nickname of RBv, instead of its own nickname,
   as ingress nickname of TRILL header in doing necessary TRILL-
   encapsulation on the frame if it is uninhibited appointed forwarder
   for the VLAN of the frame on the port.  If the frame is not received
   on such a port, RB1 MUST NOT use RBv's pseudo-nickname as ingress
   nickname when encapsulating the frame with a TRILL header.
   Otherwise, the reverse traffic may be forwarded to another member
   RBridge that does not connect to the link containing the destination,
   which may cause the traffic disruption.



Zhai, et al.            Expires November 16, 2012               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft               Pseudo-Nickname                    MAY 2012


   If the above native frame is ingressed by RB1 as a multi-destination
   TRILL data frame, e.g., its destination is unknown to RB1 or it is
   non-unicast frame, RB1 can only choose one of its assigned
   distribution trees for RBv to distribute the TRILL-encapsulated
   frame[cmt].  If not so, the multi-destination TRILL data frame will
   fail RPF check on another RBridge and be dropped.

5.1.2.  TRILL Data Frames Egressing

   This section describes egress processing of the received TRILL data
   frames on member RBridges RBn in virtual RBridge group of RBv.
   Section 5.1.2.1 describes unicast TRILL data frames egress
   processing.  Section 5.1.2.2 covers multi-destination TRILL data
   fames egress processing.

5.1.2.1.  Unicast TRILL Data Frames

   When receiving a unicast TRILL data frame, RBn checks the egress
   nickname in the TRILL header of the frame.  If the egress nickname is
   one of RBn's own nicknames, the frame is processed as Section 4.6.2.4
   in [RFC6325].

   If the egress nickname is the pseudo-nickname of RBv's in which RBn
   is a valid member RBridge, the Inner.MacSA and Inner.VLAN ID are, by
   default, learned as associated with the ingress nickname unless that
   nickname is unknown or reserved or the Inner.MacSA is not unicast.
   If the learned {Inner.MacSA, Inner.VLAN ID, ingress nickname} triplet
   is a new one or updated the locally stored one, this triplet is
   shared among the members RBridges in virtual RBridge group RBv (See
   Appendix A for more details for the triplet sharing).

   Then the frame being forwarded is de-capsulated to native form.  The
   Inner.MacDA and Inner.VLAN ID are looked up in RBn's local address
   cache, and one of the three following cases occurs:

   o  If the destination end station identified by the Inner.MacDA and
      Inner.VLAN ID is on a local links to RBv, this frame is sent onto
      the link containing the destination.

   o  else if RBn can reach the destinaiton through another RBridge RBm,
      it re-encapsulate the native frame into a unicast TRILL data frame
      and sends it to RBk.  RBn uses RBk's own nickname, instead of
      RBv's pseudo-nickname for the re-encapsulation, and remains the
      ingress nickname unchanged.

   o  Else, RBn does not know how to reach the destination; it sends the
      native frame out of all its member ports of RBv.




Zhai, et al.            Expires November 16, 2012               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft               Pseudo-Nickname                    MAY 2012


   NOTE: In the first and third case, whether RBn is the appointed
   forwarder for the frame's VLAN on the link(s) or not, it sends the
   unicast frame onto the link(s).

5.1.2.2.  Multi-Destination TRILL Data Frames

   If the RBn is an appointed forwarder for the Inner.VLAN ID of the
   frame, the Inner.MacSA and Inner.VLAN ID are, by default, learned as
   associated with the ingress nickname unless that nickname is unknown
   or reserved or the Inner.MacSA is not unicast.  If the learned
   {Inner.MacSA, Inner.VLAN ID, ingress nickname} triplet is a new one
   or updated the locally stored one, this triplet is shared among the
   members RBridges in virtual RBridge group RBv (See Appendix A for
   more details for the triplet sharing).

   Then a copy of the frame is de-capsulated into its native form.
   Before the native frame is sent out of ports on which RBn is
   appointed forwarder for the frame's VLAN, the following extra check
   is performed:

   o  Assigned Distribution Trees Check (ADT)GBPoIf the flag for this
      check (ADT_flag) is not zero on such a port, the distribution tree
      T on which the TRILL data frame arrives at RBn is checked.  Only
      if T is one of RBn's assigned distribution trees in RBv, the
      native frame can be send out of this port.  If not, the frame
      cannot be sent out of this port.

   The value of ADT_flag on a RBridge's end-station-servicing port
   depends on whether the port is a member port of RBv and RBn is the
   appointed forwarder for all VLANs on this port or not.  If so, the
   ADT_flag on this port MUST be set zero.  Otherwise, ADT_flag MUST NOT
   be set zero.

5.2.  OAM Frames

   For member RBridges, when they originate TRILL OAM frames, they MUST
   NOT use RBv's pseudo-nickname as ingress nickname in this frame's
   TRILL header.  Otherwise, it is possible that the reverse OAM message
   is not able to return to the original member RBridge, resulting in
   the OAM session disruption.


6.  IANA Considerations

   TBD.






Zhai, et al.            Expires November 16, 2012              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft               Pseudo-Nickname                    MAY 2012


7.  Security Considerations

   TBD.


8.  Acknowledgements

   We would like to thank Mingjiang Chen for his contributions to this
   document.  Additionally, we would like to thank Erik Nordmark, Les
   Ginsberg, Ayan Banerjee, Dinesh Dutt, Anoop Ghanwani, Mingui Zhang,
   Janardhanan Pathang, Jon Hudson, and Tissa Senevirathne for their
   good questions and comments.


9.  Normative References

   [RFC1195]  Callon, R., "Use of OSI IS-IS for routing in TCP/IP and
              dual environments", RFC 1195, December 1990.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC6325]  Perlman, R., Eastlake, D., Dutt, D., Gai, S., and A.
              Ghanwani, "Routing Bridges (RBridges): Base Protocol
              Specification", RFC 6325, July 2011.

   [cmt]      Senevirathne, T., Pathangi, J., and J. Hudson,
              "Coordinated Multicast Trees (CMT)for TRILL",
              draft-ietf-trill-cmt-00.txt Work in Progress, April 2012.

   [rfc6326bis]
              Eastlake 3rd, D., Banerjee, A., Ghanwani, A., and R.
              Perlman, "Transparent Interconnection of Lots of Links
              (TRILL) Use of IS-IS",
              draft-eastlake-isis-rfc6326bis-07.txt Work in Progress,
              March 2012.















Zhai, et al.            Expires November 16, 2012              [Page 11]

Internet-Draft               Pseudo-Nickname                    MAY 2012


Authors' Addresses

   Hongjun Zhai
   ZTE
   68 Zijinghua Road, Yuhuatai District
   Nanjing, Jiangsu  210012
   China

   Phone: +86 25 52877345
   Email: zhai.hongjun@zte.com.cn


   Fangwei Hu
   ZTE
   889 Bibo Road, Pudong District
   Shanghai, Shanghai  201203
   China

   Phone: +86 21 68896273
   Email: hu.fangwei@zte.com.cn


   Radia Perlman
   Intel Labs
   2200 Mission College Blvd
   Santa Clara, CA  95054-1549
   USA

   Phone: +1-408-765-8080
   Email: Radia@alum.mit.edu


   Donald Eastlake 3rd
   Huawei
   155 Beaver Street
   Milford, MA  01757
   USA

   Phone: +1-508-333-2270
   Email: d3e3e3@gmail.com











Zhai, et al.            Expires November 16, 2012              [Page 12]


