Proto                                                    E. Juskevicius
Internet Draft                                                TrekAhead
Intended status: Informational                            June 15, 2010
Expires: December 15, 2010


     Requirements to Extend the Datatracker for WG Chairs and Authors
           draft-juskevicius-datatracker-wgdocstate-reqts-04.txt


Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with
   the provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents
   at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as
   reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html

   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 15, 2010.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with
   respect to this document.  Code Components extracted from this
   document must include Simplified BSD License text as described in
   Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without
   warranty as described in the Simplified BSD License.







Juskevicius           Expires December 15, 2010                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft       WG Datatracker Requirements              June 2010


Abstract

   This document specifies requirements for new functionality to be
   added to the IETF Datatracker tool to make it possible for Working
   Group (WG) Chairs and their delegates to input and update the status
   of WG documents.  After the functionality is implemented, WG Chairs,
   WG document authors and all other IETF participants will have access
   to more information about the WG status history, current state, and
   progression of IETF WG documents from their earliest stages.

Table of Contents

   1. Introduction...................................................3
   2. Conventions used in this document..............................3
   3. General requirements...........................................4
   4. Privilege and Access Control requirements......................6
      4.1. For everyone..............................................6
      4.2. For IETF Working Group Chairs.............................6
      4.3. For Delegates of IETF WG Chairs...........................7
      4.4. For WG Document Shepherds.................................7
      4.5. For the Responsible Area Director.........................9
      4.6. Role of the IETF Secretariat in granting permissions......9
   5. Inputting and updating WG document status information..........9
      5.1. WG Document States........................................9
      5.2. WG Document Status Annotation Tags.......................10
      5.3. WG document Protocol Write-ups...........................11
   6. Special requirements for some WG I-D states and conditions....11
      6.1. Candidate WG Document....................................11
      6.2. Adopted by a WG..........................................14
      6.3. Not Adopted by a WG......................................15
      6.4. WG Document..............................................16
      6.5. In WG Last Call..........................................16
      6.6. WG Consensus: Waiting for Write-Up.......................17
      6.7. Submitted to IESG for Publication........................18
      6.8. Revised I-D Needed (annotation tag)......................18
   7. WG Status of I-Ds that are not updated by Chairs or Delegates.18
   8. WG document status change reporting requirements..............19
   9. WG document status reporting requirements.....................20
   10. Error handling requirements..................................20
   11. Security Considerations......................................20
   12. IANA Considerations..........................................21
   13. References...................................................21
      13.1. Normative References....................................21
      13.2. Informative References..................................21
   14. Acknowledgments..............................................21






Juskevicius           Expires December 15, 2010                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft       WG Datatracker Requirements              June 2010


1. Introduction

   The IETF Datatracker is a web-based system for managing information
   about Internet-Drafts (I-Ds), RFCs, IPR disclosures, and several
   other important aspects of the IETF process. [IDTRACKER]

   The Datatracker can be used to obtain a lot of information about the
   status of any I-D that has been sent to the IESG for evaluation.  In
   contrast, the tool can only report on the availability status (e.g.,
   Expired, Active, Replaced, Withdrawn, published as an RFC) of an I-D
   that has not been sent to the IESG. [WGDRAFTS]

   Document authors and other IETF participants have asked for more
   visibility into the status and progression of WG I-Ds.

   This document specifies requirements to extend the Datatracker to
   make it possible for IETF WG Chairs and their delegates to indicate
   the status of documents adopted by their WGs with more precision
   than is currently possible.  After the requirements are implemented,
   the Datatracker will be able to track and display more information
   about the status, history and progression of every I-D associated
   with an IETF WG.

2. Conventions used in this document

   The phrase "I-D associated with an IETF WG" is used throughout this
   document.  It is intended to describe all of the I-Ds that have been
   adopted by an IETF WG and every I-D which is being considered for
   adoption by a WG.  An I-D having a filename that contains the string
   "draft-ietf-" followed by a WG acronym is almost always a WG
   document, however this file naming convention is not always followed
   by document authors.  An individual submission I-D that is being
   considered for adoption by a WG may have a filename that includes
   the author's name and the WG acronym.  Both are to be considered as
   being "associated with an IETF WG" for the purposes of this
   document.

   The phrase "WG document" is used as a synonym for a "WG I-D" in the
   context of this document.  As such, this phrase does not include any
   other document that may be reviewed, discussed, or produced by an
   IETF WG.  Working Group meeting materials such as Blue Sheets,
   agendas, jabber logs, scribe's notes, minutes, and presentation
   slides are not to be considered to be "WG documents" in the context
   of this document.

   The phase "WG status of an I-D" is to be interpreted as referring to
   the document state that an I-D is in as defined in Section 3.3 of
   [WGDRAFTS].  This phrase is not to be interpreted to include the I-D
   availability states described in Section 3.1 of [WGDRAFTS], or any


Juskevicius           Expires December 15, 2010                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft       WG Datatracker Requirements              June 2010


   of the document states used to by the IESG to describe the status of
   I-Ds that they are evaluating.

   The requirements specified in this document use English phrases
   ending with "(R-nnn)", where "nnn" is a unique requirement number.

   When used in the context of the requirements in this document, the
   key words "MUST", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", and "SHOULD NOT"
   are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].  RFC 2119
   defines the use of these key words to help make the intent of
   standards track documents as clear as possible.  The same key words
   are used in this document to make the meaning of the requirements
   specified herein as clear as possible.

3. General requirements

   The Datatracker SHALL be enhanced to provide IETF WG Chairs and the
   people they designate to act as their delegates with the flexibility
   to input and update the WG status of some, all, or none of the I-Ds
   associated with their WGs using all of the WG document states
   defined in [WGDRAFTS] or a subset of those states. (R-001)

   The following two examples clarify Requirement R-001:

  - the Chairs (and their delegates) of a newly chartered IETF WG may
    choose to input and track the changes to the status of every WG I-D
    to provide maximum transparency to the IETF community and to manage
    the progression of the I-Ds in their WG;

  - the Chairs of a WG that has almost finished its charter milestones
    may decide to do otherwise.

   The Datatracker SHALL NOT permit users other than a working group's
   Chairs (such as for instance other WG Chairs) to update information
   about the status of a WG's documents through the regular Datatracker
   interface, unless the privileges to do so have been explicitly
   delegated to them by one of the WG's Chairs. (R-002)

   The WG status of an I-D SHALL be tracked using the WG document
   states, WG document status annotation tags, and intended document
   maturity levels specified in [WGDRAFTS]. (R-003)

   The implementation of Requirement R-003 SHALL NOT impair the ability
   of the Datatracker to track and display the availability state of
   any I-D (viz. Active, Expired, Replaced, Withdrawn, published as an
   RFC). (R-004)  I-D availability states are described in Section 3.1
   of [WGDRAFTS].




Juskevicius           Expires December 15, 2010                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft       WG Datatracker Requirements              June 2010


   The user-interface to be created to input WG I-D status information
   into the Datatracker SHOULD have a look and feel that is similar to
   the interface used by IETF ADs to identify the status of documents
   under formal evaluation by the IESG. (R-005)

   Any new pages created to display the WG status of I-Ds to IETF
   participants SHOULD be designed to have a look and feel that is
   similar to the pages currently used by the Datatracker to display
   the status of documents under formal evaluation by the IESG. (R-006)

   Requirement R-001 provides WG Chairs with the flexibility to input a
   lot of information into the Datatracker about the WG status of I-Ds
   associated with their WGs.  R-001 also allows WG Chairs to decide
   *not* to do this.

   If the Chairs of a WG decide not to input the status of some or all
   of the I-Ds associated with their WG, the Datatracker will be able
   to automatically identify I-Ds that have been adopted and have
   become WG documents in that WG.  The tool will also identify I-Ds
   from that WG that are sent to the IESG for evaluation.  The
   requirements for this feature are specified in Section 7 of this
   document.

   The Datatracker SHOULD date and timestamp every update to the WG
   status of an I-D and use that information when asked to display the
   WG status change history of an I-D. (R-007)  The WG status change
   history for each I-D SHOULD also identify the person or entity that
   updated the WG status of the I-D (e.g. one of the WG's Chairs, a
   delegate, an AD, the System, the IETF Secretariat) and describe the
   change in the WG status of the I-D (e.g. "WG State changed from 'a'
   to 'b'", "Document Annotation Tag 'x' Set (or Reset)", "Document
   Availability changed from 'j' to 'k'"). (R-008)

   The inputting or updating of the WG status of an I-D SHALL NOT
   overwrite any previously archived status change history information
   for the I-D; every update to the WG status of an I-D MUST be added
   to the status change history log for the I-D. (R-009)

   WG document status tracking SHOULD be implemented using a new WG
   state machine that is separate from Datatracker's existing IESG
   document status tracking state machine. (R-010)  The state that a WG
   I-D is in, in each state machine, MUST be able to be independently
   updated by the authorized users of each state machine. (R-011)








Juskevicius           Expires December 15, 2010                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft       WG Datatracker Requirements              June 2010


4. Privilege and Access Control requirements

4.1. For everyone

   Every IETF participant must be allowed to view information about the
   WG status of an I-D without logging on to the Datatracker; everyone
   SHALL have 'read' access to WG document status information. (R-012)

   People who need to input, modify or update the WG status of an I-D
   need 'write' privileges; these users SHALL be required to log-on to
   the Datatracker using a personal user-id and password (e.g. an IETF
   tools password) in order to gain 'write' access. (R-013)

4.2. For IETF Working Group Chairs

   When an IETF WG Chair needs to input or update the WG status of an
   I-D in one of his or her WGs, the WG Chair SHALL be required to log-
   on to the Datatracker using a personal user-id and password (e.g.,
   an IETF tools password) in order to gain 'write' access. (R-014)

   After successfully logging on to the Datatracker, IETF WG Chairs:

  - SHALL be given full 'read' and 'write' privileges to input and
    update WG status information for all of the I-Ds associated with
    their WGs; (R-015)

  - SHALL be able to use all of the WG document states and status
    annotation tags defined in [WGDRAFTS] to describe the status of
    the I-Ds associated with their WGs; (R-016)

  - SHALL be given the option to select a subset of the WG document
    states defined in [WGDRAFTS] to be used in their WGs if they do not
    want to use of all of the predefined WG document states; (R-017)

  - SHALL NOT be able to create ad hoc WG document states or state
    names; (R-018)

  - SHALL NOT be allowed to update or modify information which is not
    related to the WG status of an I-D (e.g., IANA status, RFC-Editor
    status, IESG status; (R-019)

  - SHALL be able to designate one or more people to act as delegates
    to input and update the WG status of the I-Ds associated with their
    WGs; (R-020)  The identifier for each delegate should be the
    person's e-mail address; (R-021)

  - SHALL be able to designate different people to act as delegates for
    them in a different WG when the same WG Chair is also responsible
    for the different IETF WG; (R-022)


Juskevicius           Expires December 15, 2010                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft       WG Datatracker Requirements              June 2010


  - SHALL be able to assign a person to be the Document Shepherd for
    one or more WG I-Ds if this role will not be performed by a WG
    Chair or a designated delegate; (R-023)  The identifier for the
    Document Shepherd should be the person's e-mail address. (R-024)

  - SHALL be able to input, upload and edit Document Shepherd protocol
    write-ups for the I-Ds in their WGs; (R-025)

  - SHALL be able to review and change their designated delegates and
    Document Shepherds for the I-Ds in their WGs, one WG at a time.
    (R-026)

4.3. For Delegates of IETF WG Chairs

   After successfully logging on to the Datatracker, the delegate of an
   IETF WG Chair SHALL have the same privileges as the WG Chair to
   input and update WG document status information, as specified in
   R-015 to R-019 inclusive, plus R-023 and R-025. (R-027)

   Per Requirement R-013, every person designated to be the delegate of
   an IETF WG Chair needs to have their own user-id and password to
   log-on to the Datatracker.

   The Datatracker SHOULD alert the WG Chairs, the IETF Secretariat,
   and the newly designated delegate via e-mail if a person who is
   newly designated to be a delegate of a WG Chair does not have a
   personal user-id and password to log-on to the Datatracker. (R-028)
   The purpose of the e-mail is to alert the WG Chairs that the
   delegate needs to take action to obtain a personal user-id and
   password, and to inform the delegate that he/she needs to take
   action (e.g., to contact the IETF Secretariat) to obtain their own
   user-id and password for the Datatracker.

4.4. For WG Document Shepherds

   The IETF document shepherding process and the role of an IETF WG
   Document Shepherd is described in RFC 4858 [RFC4858].

   The requirements in this Section describe the access privileges to
   be granted to a WG Document Shepherd who is not a WG Chair or a
   delegate of a WG Chair with the privileges described in Section 4.3.

   Per Requirement R-013, each person designated to be a Document
   Shepherd for a WG draft needs to have their own personal user-id and
   password to log-on to the Datatracker.  A Document Shepherd who does
   not have a personal user-id and password for the Datatracker will
   need to obtain one (e.g., by contacting the IETF Secretariat).




Juskevicius           Expires December 15, 2010                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft       WG Datatracker Requirements              June 2010


   The Datatracker SHOULD alert the WG Chairs, the IETF Secretariat,
   and the newly designated Document Shepherd (e.g., via e-mail) when a
   person newly designated to be a Document Shepherd does not have a
   personal user-id and password to log-on to the Datatracker. (R-029)
   The purpose of the e-mail is to alert the Chairs that the Document
   Shepherd needs to take action to obtain a personal user-id and
   password, and to inform the Document Shepherd that he/she needs to
   take action (e.g., to contact the IETF Secretariat) to obtain a
   personal user-id and password for the Datatracker.

   Document Shepherds need to be able to upload or input protocol
   write-ups into the Datatracker for the WG I-Ds assigned to them.
   They also need to be able to set and reset the WG document status
   annotation tag called "Doc Shepherd Follow-up Underway" as defined
   in Section 3.5.12 of [WGDRAFTS] for I-Ds in the "WG Consensus:
   Waiting for Write-Up" state and, in some cases, for I-Ds in the "WG
   Document" state.

   After successfully logging on to the Datatracker, Document Shepherds
   SHALL have restricted 'write' privileges to upload, input and edit
   protocol write-ups for the WG I-Ds assigned to them. (R-030)

   In IETF WGs that use the "WG Consensus: Waiting for Write-Up" state,
   the Document Shepherds SHALL be allowed to input, upload and edit
   the protocol write-ups for a documents assigned to them once their
   I-Ds have progressed into this state. (R-031)

   In WGs that do not use the "WG Consensus: Waiting for Write-Up"
   state, the Document Shepherds SHALL be allowed to input, upload and
   edit the protocol write-ups for documents assigned to them when the
   I-Ds have progressed into the "Waiting for WG Chair Go-Ahead" state
   (in WGs that use this state) or for I-Ds in the "WG Document" state
   (in all other WGs). (R-032)

   Document Shepherds SHALL also have the ability to set and reset the
   document status annotation tag called "Doc Shepherd Follow-Up
   Underway" as defined in Section 3.5.12 of [WGDRAFTS]. (R-033)

   The "Doc Shepherd Follow-Up Underway" annotation tag will be set to
   indicate when the Document Shepherd has started work on a write-up
   for the document.  The absence or resetting of this annotation tag
   may indicate the protocol write-up has not yet been started, or has
   been put on-hold for some reason, or has been completed.  The log of
   set and reset operations performed on this annotation tag and will
   indicate the status of the protocol write-up for each WG I-D.

   Section 5.3 contains additional requirements about how Document
   Shepherds may enter, upload and edit the protocol write-ups for
   their WG I-Ds in the Datatracker.


Juskevicius           Expires December 15, 2010                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft       WG Datatracker Requirements              June 2010


4.5. For the Responsible Area Director

   After successfully logging on to the Datatracker, IETF ADs SHALL
   have the same privileges as IETF WG Chairs to input and update WG
   document status information, to designate delegates, and to assign
   Document Shepherds. (R-034)  IETF ADs must also retain their normal
   privileges to input and update the IESG status of I-Ds they are
   responsible for.

   Each IETF AD SHALL have privileges specified in Requirement R-034
   for every WG in his or her Area. (R-035)

4.6. Role of the IETF Secretariat in granting permissions

   Before granting permissions to update WG document status settings to
   a person who does not have them, the IETF Secretariat should verify
   that the person requesting the permissions is a WG Chair or an AD
   and has been delegated the authority to update WG document status
   information by one of the Chairs of the WG or an AD.  In order to
   update the status of WG I-Ds, a user will need to be granted the
   permissions to perform WG document status changes in general, and be
   authorized (e.g. delegated) to update the WG status of the I-Ds in
   an IETF WG by one of the WG's Chairs or an AD.

5. Inputting and updating WG document status information

5.1. WG Document States

   Requirement R-003 specifies that the WG state of an I-D must be
   described using the document states defined in Section 3.3 of
   [WGDRAFTS].

   When a WG Chair or delegate logs-on to the Datatracker to input or
   change the WG state of an I-D, the Datatracker should display the
   current state of the I-D, the length of time the document has been
   in its current state, the amount of time the I-D may continue to
   remain in its current state (if this information is available), and
   the most likely next state (or states) for the I-D. (R-036)  The
   Datatracker SHALL use the WG document state machine illustrated in
   Section 3.4 of [WGDRAFTS] to identify the 'most likely next state'
   (or states) for an I-D that is associated with an IETF WG. (R-037)

   If the Chairs of a WG have specified that only a subset of the WG
   document states may be used to describe the status of I-Ds in their
   WGs (per Requirement R-017), the Datatracker SHALL update its WG
   document state machine for that WG accordingly, and use the updated
   state machine to identify the 'most likely next state' (or states)
   needed to comply with Requirement R-037 for that WG. (R-038)



Juskevicius           Expires December 15, 2010                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft       WG Datatracker Requirements              June 2010


   After displaying the information specified by R-036 (and R-038 if
   applicable), the Datatracker SHALL prompt the WG Chair or delegate
   to select a next state for the I-D and to enter some text to explain
   the state change for the I-D's status change history. (R-039)

   As a general principle, the Datatracker SHOULD always prompt the
   person who updates the WG status of an I-D to input some text to be
   archived in the status change history log of every I-D. (R-040)

5.2. WG Document Status Annotation Tags

   WG I-D status annotation tags may be used to describe conditions
   that affect a document (e.g., why a document is in the state it is
   in) or to indicate actions needed to progress the document.
   Annotation tags do not change the state of WG documents.

   WG document status annotation tags may be used one at a time or in
   combination to provide information about the status of a WG I-D in
   any state, if it makes sense to do so.  Section 3.5 of [WGDRAFTS]
   describes all of the WG document status annotation tags to be added
   to the Datatracker.

   The Datatracker SHALL allow WG Chairs and their delegates to set and
   reset all of the WG I-D status annotation tags defined in Section
   3.5 of [WGDRAFTS] for every I-D associated with their WGs. (R-041)

   When a WG Chair, Delegate or Document Shepherd logs into the
   Datatracker to set or reset one or more WG document status
   annotation tags, the Datatracker SHOULD display a summary of all
   annotation tag set/reset operations to date, per document, from the
   present time backwards, split by pages, and then guide the user to
   select one (or more) annotation tags to be set or reset. (R-042)
   Note that WG Document Shepherds may only set and reset the "Doc
   Shepherd Follow-up Underway" annotation tag as specified by
   Requirement R-033.

   The summary of annotation tag set/reset operations (required by
   R-042) SHOULD include the date when each annotation tag was set or
   reset, the identity of the person or entity that set or reset each
   tag, and any text (e.g., from the document's status change history
   log) that was input when each tag was set or reset. (R-043)

   The Datatracker SHOULD allow more than one annotation tag to be set
   or reset per log-on, and the Datatracker SHOULD prompt the user to
   input some text to explain why each annotation tag is being set or
   reset. (R-044)





Juskevicius           Expires December 15, 2010               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft       WG Datatracker Requirements              June 2010


5.3. WG document Protocol Write-ups

   The IESG requires a protocol write-up to be prepared for a WG I-D
   before the I-D may be sent to the IESG for evaluation.

   Requirements R-031 and R-032 identify the WG state than an I-D must
   be in before a Document Shepherd may begin to input, upload and/or
   edit a protocol write-up for a WG I-D into the Datatracker.

   When a Document Shepherd logs into the Datatracker to upload, input
   or edit the protocol write-up for a WG I-D assigned to him or her,
   the Datatracker SHOULD display a list of every WG I-D that the
   Document Shepherd is responsible for and a summary of the current
   status and history of changes made to the protocol write-up for each
   I-D, from the present time backwards, split by pages, and split by
   WGs (if the same person is a Document Shepherd in more than one WG).
   (R-045)

   After displaying the information required by R-045, the Datatracker
   must allow Document Shepherds to upload, input or edit protocol
   write-ups for their I-Ds if the conditions specified in Requirements
   R-031 and R-032 are met.  The tool SHALL provide each Document
   Shepherds with a user-interface to capture their protocol write-ups
   for the I-Ds they are responsible for, and to facilitate setting and
   resetting the "Doc Shepherd Follow-up Underway" annotation tag for
   those I-Ds. (R-046)

   WG Chairs SHOULD be able to access the Document Shepherd user-
   interface and call-up a display of the same WG I-D protocol write-up
   status information that the Datatracker gives to each of a WG
   Chair's designated Document Shepherds. (R-047)  This will enable WG
   Chairs to mentor new Document Shepherds and it will enable WG Chairs
   to review the workload assigned to each Document Shepherd.

   WG Chairs and delegates may designate themselves to act as Document
   Shepherds for some or all of the I-Ds in their own WGs.  In the WGs
   where this happens, the Datatracker SHOULD ask the WG Chairs and/or
   delegates which role they are playing when the log in, in order to
   display the most appropriate user-interface for that role. (R-048)

6. Special requirements for some WG I-D states and conditions

6.1. Candidate WG Document

   The "Candidate WG Document" state may be used to describe an I-D
   that is being considered for adoption by an IETF WG.  An I-D in this
   state has not yet achieved consensus, preference or selection in a
   working group.



Juskevicius           Expires December 15, 2010               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft       WG Datatracker Requirements              June 2010


   This state may be used to describe:

  - an I-D that someone has asked to be considered by a WG, if the WG
    Chair has agreed with the request;

  - an I-D that the WG Chair asked an author to write; or

  - an I-D listed as a 'candidate draft' in the WG charter.

   The Datatracker SHALL allow an IETF WG Chair or delegate to identify
   an I-D as a "Candidate WG Document" for her or his WG if the I-D has
   not yet been adopted by any IETF WG, is not expired and has not been
   withdrawn or replaced by another I-D. (R-049)  The Datatracker
   should not allow a document that is expired, withdrawn, replaced or
   already adopted by an IETF WG to be moved into the "Candidate WG
   Document" state.

   It is not uncommon for an author to 'shop' a document to multiple
   WGs hoping to get the draft adopted somewhere.  The Datatracker
   SHALL allow a document to be in the "Candidate WG Document" state
   for more than one WG at a time if the conditions specified in R-049
   are met. (R-050)

   Requirements R-051 to R-064 inclusive are intended to minimize the
   time needed by WG Chairs and/or their delegates to manage documents
   placed into the "Candidate WG Document" state.  The objectives are
   as follows:

  - a WG Chair (or delegate) should be able to identify an I-D as a
    candidate for adoption in her or his WG if Requirement R-049 is
    met;

  - a WG Chair (or delegate) should not have to update the status of a
    candidate document again unless he/she decides to adopt the I-D as
    a WG document; and

  - a second (or third, or fourth) WG Chair or delegate who takes an
    interest in the same candidate document should not create a problem
    or a coordination headache for any other WG Chair or delegate.

  The code to be written to track documents in the "Candidate WG
  Document" State should be designed to operate as follows:

  - the first WG Chair (or delegate) to move an I-D into the candidate
    state shall specify the maximum length of time the I-D may be in
    the candidate state;

  - the second (or third or fourth ...) WG Chair or delegate to
    identify the same document as a candidate in his or her WG will be


Juskevicius           Expires December 15, 2010               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft       WG Datatracker Requirements              June 2010


    informed of the current status of the document, and will be given
    an opportunity to extend the period of time that the I-D may remain
    in the candidate state; and

  - the Datatracker will automatically change the state of the document
    to "Not Adopted by a WG" when time runs out, unless someone logs-on
    to the Datatracker and moves the document into some other state
    first.

   Requirements R-051 to R-064 provide detailed specifications for the
   implementation of this functionality.

   The first WG Chair (or delegate) to move an I-D into the "Candidate
   WG Document" state SHALL be required to specify a length of time
   that the I-D may remain in this state. (R-051)  The maximum length
   of time that an I-D may remain in the "Candidate WG Document" state
   SHOULD be specified as a number of weeks. (R-052)

   Before a different WG Chair (or delegate) is allowed to identify the
   same document as a candidate for adoption in his or her (different)
   WG, the Datatracker SHALL indicate that the document is already a
   candidate in another IETF WG and display the name of the other WG
   and the amount of time remaining that the document may remain in the
   candidate state. (R-053)  If, after reviewing this information, the
   different WG Chair (or delegate) decides to proceed, the Datatracker
   SHALL allow the WG Chair (or delegate) to identify the I-D as a
   "Candidate WG Document" for their working group, and to extend the
   number of weeks that the document may remain in the candidate state
   if more time is required. (R-054)

  - If the different WG Chair tries to extend the time beyond the
    expiry date of the I-D, the Datatracker SHALL adjust the time to
    coincide with the expiry date of the I-D and then inform the WG
    Chair that the time that an I-D may remain in the "Candidate WG
    Document" state may not be allowed to extend beyond the date the
    document "Expires" (as specified the cover page of the I-D).
    (R-055)

  - After the new date is entered and confirmed, the Datatracker SHALL
    send an e-mail to the WG Chairs and delegates of every other WG (in
    which the document is already a candidate) to inform them the
    document has become a candidate in another WG and that the time the
    I-D may remain as a candidate has been extended to a new date of
    (whatever the new date is). (R-056)

  - If the time remaining is not extended by the different WG Chair or
    delegate, the (already running) timer SHALL continue to count-down
    without interruption. (R-057)  In this case, the Datatracker SHALL
    send an e-mail to the WG Chairs and delegates of every other WG (in


Juskevicius           Expires December 15, 2010               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft       WG Datatracker Requirements              June 2010


    which the document is already a candidate) to inform them the
    document has become a candidate in yet another WG and to confirm
    that the amount of time the I-D may remain as a candidate has not
    been changed. (R-058)

   One week before expiry of the timer, the Datatracker SHALL send a
   nudge via e-mail to every WG Chair and delegate in which the I-D is
   a "Candidate WG Document". (R-059)  The e-mail will alert everyone
   the I-D is still in the candidate state, and inform everyone that
   the Datatracker will automatically move the I-D into the "Not
   Adopted by a WG" state when time expires unless someone moves it to
   a different state first. (R-060)

   If a "Candidate WG Document" is adopted by a WG before the timer
   expires (e.g., if the state of the document is changed to "Adopted
   by a WG"), the Datatracker SHALL cancel the timer and send an e-mail
   to the author of the I-D and to every WG Chair and delegate who had
   an interest in the document to inform them that the I-D has been
   adopted by the (insert name of the WG here) WG. (R-061)

   If a document is not adopted by any WG when time expires, the I-D
   will still be in the "Candidate WG Document" state.  In this case,
   the Datatracker SHALL automatically move the document into the "Not
   Adopted by a WG" state and send an e-mail to every WG Chair and
   delegate who was interested in the document to announce the document
   was not adopted and that its state has been changed automatically.
   (R-062)

   If a document is a "Candidate WG Document" in only one WG, the
   Datatracker shall allow the Chairs of that WG to change the state of
   the candidate I-D to "Not Adopted by a WG" at any time. (R-063)  The
   Datatracker SHALL NOT allow a document that is a candidate in more
   than one WG to be moved into the "Not Adopted by a WG" state before
   the timer specified in R-051 and R-052 expires. (R-064)

6.2. Adopted by a WG

   The "Adopted by a WG" state should be used to identify an individual
   submission I-D that an IETF WG has agreed to adopt as one of its WG
   documents.

   The purpose of this state is to provide a clear indication of when
   an individual submission I-D is adopted by a WG, and to help capture
   correct "Replaced by" information for the status change history log
   of the individual submission I-D.  This state is needed because the
   Datatracker uses the filename of an I-D as a key to access its
   archive of status change history information for each I-D; the
   filename of an I-D that is adopted by a WG will typically be changed



Juskevicius           Expires December 15, 2010               [Page 14]

Internet-Draft       WG Datatracker Requirements              June 2010


   after the document is adopted but before the I-D submitted as a new
   version-00 I-D and approved for posting as a "WG Document".

   The Datatracker shall allow an individual submission I-D to be moved
   into the "Adopted by a WG" state if the I-D is not expired and it
   has not been withdrawn, been replaced by another I-D, or been
   adopted by another IETG WG. (R-065)  If a WG Chair or delegate moves
   an I-D into the "Adopted by a WG" state, the Datatracker shall
   announce the state change via e-mail as specified by R-061.

6.3. Not Adopted by a WG

   The purpose of the "Not Adopted by a WG" state is to identify an I-D
   that was considered for adoption by one or more IETG WGs but was not
   adopted by any WG.

   Requirements R-059, R-060 and R-062 specify that the Datatracker
   shall automatically transition an I-D from the "Candidate WG
   Document" state into the "Not Adopted by a WG" state when it is
   clear that no IETF WG has adopted the I-D.

   Per Requirements R-007 and R-008, the Datatracker must update the
   document change status history log of an I-D that is transitioned
   into the "Not Adopted by a WG" state.  The status information to be
   written into the I-D's history log SHALL include the date the I-D
   was determined to be "not adopted", and the name of each IETF WG
   that the I-D was a candidate for and that did not adopt the I-D.
   (R-066)

   Notwithstanding the aforementioned, a different IETF WG may decide
   to adopt an I-D after it has entered the "Not Adopted by a WG"
   state.  The Datatracker SHALL allow a WG Chair or delegate to move
   an I-D that is in the "Not Adopted by a WG" state into the "Adopted
   by a WG" state if the I-D has not expired, been withdrawn, or been
   replaced by another I-D. (R-067)  The status information to be
   written into the history log in this case SHALL include the date the
   I-D was adopted, the name of the IETF WG that adopted the I-D.
   (R-068)

   Requirement R-009 specifies that updates to the WG status of an I-D
   shall not overwrite previously archived document status history
   information for the I-D.  This means that the adoption of an I-D
   that was previously not adopted by one or more different WGs will
   not be deleted from the status history log of the I-D.  All document
   status change history information for the I-D will be preserved,
   even when the I-D is revised and subsequently approved for posting
   as a new version -00 WG I-D with a new filename (viz. a filename
   including the string "draft-IETF-" followed by a WG acronym).



Juskevicius           Expires December 15, 2010               [Page 15]

Internet-Draft       WG Datatracker Requirements              June 2010


6.4. WG Document

   The "WG Document" state describes an I-D that has been adopted by an
   IETF WG and is being actively developed by the WG.

   The Datatracker SHALL automatically place a new version-00 I-D into
   the "WG Document" state if a WG Chair approves the submission of the
   I-D for posting in the IETF document repository and if the filename
   of the I-D includes the string "draft-ietf-wgname-". (R-069)

   The Datatracker SHOULD also prompt the WG Chair to input, confirm or
   correct the filename of the I-D being replaced (if any) by each new
   version-00 WG I-D when the Chair approves the posting of the new
   I-D. (R-070)

   The Datatracker SHALL allow WG Chairs and their delegates to move an
   I-D into the "WG Document" state from a different document state as
   defined in Section 3.3 of [WGDRAFTS] if the I-D has not expired,
   been withdrawn or replaced by another I-D. (R-071)

   Under normal conditions, it should not be possible for an I-D to be
   in the "WG Document" state in more than one IETF WG at a time.  The
   Datatracker SHALL NOT allow a WG Chair or delegate to move an I-D
   into the "WG Document" state in their WG if the I-D is already in
   this state in a different WG. (R-072)

   The WG Chair (or delegate) who moves or approves an I-D to be in the
   "WG Document" state for the first time SHALL be required to indicate
   the "Intended Maturity Level" for the document, as defined in
   Section 3.6 of [WGDRAFTS] if the Datatracker cannot automatically
   determine this information for some reason. (R-073)  The Datatracker
   SHALL allow the "Intended Maturity Level" to be changed after first
   being set. (R-074)

   A WG document may be transferred from one WG to another WG by a
   Responsible Area Director.  The Datatracker SHALL allow an IETF Area
   Directors to transfer an I-D from one IETF WG to a different WG.
   (R-075)

6.5. In WG Last Call

   A document "In WG Last Call" is an I-D for which a Working Group
   Last Call (WGLC) has been issued, and is in progress.  Note that WG
   last calls are an optional part of the IETF WG process, per Section
   7.4 of RFC 2418 [RFC2418].

   If a WG Chair decides to conduct a WGLC on an I-D, he/she may use
   the "In WG Last Call" state to track the progress of the WGLC.  The
   Chair SHOULD be able configure the Datatracker to send a WGLC


Juskevicius           Expires December 15, 2010               [Page 16]

Internet-Draft       WG Datatracker Requirements              June 2010


   message to one or more mailing lists when an I-D in moved into this
   state. (R-076)  The WG Chair should be able to select a different
   set of mailing lists for each document because some documents may
   need coordination with other WGs. (R-077)

   The WG Chair (or delegate) who moves an I-D into the "In WG Last
   Call" state SHALL be required to specify the number of weeks that
   the document may remain in this state. (R-078)  The number of weeks
   SHALL be able to be changed after first being set. (R-079)

   A document that is in the "In WG Last Call" state SHALL remain in
   this state until a WG Chair or delegate moves the I-D into a
   different WG state. (R-080)  WG Chairs and their delegates SHALL be
   able to configure the Datatracker to send an e-mail after the number
   of weeks specified by R-078 to remind or 'nudge' them to conclude
   the WGLC and to determine a next state for the I-D. (R-081)

   It is possible that a WGLC may lead directly back into another WGLC
   for the same document.  For example, an I-D that completed a WGLC as
   an "Informational" document may need another WGLC if a decision is
   taken to convert the I-D into a standards track document.  The
   Datatracker SHOULD allow this to occur. (R-082)

6.6. WG Consensus: Waiting for Write-Up

   A document in the "WG Consensus: Waiting for Write-Up" state has
   essentially completed its development within the WG, and is nearly
   ready to be sent to the IESG for publication.  The last thing to be
   done is the preparation of a protocol write-up by the Document
   Shepherd.  The IESG requires that a protocol write-up be completed
   before publication of the I-D is requested.

   A document in this state SHOULD remain in this state until the WG
   Chair (or delegate) moves the document to a different state. (R-083)
   The Datatracker SHOULD be configurable to send an e-mail to the WG
   Chair after a specified period of time to remind or 'nudge' the WG
   Chair to look into the status of the Document Shepherd's write-up.
   (R-084)

   The Document Shepherd for an I-D that is moved into this state SHALL
   be alerted of the state change via e-mail. (R-085)  The e-mail will
   'nudge' the Shepherd to develop a protocol write-up for the I-D.  If
   a timer was configured per R-083, the Datatracker shall send an e-
   mail message to the Document Shepherd one week before expiry of the
   timer to nudge the Document Shepherd and warn that a WG Chair may be
   calling in a week's time if a write-up is completed for the I-D by
   that time.




Juskevicius           Expires December 15, 2010               [Page 17]

Internet-Draft       WG Datatracker Requirements              June 2010


   The Datatracker shall send a message to the Chairs and delegates of
   a WG when a Document Shepherd enters a protocol write-up for a WG I-
   D into the Datatracker, and when the Document Shepherd indicates
   that he/she is satisfied with the write-up. (R-086)

6.7. Submitted to IESG for Publication

   This state describes a WG document that has been submitted to the
   IESG for publication and that has not been sent back to the WG for
   revision.  Under normal conditions, an I-D that has reached this
   state will have finished it tenure as a WG document.

   The Datatracker SHOULD look for the presence of annotation tags when
   a WG document is moved into this state.  If there are any tags that
   have not been cleared or reset, the Datatracker SHOULD send an e-
   mail to the WG Chairs (and delegates) to suggest they clear any
   extraneous annotation tags. (R-087)

6.8. Revised I-D Needed (annotation tag)

   After an I-D is submitted to the IESG, it may be judged to need
   revision before it can be published as an RFC.  An AD or the IESG as
   a whole may return a document to a WG for revision.

   A document that needs revision may be identified when the WG Chair,
   delegate, or the Responsible AD logs-on to the Datatracker to append
   one of the "Issue Raised - Revision Needed" annotation tags to the
   status of the document.  The Datatracker SHALL require the person
   who attaches one of these annotation tags to a document to indicate
   the number of weeks that it should take for the revised document to
   be produced (R-088).  The Datatracker should also prompt the user to
   consider changing the WG state of the I-D from "Submitted to IESG
   for Publication" to something else (e.g., Parked WG Document, WG
   Document, Waiting for WG Chair Go-Ahead). (R-089)

   The Datatracker should be programmed to send an e-mail to the WG's
   Chairs and delegates after the number of weeks specified in R-087 to
   remind or 'nudge' the WG Chairs and delegates to follow-up on the
   revisions to the document, unless a revised document is submitted
   before the time elapses. (R-090)

7. WG Status of I-Ds that are not updated by Chairs or Delegates

   Requirement R-001 provides each IETF WG Chair with the freedom to
   decide to use all or just some of the WG document states defined in
   [WGDRAFTS] to indicate the status and progression of documents in
   his or her working group.  The same requirement also allows each
   IETF WG Chair to decide to *not* log-on to the Datatracker to
   manually input or update the status of drafts in her/his WG.


Juskevicius           Expires December 15, 2010               [Page 18]

Internet-Draft       WG Datatracker Requirements              June 2010


   The Datatracker must allow for the possibility that some WG Chairs
   will not manually input or update the status of some WG drafts.

   To provide some visibility into the status of WG documents that are
   not manually tracked by a WG Chair or delegate, the Datatracker must
   generate the following state transitions automatically for all I-Ds
   associated with an IETG WG:

  - Per R-069, the Datatracker will automatically transition version-00
    I-Ds into the "WG Document" state when a WG Chair approves the
    posting of an I-Ds;

  - Per R-004, The Datatracker will indicate the availability status of
    an I-D that has not been withdrawn or replaced and that is in the
    "WG Document" state to be "Expired" if the document is more than
    six months old, and "Active" if the document is less than six
    months old;

  - The Datatracker SHALL NOT automatically transition an I-D from the
    "WG Document" state to any other state in the WG state machine
    unless the I-D is placed into the "Publication Requested" state in
    the IESG state machine by an AD or the IETF Secretariat. (R-091)

  - The Datatracker SHALL automatically transition a WG I-D into the
    "Submitted to IESG for Publication" state (in the WG state machine)
    if the I-D is in some other WG state and if the I-D is moved into
    the "Publication Requested" state in the IESG state machine.
    (R-092)

8. WG document status change reporting requirements

   Everyone with 'write' access to WG document status information
   SHOULD be able to obtain a summary display of all status changes
   made to the WG documents they are responsible for, from the present
   time backwards, split by pages, after successfully logging-on to the
   Datatracker. (R-093)

   The Datatracker SHOULD provide a convenient way for WG Chairs to
   obtain a summary of all WG document status changes made on their
   behalf by their delegates, from the present time backwards, split by
   pages, after successfully logging-on to the Datatracker. (R-094)

   The Datatracker SHOULD send an e-mail message to the authors of an
   I-D whenever the WG status of their I-D is updated.  The contents of
   the e-mail SHOULD provide details about the change in the status of
   the document (e.g. the new state the I-D has been moved to and/or
   the names of any newly set or reset document status annotation
   tags), the date of the status change, and an indication of who (or
   which entity) caused the change in WG status. (R-095)


Juskevicius           Expires December 15, 2010               [Page 19]

Internet-Draft       WG Datatracker Requirements              June 2010


9. WG document status reporting requirements

   The Datatracker SHALL provide everyone with a convenient way to
   query the status of every document in an IETF WG and to see a
   display of the current status of some or all of the documents in the
   WG, including the Document Shepherd protocol write-ups for I-Ds that
   have been submitted to the IESG and the names of the Document
   Shepherds. (R-096)

   For WGs in which the WG Chairs have decided to only use a subset of
   the predefined WG document states (per R-017), the Datatracker SHALL
   indicate which WG document states are being used by that WG. (R-097)

   The Datatracker SHALL also provide everyone with the ability to
   search for the status of documents written by a specific author, or
   I-Ds in a specific WG document state or having a specific 'intended
   maturity level', or having a specific annotation tag attached.
   (R-098)

10. Error handling requirements

   Errors with respect to inputting or updating the status of a WG
   document are possible.

   Per Requirement R-009, the creation of new or updated status
   information cannot erase, overwrite or cause the deletion of any
   previously entered document status change history information.

   Errors in data entry by a WG Chair or delegate should be corrected
   by a WG Chair or a delegate taking action to update any erroneous
   status information in the Datatracker with correct information, so
   that the correct status of the I-D is displayed.  For example, a
   document that was accidentally placed into the wrong state can be
   moved into the correct state by the WG Chair (or delegate), and a
   comment should be entered into the document's status change history
   log to explain what happened.

11. Security Considerations

   This document does not propose any new Internet mechanisms, and has
   no security implications for the Internet.

   This document does however contains specific requirements to add
   features to the IETF Datatracker to make it possible for a greater
   number of users to input and/or update status information about I-Ds
   associated with IETF WGs.  Enhancing the Datatracker may create an
   opening for new denial-of-service (DoS) attacks and/or attempts by
   malicious users to corrupt the information in the WG document status
   database.


Juskevicius           Expires December 15, 2010               [Page 20]

Internet-Draft       WG Datatracker Requirements              June 2010


   This document does not propose any specific requirements to mitigate
   DoS attacks on the Datatracker.

12. IANA Considerations

   This document does not require any new number assignments from IANA,
   and does not define any new numbering spaces to be administered by
   IANA.

   RFC-Editor: Please remove this section before publication.

13. References

13.1. Normative References

   [WGDRAFTS]  Juskevicius, E., "Definition of WG Document States",
               work in process, draft-ietf-proto-wgdocument-states-07,
               June 2010.

   [RFC2119]   Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
               Requirement Levels', RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC4858]   Levkowetz, H., et al., "Document Shepherding from
               Working Group Last Call to Publication", RFC 4858,
               May 2007.

   [RFC2418]   Bradner, S., Ed., "IETF Working Group Guidelines and
               Procedures", BCP 25, RFC 2418, September 1998.

13.2. Informative References

   [IDTRACKER] "The IETF Datatracker tool", Web Application:
               https://datatracker.ietf.org/, June 15, 2010.

   [TRCKREQTS] Levkowetz, H., and Mankin, A., "Requirements on I-D
               Tracker Extensions for Working Group Chairs",
               draft-ietf-proto-wgchair-tracker-ext-03,
               February 8, 2007.

14. Acknowledgments

   The author would like to thank Henrik Levkowetz and Allison Mankin
   for writing the original I-D [TRCKREQTS] that contained many good
   ideas and served as a foundation for this document.

   The author would also like to thank Henrik Levkowetz and Alfred
   Hoenes for their ongoing support during the writing of this
   document.  Many of their detailed comments and suggestions have been
   used by the author to revise and improve this document.


Juskevicius           Expires December 15, 2010               [Page 21]

Internet-Draft       WG Datatracker Requirements              June 2010


   The author also offers his gratitude to Russ Housley, Scott Bradner,
   Robert Sparks, Spencer Dawkins, Paul Hoffman, and the WG Chairs and
   other IETF participants at the wgdtspec BOF at IETF 77 for their
   inputs, comments and suggestions.

   This document was initially prepared using 2-Word-v2.0.template.dot.



   Author's Address

   Ed Juskevicius
   TrekAhead
   PO Box 491, Carp, ON
   CANADA

   Email: edj.etc@gmail.com


































Juskevicius           Expires December 15, 2010               [Page 22] 
