


Internet Engineering Task Force                              S. Kawamura
Internet-Draft                                         NEC BIGLOBE, Ltd.
Intended status: Informational                             E. Jankiewicz
Expires: June 12, 2011                           SRI International, Inc.
                                                        December 9, 2010


            A Basic Guideline for Listing ISPs that Run IPv6
                  draft-kawamura-ipv6-isp-listings-01

Abstract

   There are many web sites that list IPv6 enabled service providers, or
   attempt to categorize the IPv6 capability of ISPs.  While these
   opinions are helpful, there is no standard criteria used by the
   sites, so it is difficult to compare the results.  This document
   surveys current listings, and proposes a set of guidelines that could
   be taken into consideration by theses sites, or by anyone looking to
   evaluate an ISP's IPv6 capability.  This guideline can also be used
   as a checklist by ISPs planning activation of IPv6 in their network.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on June 12, 2011.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect



Kawamura & Jankiewicz     Expires June 12, 2011                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft              IPv6 ISP Listings              December 2010


   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


1.  Introduction

   There are many web sites that give listings of IPv6 enabled service
   providers, or rate ISPs according to their IPv6 enabledness.
   Appendix A gives examples of these.

   There are several motivations for these listings which benefit both
   the ISPs and the users.  It gives ISPs a goal to work for in turning
   up IPv6, i.e. earning a rating as "IPv6 capable".  It also can be
   used by ISPs for publicity, a platform for telling the world that
   their service is ready for IPv4 address exhaustion.  Listings can
   also be a guide for users to select the IPv6 capability they want
   when they choose their ISP, assuming they have a choice in their
   service area.

   This document surveys examples of currently known listings, and
   proposes a set of basic guidelines that can be used in revised or new
   listings like this or by individuals evaluating an ISP's capability.
   These guidelines would help those that intend to start such programs.
   It may also help in keeping one listing or rating guideline from
   being widely different from another, so it would not confuse users
   who decided to choose ISPs on the basis that the ISP is on one of
   these IPv6 enabled service provider listings.

1.1.  Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].


2.  Examples of Listing Criteria

2.1.  IPv6 Enabled Program

   The IPv6 enabled program (http://ipv6forum.org/ipv6_enabled/) lists
   ISPs at two levels: basic and advanced.  At the time of this writing,
   the advanced level list has not been started yet.  The requirements
   for being listed in the basic list are, to have a prefix assigned or
   allocated (IPv6 enabled program does not check if the prefix is an
   assignment or allocation), have a global AS route it, and keep
   reachability as much as possible.



Kawamura & Jankiewicz     Expires June 12, 2011                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft              IPv6 ISP Listings              December 2010


   The IPv6 Enabled Program checks the following.

2.1.1.  Network Accessibility

   The ISP's AS number is checked against a database to see if the AS
   exists and is unique.

2.1.2.  Active IPv6 Address Requirement

   The ISP's IPv6 prefix is checked against a database to see if the
   applying ISP is the rightful owner.  Actual traffic to the prefix
   from a customer is also checked.  Checking at the time of writing is
   done by using a script that the ISP will paste to a web site, and the
   script checks if it was accessed via IPv6.

2.1.3.  Persistence of IPv6 Service Reachability

   The check noted in the previous section is done periodically to check
   global reachability.

2.2.  IPv6 Ripeness

   IPv6 Ripeness (http://labs.ripe.net/content/ipv6-ripeness/) is part
   of a study conducted by RIPE NCC.  Stars are given to LIRs registered
   in the RIPE NCC service region by checking there status in IPv6
   deployment.

2.2.1.  Criteria

   Stars are earned by checking the following criteria.

   o  Have an IPv6 prefix allocated or a PI assigned.

   o  Prefix is visible in the Routing Information System(RIS).

   o  A route6 object is registered in the RIPE database.

   o  Reverse DNS is setup for the IPv6 prefix.

2.3.  Summary of the Checking Criteria

   The programs discussed in this section share these criteria in
   common.

   o  Have an IPv6 prefix allocated or a PI assigned.

   o  Prefix is visible in a routing database.




Kawamura & Jankiewicz     Expires June 12, 2011                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft              IPv6 ISP Listings              December 2010


   IPv6 Ripeness also checks if a route6 is registered (have good
   routing manners), and a reverse DNS is set up.  IPv6 Enabled Program
   checks for actual traffic which requires the presence of an active
   web server inside the ISP.


3.  Guidelines for Listing an IPv6 Enabled ISP

3.1.  Scope of the Guideline

   This guideline can be used to check any LIR or a PI address holder,
   that claims to be an ISP.  The guideline is only intended to check an
   ISP's network accessibility.  In turn, this guideline can also be
   used as a minimum requirement checklist by ISPs who want to newly
   turn up IPv6 in their network.

3.2.  Levels of the Listing

   We divide the listing into three levels, Experimental, Basic, and
   Advanced.  Experimental level is what is a minimal set of
   capabilities for any ISP to claim that they have some form of IPv6
   working and available to some subset of customers.  The Experimental
   level will not guarantee that the ISP has a fully working or
   production quality IPv6 network or that IPv6 service is available to
   all customers.  The Experimental level is what is absolutely
   necessary to provide service defined in [RFC5211] section 2.1 as
   PREP1+PREP2+PREP3 strengthened by the addition of section 2.2
   "Trans1".  This means that in addition to preparing for IPv6
   deployment, an Experimental level ISP MUST offer IPv6-based Internet
   Service to at least some customers as a trial.

   The Basic level will take the requirements one step further in bring
   the level of deployment closer to the quality of the IPv4 network.
   The Basic level includes what is absolutely necessary to provide
   service defined as MUST in [RFC5211] section 2.2 as TRANS1+TRANS2+
   TRANS3 and to the extent possible the capabilities defined as SHOULD.

   The requirements of the Basic level should be covered in order to
   provide any of the service types defined in the General Terminology
   section in [RFC4084].

   The Advanced level will take the requirements further to bring the
   level of deployment and support to parity with what is generally
   recognized as "full production support" in the IPv4 services offered
   by ISPs today.  This corresponds to the service level defined in
   [RFC5211] section 2.3 as POST1+POST2+POST3.





Kawamura & Jankiewicz     Expires June 12, 2011                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft              IPv6 ISP Listings              December 2010


3.3.  Experimental

   The Experimental level listing checks an ISP to meet the following
   criteria.

   o  Have an IPv6 prefix allocated or a PI assigned.

   o  Prefix is visible in at least one routing database.

   o  Have at least one server with an IPv6 address where accessibility
      can be checked.

3.4.  Basic

   The Basic level listing checks an ISP to meet the following criteria.

   o  Reverse DNS for is set up for allocated prefixes.

   o  DNS cache servers are accessible via IPv6 transport.

   o  Path MTU discovery [RFC1981] is functional and is not filtered.

   o  Prefix visibility is seen in at least two routing databases
      belonging in different regions of the world.

   o  Some form of support is available to customers and to operators
      that want to contact the ISP on an issue that cannot be resolved
      within their network.

   o  Mail exchange(MX) servers are accessible via IPv6.

3.5.  Advanced

   Detailed criteria for Advanced level are difficult to specify, as
   they depend on the specific operational characteristic of the
   particular network.  In general the Advanced level listing requires
   an ISP to meet the following criteria, essentially full parity with
   IPv4 level of service.

   o  The capabilities described in Basic level MUST be available to all
      customers by default.

   o  Full support for IPv6 services comparable to support for IPv4
      services MUST be available to all customers and operators.

   o  All public websites provided by the ISP for customer and other
      operators SHOULD be accessible from an IPv6-only client.




Kawamura & Jankiewicz     Expires June 12, 2011                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft              IPv6 ISP Listings              December 2010


3.6.  Considerations

   The listings can be made more useful if checking is done according to
   the target users of the ISP service.  ISP for residential, ISP for
   ISPs (transit providers), ISP for enterprises, and ISP for data
   centers have different requirements.  This document does not go into
   discussing the requirements for each type of services are.  This
   document intends to discuss the requirements that should be common to
   any services provided by any ISP.


4.  Security Considerations

   This draft does not introduce any new Security Considerations.


5.  IANA Considerations

   None.


6.  Acknowledgements

   The author would like to thank the Task Force on IPv4 Address
   Exhaustion, Japan.  Parts of this document was inspired from work by
   Brian Carpenter and Sheng Jiang.  Thanks to Vesna Manojlovic for
   providing generous input to the draft.


7.  References

7.1.  Normative References

   [RFC5211]  Curran, J., "An Internet Transition Plan", RFC 5211,
              July 2008.

7.2.  Informative References

   [RFC1981]  McCann, J., Deering, S., and J. Mogul, "Path MTU Discovery
              for IP version 6", RFC 1981, August 1996.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC4084]  Klensin, J., "Terminology for Describing Internet
              Connectivity", BCP 104, RFC 4084, May 2005.





Kawamura & Jankiewicz     Expires June 12, 2011                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft              IPv6 ISP Listings              December 2010


Appendix A.  Links to Listing Programs

   Below are some programs that list IPv6 enabled service providers.

      IPv6 Enabled Program http://ipv6forum.org/ipv6_enabled/

      IPv6 Ripeness http://labs.ripe.net/content/ipv6-ripeness/

      SixXS http://www.sixxs.net/wiki/IPv6_Enabled_Service_Providers

      IPv6 to Standard http://www.ipv6-to-standard.org/

      Hurricane Electric IPv6 Progress Report
      http://bgp.he.net/ipv6-progress-report.cgi


Authors' Addresses

   Seiichi Kawamura
   NEC BIGLOBE, Ltd.
   14-22, Shibaura 4-chome
   Minatoku, Tokyo  108-8558
   JAPAN

   Email: kawamucho@mesh.ad.jp


   Edward J. Jankiewicz
   SRI International, Inc.
   333 Ravenswood Ave
   Menlo Park, CA
   USA

   Email: edward.jankiewicz@sri.com

















Kawamura & Jankiewicz     Expires June 12, 2011                 [Page 7]


