


Routing Area Working Group                                     A. Retana
Internet-Draft                                       Cisco Systems, Inc.
Intended status: Informational                                  R. White
Expires: August 17, 2013                                        Verisign
                                                                 M. Paul
                                                     Deutsche Telekom AG
                                                       February 13, 2013


      A Framework and Requirements for Energy Aware Control Planes
                       draft-retana-rtgwg-eacp-01

Abstract

   There has been, for several years, a rising concern over the energy
   usage of large scale networks.  This concern is strongly focused on
   campus, data center, and other highly concentrated deployments of
   network infrastructure.  Given the steadily increasing demand for
   higher network speeds, always-on service models, and ubiquitous
   network coverage, it is also of growing importance for
   telecommunication networks both local and wide area in scope.  One of
   the issues in moving forward to reduce energy usage is to ensure that
   the network can still meet the performance specifications required to
   support the applications running over it.

   This document provides an overview of the various areas of concern in
   the interaction between network performance and efforts at energy
   aware control planes, as a guide for those working on modifying
   current control planes or designing new control planes to improve the
   energy efficiency of high density, highly complex, network
   deployments.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 17, 2013.



Retana, et al.           Expires August 17, 2013                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft         Energy Aware Control Plane          February 2013


Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.





































Retana, et al.           Expires August 17, 2013                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft         Energy Aware Control Plane          February 2013


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.  Requirements Language  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     3.1.  Scope  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     3.2.  Business Drivers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.3.  Application Drivers  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   4.  Framework  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     4.1.  Modes of Reducing Energy Usage . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
       4.1.1.  Example Network  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
       4.1.2.  Examples of Energy Reduction . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     4.2.  Global Verses Local Decisions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   5.  Considerations and Requirements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     5.1.  Energy Efficiency and Bandwidth Reduction  . . . . . . . .  9
       5.1.1.  An Example of Lowered Bandwidth  . . . . . . . . . . . 10
       5.1.2.  Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     5.2.  Energy Efficiency and Stretch  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
       5.2.1.  An Example of Stretch  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
       5.2.2.  Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     5.3.  Energy Efficiency and Fast Recovery  . . . . . . . . . . . 12
       5.3.1.  An Example of Impact on Fast Recovery  . . . . . . . . 12
       5.3.2.  Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     5.4.  Introducing Jitter Through Microsleeps . . . . . . . . . . 13
       5.4.1.  An Example of Microsleeps to Reduce Energy Usage . . . 13
       5.4.2.  Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
     5.5.  Other Operational Aspects  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
       5.5.1.  An Example of Operational Impact . . . . . . . . . . . 14
       5.5.2.  Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   6.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   7.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   8.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
     8.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
     8.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   Appendix A.  Change Log  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
     A.1.  Changes between the -00 and -01 versions.  . . . . . . . . 15
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16














Retana, et al.           Expires August 17, 2013                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft         Energy Aware Control Plane          February 2013


1.  Introduction

   As energy prices continue to increase, and energy awareness becomes a
   watchword for most large companies, places where the network
   infrastructure used a good deal of power have come under increased
   scrutiny for savings.  There is a concern, however, in saving energy
   at the cost of network operations --to reduce performance along with
   energy consumption, negatively impacting the operation of a network
   and the applications reliant on that network.  This concern is
   primarily focused on the network control plane, but will necessarily
   apply to network performance and energy usage overall.

   This document provides a background, a framework for understanding
   and managing the tradeoffs between modifications made to network
   protocols to conserve energy and network performance metrics and
   requirements, and a set of requirements for protocol designers to
   consider in proposals for new control plane protocols or
   modifications to existing control plane protocols.  It is intended to
   encourage work on mechanisms that will reduce network energy usage
   while providing perspective on balancing energy usage against
   performance.  The ultimate goal is to provide the tools and knowledge
   necessary for protocol designers to modify network protocols to best
   balance efficiency against performance, and to provide the background
   information network operators will need to intelligently deploy and
   use protocol modifications to network protocols.

   The document is organized as follows.  Section 3 provides material
   the reader needs to understand to appreciate the challenges inherent
   in balancing energy reduction with effective network performance.
   This section includes subsections considering the application and
   business requirements that are the basis of the reset of the
   document.  Section 4 provides a framework for understanding
   mechanisms common to all energy management schemes proposed to date
   in general terms.  Section 5 provides an analysis of the areas
   highlighted, including an explanation of how the specific area
   interacts with energy management, and example of the interaction,
   and, finally, a set of requirements protocol designers should
   consider when proposing either new protocols or modifications to
   existing protocols to reduce energy usage.


2.  Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].





Retana, et al.           Expires August 17, 2013                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft         Energy Aware Control Plane          February 2013


3.  Background

   The background covered here describes the underlying business and
   application drivers for the consideration and requirements sections
   below.  This section also contains a small example network used
   throughout the remainder of this document for explaining various
   mechanisms and technical points.

3.1.  Scope

   The reader should differentiate between radio based and wireline (or
   rather, "plugged in"), networks.  Radio based networks designed for
   rapid deployment for highly mobile users (often called Mobile Ad Hoc
   Networks, or MANETs [MANET]), and sensor networks designed for low
   power, processing, and memory (such as those described in [ROLL]),
   are not the target of this document.  Readers should refer to the
   groups working within those areas for energy management requirements
   based on those specialized environment.  While protocol developers
   for those environments may draw useful information from this
   document, this work is not intended to address those specialized
   networks specifically.  Mobile cellular networks however are
   similarly affected by excess energy consumption as wireline networks
   and seek to save energy by methods as described in the following (see
   e.g. [3GPP]).

   The reader should also differentiate between intradomain and
   interdomain applications.  Interdomain applications require more work
   in policy than in technical and business considerations, and
   therefore fall outside the scope of this document.  Intradomain
   control planes are (intuitively) where most energy savings will be
   attained, at any rate.  Most high concentrations of routers, such as
   data centers and campus networks, are under a single administrative
   domain.  Therefore, placing interdomain control planes outside the
   scope of this document does not limit its usefulness in any
   meaningful way.

   The reader should further differentiate between the components of an
   energy management system, namely energy monitoring and energy
   control.  Energy monitoring deals with the collection of information
   related to energy utilization and characteristics, as described in
   [EMAN].  Energy control relates to directly influencing the
   optimization and/or efficiency of devices in the network.  The focus
   of this document is on understanding the tradeoffs between
   modifications made to network protocols to conserve energy and
   network performance metrics and requirements, not on the functions,
   steps or procedures required for energy monitoring.





Retana, et al.           Expires August 17, 2013                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft         Energy Aware Control Plane          February 2013


3.2.  Business Drivers

   Networks are primarily built to support both broad and narrow
   business requirements.  Broad business requirements might include
   general communication requirements, such as providing email service
   between internal and external personnel, or providing general access
   to the World Wide Web for research and business support.  Narrow
   requirements would relate to specific applications, such as
   supporting a particular financial application in the case of a bank
   or other financial enterprise, or supporting customer traffic in the
   case of a service provider.  Application requirements will be
   considered in greater detail in the next section.

   Another class of requirements business place on networks can be
   called operational requirements.  These include (but are not limited
   to), capital expense, operational expense, and the restrictions the
   network architecture places on the growth and operation of the
   business itself.  These, in turn, drive requirements such as change
   management, total uptime (availability), and the ability of the
   network to be easily and quickly modified to meet new business
   demands, or to shed old business demands.  Operational expense is the
   primary area this document covers in relation to business
   requirements, because this is where energy management most obviously
   overlaps with network performance.

3.3.  Application Drivers

   Applications drivers provide the background for each of the technical
   sections below.  When approaching a specific application, there are
   only a small number of questions network and protocol designers need
   to fully understand to shape networks and protocols so a specific
   application can be supported.  The first two questions revolve around
   bandwidth; how much bandwidth will the application consume, and is
   this bandwidth consumption fairly steady, or highly variable?  For
   instance, applications such as streaming video tend to have long
   lasting flows with high bandwidth requirements, file transfers tend
   to produce shorter flows requiring high bandwidth, and HTML traffic
   tends to be bursty, with much lower bandwidth requirements.

   The next question a protocol or network designer might ask about a
   specific application is it's tolerance to jitter.  Real time
   applications, such as voice and video conferencing, have a very low
   toleration for jitter.  File transfers and streaming video, on the
   other hand, can often handle large variations in packet arrival
   times.  If packets are delayed long enough, the application may
   actually time out, shutting down sessions.  Users will often "hang
   up" after a short period of time, as well, causing loss of revenue
   and productivity.



Retana, et al.           Expires August 17, 2013                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft         Energy Aware Control Plane          February 2013


   Delay is another crucial factor in the performance of many
   applications.  Many server virtualization protocols, for instance,
   have very low tolerance for delay, having been written with a short
   wire local broadcast segment in mind.  Applications such as stock and
   commodity trading, remote medical, and collaborative video editing
   also exhibit very little tolerance for delay.

   These last two application drivers, jitter and delay, are normally
   the result of two underlying causes within a network's control plane:
   stretch and convergence.  Stretch (defined more fully in the section
   considering stretch below) causes longer paths to be taken through
   the network.  Each hop in the network path adds serialization into
   and out of a set of queues in device memory, along with the delays of
   various queuing mechanisms implemented on that device.  Each hop in
   the network increases delay directly, and has the potential to
   increase jitter as packets pass into and out of the additional
   devices.

   Network convergence will also show up as jitter in an application's
   stream; if packets are held up or looped for hundreds of milliseconds
   during a network convergence event, applications running over the
   converging topology will see this convergence time as a massive
   jitter event, or a short term delay in the delivery of packets.

   Jitter and delay can also be introduced directly into the packet
   stream by reducing the throughput of individual links, or putting
   devices and/or links into energy reduced modes for very short periods
   of time (microsleeps).  If a link is asleep when the first and third
   packets from a flow arrive at the head end of the link, and not when
   the second packet from that same flow arrives, each packet is going
   to be processed differently, and hence will have a different delay
   across the path.

   The specific technical problems addressed in the following sections,
   then, are bandwidth reduction, increasing stretch, network
   convergence, and introducing jitter through microsleeps.


4.  Framework

4.1.  Modes of Reducing Energy Usage

   Regardless of whether the control plane is centralized (such as some
   form of centrally computed traffic engineering or software defined
   network), or distributed (traditional routing protocols), there are
   four primary ways in which energy usage can be reduced:





Retana, et al.           Expires August 17, 2013                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft         Energy Aware Control Plane          February 2013


   o  Removing redundant links from the network topology

   o  Removing redundant network equipment from the network topology

   o  Reducing the amount of time equipment or links are operational

   o  Reducing the link speed or processing rate of equipment

4.1.1.  Example Network

   To illustrate the impacts of link and device removal throughout the
   rest of this document, the following network is used.

                             /---R2---\  /---\
                           R1          R4     R5
                             \---R3---/  \---/

   This network is overly simplistic so the impact of removing various
   links and devices from the topology can be more clearly illustrated.
   More complex topologies will often exhibit these same impacts without
   being so obvious.

4.1.2.  Examples of Energy Reduction

   In the example network above, several different modes of energy
   reduction might be:

   o  Shutting down one of the two links between R4 and R5

   o  Shutting down one of the two links between R4 and R5, and shutting
      down any line cards (or part of the nodes themselves) associated
      with the removal of these links

   o  Shutting down R2 or R3, since these represent alternate paths to
      reach the same set of destinations

   o  Shutting down the link between R2 and R4, since similar
      connectivity is provided through R1->R3->R4

   o  Shutting down all links and devices for fractions of time in a
      coordinated fashion

   o  Shutting down individual links as traffic or the control plane
      permits for fractions of time (here the momentary shutdown of
      various links is not coordinated, but undertaken hop by hop)

   o  Reducing the speed of all links and devices for fractions of time
      in a coordinated fashion



Retana, et al.           Expires August 17, 2013                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft         Energy Aware Control Plane          February 2013


   o  Reducing the speed of individual links as traffic or the control
      plane permits for fractions of time (here the momentary slowdown
      of various links is not coordinated, but undertaken hop by hop)

4.2.  Global Verses Local Decisions

   Independent of whether the control plane is centralized or
   distributed, the scope considered when making a decision about energy
   efficiency may affect the result and effectiveness of the system.
   There are clearly two extreme options when looking at the scope of
   the information used to make decisions.  The first extreme is that of
   every device in the network considering only local conditions, and
   determining the proper local state from that information.  An example
   of this mode of operation might be a local link where the devices on
   either side of that link measure the link utilization, and
   independently decide to automatically shut the link down when
   utilization reaches a specific threshold.  An example of the other
   end of the spectrum might be a network control plane in which all the
   nodes involved agree before taking a specific action; in the case of
   two parallel links, the devices on each end not only would have
   similar configured policies, but would coordinate if one of the links
   was to be turned off.  It is outside the scope of this document to
   determine which of these two options may be optimal or "best."

   There are some considerations and tradeoffs which need to be outlined
   in considering the global versus local decisions in relation to
   energy efficiency.  System designers should take note of the
   difficulties with preventing pathological conditions when purely
   localized decisions are made.  For instance, in the example network,
   assume R1 determines to put the R1->R2 link into an energy saving
   mode, while R4 determines to put the R4->R3 link into an energy
   saving mode.  In this case, no path will remain available through the
   network.  It is also possible for the opposite to occur, that is for
   no links or devices to be placed into a reduced energy state because
   R1 and R4 don't agree through the control plane which links and
   devices should be removed from the topology.

   Protocol designers should consider these tradeoffs in proposals for
   energy aware control planes.


5.  Considerations and Requirements

5.1.  Energy Efficiency and Bandwidth Reduction

   Bandwidth is an important consideration in high density networks;
   most data centers are designed to provide a specific amount of
   bandwidth into and out of each server and to facilitate virtual



Retana, et al.           Expires August 17, 2013                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft         Energy Aware Control Plane          February 2013


   server movement among physical devices.  In campus and core networks
   bandwidth is finely coupled with quality of service guarantees for
   applications and services.  It should be obvious that removing links
   or devices from a network topology will adversely affect the amount
   of available bandwidth, which could, in turn, cause well thought out
   quality of service mechanisms to degrade or fail.

   What might not be so obvious is the relationship between available
   bandwidth and jitter, or other network quality of service measures.
   If higher speed links are removed from the topology in order to
   continue using lower speed (and therefore presumably lower power)
   links, then serialization delays will have a larger impact on traffic
   flow.  Longer serialization delays can cause input queues to back up,
   which impacts not only delay but jitter, and possibly even traffic
   delivery.

5.1.1.  An Example of Lowered Bandwidth

   In the network illustrated above, one of the two links between R4 and
   R5 could be an obvious candidate for removal from the network.
   Especially if the network load can easily be transferred to the
   remaining link without failure, and without serious consequences for
   delay or jitter in the network, there is a strong case to be made for
   doing so --particularly if the accompanying line cards could also be
   shut down to add to the energy savings.

5.1.2.  Requirements

   Modifications to control plane protocols to achieve network energy
   efficiency SHOULD provide the ability to set the minimal bandwidth,
   jitter, and delay through the network, and not shut down links or
   devices that would violate those minimal requirements.

5.2.  Energy Efficiency and Stretch

   In any given network, there is a shortest path between any source and
   any destination.  Network protocols discover these paths from the
   destination's perspective --routing draws traffic along a path,
   rather than driving along a path.  Along with the shortest path,
   there are a number of paths that can also carry traffic from a given
   source to a given destination without the packets passing along the
   same logical link, or through the same logical device, more than
   once.  These are considered loop-free alternate [RFC5714] paths.

   The primary difference between the shortest path and the loop-free
   alternate paths is the total cost of using the path.  In simple
   terms, this difference can be calculated as the number of links and
   devices a packet must pass through when being carried from the source



Retana, et al.           Expires August 17, 2013               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft         Energy Aware Control Plane          February 2013


   to the destination --the hop count.  While most networks use much
   more sophisticated metrics based on bandwidth, congestion, and other
   factors, the hop count will stand in as the only metric used
   throughout this document.

   When the control plane causes traffic to pass from the source to the
   destination along a path which is longer than the shortest path, the
   network is said to have stretch (see [Krioukov] for a more in depth
   explanation of network stretch).  To measure stretch, simply subtract
   the metric of the shortest path from the metric of the longer path.
   For example, in hop count terms, if the best path is three hops, and
   the current path is four hops, the network exhibits a stretch of 1.

5.2.1.  An Example of Stretch

   In the network illustrated above, if a modification is made to the
   control plane in order to remove the link between R1 and R4 in order
   to save energy, all the destinations shown in the diagram remain
   reachable.  However, from the perspective of R1, the best path
   available to reach R2 has increased in length by two hops.  The
   original path is R1->R2, the new path is R1->R3->R4->R2.  This
   represents a stretch of 2.

   Along with this increased stretch will most likely also come
   increased delay through the network; each hop in the network
   represents a measurable amount of delay.  This increased stretch
   might also represent an increased amount of jitter, as there are more
   queues and more serialization events in the path of each packet
   carried.  There will also be the modifications in jitter as the
   network switches between the optimal performance configuration and an
   energy efficient configuration.

5.2.2.  Requirements

   Designers who propose modifications to control plane protocols to
   achieve network energy efficiency SHOULD analyze the impact of their
   mechanisms on the stretch in typical network topologies, and SHOULD
   include such analysis when explaining the applicability of their
   proposals.  This analysis may include an examination of the absolute,
   or maximum, stretch caused by the modifications to the control plane
   as well as analysis at the 95th percentile, the average stretch
   increase in a given set of topologies, and/or the mean increase in
   stretch.

   Mechanisms that could impact the stretch of a network SHOULD provide
   the ability for the network administrator to limit the amount of
   stretch the network will encounter when moving into a more energy
   efficient mode.



Retana, et al.           Expires August 17, 2013               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft         Energy Aware Control Plane          February 2013


5.3.  Energy Efficiency and Fast Recovery

   A final area where modifications to the control plane for energy
   efficiency is fast convergence or fast recovery.  Many networks are
   now designed to recover from failures quickly enough to only cause a
   handful of traffic to be lost; recovery on the order of half a second
   is not an uncommon goal.  It should be obvious that removing
   redundant links and devices from the network to reduce energy
   consumption could adversely affect these goals.

5.3.1.  An Example of Impact on Fast Recovery

   In the network shown, assume R2 and its associated links are removed
   from the topology in order to save energy.  Rather than this second
   path being available for immediate recovery on the failure of the
   R1->R3 link, some process must be followed to bring R2 and its
   associated links back up, reinject them into the topology, and
   finally begin routing traffic across this path.

   In many situations, only links and devices which are a "third point
   of failure" may be acceptable as removal candidates in order to
   conserve energy.

5.3.2.  Requirements

   Modifications to the control plane in order to remove links or nodes
   to conserve energy SHOULD entail the ability to choose the level of
   redundancy available after the network topology has been trimmed.
   For instance, it might be acceptable in some situations to move to
   single points of failure throughout the network, or in specific
   sections of the network, for certain periods of time.  In other
   situations, it may only be acceptable to reduce the network to a
   double point of failure, and never to a single point of failure.

   The complete removal of nodes or links from the network topology has
   several impacts on the control plane which must be considered.  In
   these cases, the control plane must:

   o  Modify the network topology so removed links or devices are not
      used to forward traffic

   o  Remember that such links exist, possibly including the neighbors
      and destinations reachable through those links or devices








Retana, et al.           Expires August 17, 2013               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft         Energy Aware Control Plane          February 2013


5.4.  Introducing Jitter Through Microsleeps

   One proposed mechanism to reduce energy usage in a network is to
   sleep links or devices for very short periods of time, called
   microsleeps.  For instance, if a particular link is only used at 50%
   of the actual available bandwidth, it should be possible to place the
   link in some lower power state for 50% of the time, thus reducing
   energy usage by something percentage.

   Such schemes introduce delay and jitter into the network path
   directly; if a packet arrives while the link to the next hop, or the
   next hop itself, is in a reduced energy state, the packet must wait
   until the link or next hop device enter a normal operational mode
   before it can be forwarded.  Most of the time the proposed sleep
   states are so small as to be presumably inconsequential on overall
   packet delay, but multiple packets crossing a series of links, each
   encountering different links in different states, could take very
   different amounts of time to pass along the path.

   One possible way to resolve this somewhat random accrual of delays on
   a per packet basis is to coordinate these sleep states such that
   packets accepted at the entry of the network are consistently passed
   through the network when all links and devices are in a normal
   operating mode, and simply delaying all packets at the entry point
   into the network while the devices in the network are in some energy
   reduced state.  This solution still introduces some amount of jitter;
   some packets will be delayed by the sleep state at the edge of the
   network, while others will not.  This solution also requires
   coordinated timers at the speed of forwarding itself to effectively
   control the sleep and wake cycles of the network.

5.4.1.  An Example of Microsleeps to Reduce Energy Usage

   In the example network, assume the bandwidth utilization along the
   path R1->R2->R4->R5 is 50% of the actual available bandwidth along
   this path.  It is possible to consider a scheme where R1->R2, R2,
   R2->R4, and R4->R5 are all put into some energy reduced operational
   mode 50% of the time, since packets are only available to send 50% of
   the time.  A packet entering at R1 may encounter a short delay at
   R1->R2, at R2->R4, and at R4->R5, or it might not.  Even if these
   delays are very small, say 200ms at each hop, the accumulated delay
   through the network due to sleep states may be 0ms (all links and
   devices awake) or 600ms (all links and devices asleep) as the packet
   passes through the network.

   As network paths lengthen to more realistic path lengths in real
   deployments, the jitter introduced varies more widely, which could
   cause problems for the operation of a number of applications.



Retana, et al.           Expires August 17, 2013               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft         Energy Aware Control Plane          February 2013


5.4.2.  Requirements

   Protocol designers SHOULD analyze the impact of accumulated jitter
   when proposing mechanisms that rely on microsleeps in either
   equipment or links.  This analysis SHOULD include both worst case and
   best case scenarios, as well as an analysis of how coordinated clocks
   are to be handled in the case of coordinated sleep states.

5.5.  Other Operational Aspects

   Modification of the network topology in order to save energy needs to
   consider the operational needs of the network as well as application
   requirements.  Change management, operational downtime, and business
   usage of the network need to be considered when determining which
   links and nodes should be placed into a low energy state.  Energy
   provisions have to be assigned and changed for nodes and links,
   optimally according to network usage profiles over the time of day.

   Control plane protocol operation, in terms of operational efficiency
   on the wire, also needs to be considered when modifying protocol
   parameters.  Any changes that negatively impact the operation of the
   protocol, in terms of the amount of traffic, the size of routing
   information transmitted over the network, and interaction with
   network management operations need to be carefully analyzed for
   scaling and operational implications.

5.5.1.  An Example of Operational Impact

   Time of day is an important consideration in business operations.
   During normal operational hours, the network needs to be fully
   available, including all available redundancy and bandwidth.  During
   holidays, night hours, and other times when a campus might not be
   used, or when there are lower traffic and resiliency demands on the
   network, network elements can be removed to reduce energy usage.

5.5.2.  Requirements

   Protocol designers SHOULD analyze operational requirements, such as
   time of day and network traffic load considerations, and explain how
   proposed protocols or modifications to protocols will interact with
   these types of requirements.  Protocols designers SHOULD analyze
   increases in network traffic and the operational efficiency impact of
   proposed changes or protocols.


6.  Security Considerations

   None.



Retana, et al.           Expires August 17, 2013               [Page 14]

Internet-Draft         Energy Aware Control Plane          February 2013


7.  Acknowledgements

   The authors of this document would like to acknowledge the
   suggestions and ideas provided by Sujata Banerjee, Puneet Sharma and
   Dirk Von Hugo.


8.  References

8.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

8.2.  Informative References

   [3GPP]     3GPP, "3GPP TR 25-927 Solutions for energy saving within
              UTRA Node B", 2011,
              <http://3gpp.org/ftp/Specs/html-info/25927.htm>.

   [EMAN]     IETF, "Energy Management Working Group Charter", 2012,
              <http://datatracker.ietf.org/wg/eman/charter/>.

   [Krioukov]
              Krioukov, D., "On Compact Routing for the Internet", 2007,
              <http://www.caida.org/publications/papers/2007/
              compact_routing/>.

   [MANET]    IETF, "Mobile Ad Hoc Networks Charter", 2012,
              <http://datatracker.ietf.org/wg/manet/charter/>.

   [RFC5714]  Shand, M. and S. Bryant, "IP Fast Reroute Framework",
              RFC 5714, January 2010.

   [ROLL]     IETF, "Routing Over Lowe power and Lossy networks
              Charter", 2012,
              <http://datatracker.ietf.org/wg/roll/charter/>.


Appendix A.  Change Log

A.1.  Changes between the -00 and -01 versions.

   o  Updated authors' contact information.

   o  Modified some of the rfc2119 keywords.





Retana, et al.           Expires August 17, 2013               [Page 15]

Internet-Draft         Energy Aware Control Plane          February 2013


Authors' Addresses

   Alvaro Retana
   Cisco Systems, Inc.
   7025 Kit Creek Rd.
   Raleigh, NC  27709
   USA

   Email: aretana@cisco.com


   Russ White
   Verisign
   12061 Bluemont Way
   Reston, VA  20190
   USA

   Email: riwhite@verisign.com


   Manuel Paul
   Deutsche Telekom AG
   Winterfeldtstr. 21-27
   Berlin  10781
   Germany

   Email: Manuel.Paul@telekom.de
























Retana, et al.           Expires August 17, 2013               [Page 16]

