


6lowpan Working Group                                             Y. Qiu
Internet-Draft                                                   J. Zhou
Expires: December 30, 2010                                        F. Bao
                                         Institute for Infocomm Research
                                                           June 28, 2010


     Lightweight Secure Router Protocol in Dymanmic Sensor Networks
                   draft-qiu-6lowpan-secure-router-00

Abstract

   When a sensor node roams within a very large and distributed wireless
   sensor network, which consists of numerous sensor nodes, its routing
   path and neighborhood keep changing.  In order to provide a high
   level of security in this environment, the moving sensor node needs
   to be authenticated to new neighboring nodes and a key established
   for secure communication.  The document proposes an efficient and
   scalable protocol to establish and update the authentication key in a
   dynamic wireless sensor network environment.  The protocol guarantees
   that two sensor nodes share at least one key with probability 1
   (100%) with less memory and energy cost, while not causing
   considerable communication overhead.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 30, 2010.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents



Qiu, et al.             Expires December 30, 2010               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft          Lightweight Secure Router              June 2010


   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Network Assumptions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Shared-Key Discovery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   4.  Dynamic Authentication and Key Establishment Protocol  . . . .  6
     4.1.  Basic Protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     4.2.  Key Management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     4.3.  Distribution Mode  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   5.  Security Consideration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   6.  IANA Consideration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   7.  Conclusions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   8.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15




























Qiu, et al.             Expires December 30, 2010               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft          Lightweight Secure Router              June 2010


1.  Introduction

   The demand of wireless sensor networks (WSNs) is growing
   exponentially.  It has turned out that the sensor networks can be
   widely applied in the areas of healthcare, environment monitoring,
   and the military.  One of the surveys on WSNs points out that, in the
   near future, wireless sensor networks will be an integral part of our
   lives, more so than the present-day personal computer [1].

   A sensor node has low capability in terms of power, computation,
   storage and communication.  A wireless sensor network is composed of
   a large number of wireless sensor nodes and multi-hop communication
   is desired in WSNs.  As a result, security in wireless sensor
   networks has six challenges to overcome: (i) the wireless nature of
   communication, (ii) resource limitations of sensor nodes, (iii) very
   large and dense WSNs, (iv) lack of fixed infrastructure, (v) unknown
   network topology prior to deployment, (vi) high risk of physical
   attacks on unattended sensors [2].

   With the aforementioned limitations of the existing solutions in
   mind, we now propose a secure protocol in dynamic WSN, addressing all
   of the following issues:

   o  A moving sensor node needs to change its attached routers (or
      cluster heads) frequently.

   o  A router (or cluster head) needs to ensure a joining node is not a
      malicious sensor.

   o  A moving node needs to establish a secure tunnel with the new
      router (or cluster head).

   o  The energy consumption for establishing the secure tunnel must be
      minimal.

   One of the important novel features of the proposed protocol is that
   the cluster heads is employed as sub-base-stations to execute key
   establishment.  This way, the total dependency on the base station
   for key establishment can be avoided.  Also, this approach reduces
   the hops between two communicating ends and hence results in
   reduction of the communication cost.










Qiu, et al.             Expires December 30, 2010               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft          Lightweight Secure Router              June 2010


2.  Network Assumptions

   In this paper, we consider a scenario in which a sensor node roams
   within a very large and distributed WSN, consisting of a large number
   of sensor nodes.  It is a typical scenario that is widely adopted in
   hospital environments as the patients or doctors equipped with
   sensors roam across each department in the hospital.  A patient who
   carries the sensor nodes can move freely within the range of a
   hospital.  When a wireless sensor node is moving, its routing path
   and neighborhood keep changing.  The moving node needs to be
   authenticated to the new neighbors and to establish a key for secure
   communication.

   This scenario reflects the problems described in Section 1: (a)
   composition by a large number of sensor nodes; (b) communication
   based on wireless multi-hop mechanism; (c) no fixed infrastructure;
   (d) the possible location change of sensor node (patient).
   Therefore, the challenges of this network assumption are how to
   establish a secure channel with these routers.
































Qiu, et al.             Expires December 30, 2010               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft          Lightweight Secure Router              June 2010


3.  Shared-Key Discovery

   In the WSN environment, as data transmission consumes much more
   energy than computation, the probabilistic solution is widely
   accepted in order to reduce the storage and communication overhead
   during key establishment.

   So far in the literature, numerous random key pre-distribution
   schemes have been proposed.  For example, in Chan et al.!_s scheme
   [21], each sensor node stores a random set of Np dedicated pair-wise
   keys to achieve the probability p that two nodes share a key.  At the
   key setup phase, each node ID is matched with Np other randomly
   selected node IDs with probability p.  A distinct pair-wise key is
   generated for each ID pair, and is stored in both nodes!_ key-chain
   along with the ID of the other party.  During the shared-key
   discovery phase, each node broadcasts its ID so that neighboring
   nodes can tell if they share a common pair-wise key.  Note that Chan
   et al.!_s scheme reduces the storage overhead by sacrificing key
   connectivity, but it still provides perfect key resilience.

   In this protocol, it is assumed that a sensor node (carried by a
   patient) can move within a special range (e.g. hospital).  As each
   sensor!_s memory is severely constrained, each sensor may only store
   a small set of keys randomly selected from a key pool at the
   deployment.  Two nodes may use any existing key discovery protocol
   (e.g., the solution proposed in [21]) to find a common key from their
   own sets.  If the common key is not found, the key establishment
   scheme will be initiated.  The reason why binding a general pre-
   shared key discovery phase to the protocol is to reduce the energy
   cost as much as possible.





















Qiu, et al.             Expires December 30, 2010               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft          Lightweight Secure Router              June 2010


4.  Dynamic Authentication and Key Establishment Protocol

4.1.  Basic Protocol

   Due to the limited storage of sensor nodes, the pre-shared key-pair
   is not always available between the roaming node and its new
   neighbors in the circumstance of a dynamic node roaming within large
   WSNs (e.g., in hospitals and nuclear power plants).  Therefore it
   requires an efficient and scalable protocol to establish and update
   the keys among nodes for secure communications.

   Figure 2 shows the basic architecture and message flow of our
   protocol for authentication and key establishment in dynamic WSNs.
   When a dynamic sensor node moves to a new area and wants to attach to
   a router or a cluster head in this area, it first sends a request
   message to the base station (refer to Figure 2).

   req={Src=SN, Dst= BS, RT||R0||MAC(KBN, SN||RT||R0)}                     (1)

   where Src and Dst denote the source and destination address of a
   message respectively.  SN, BS and RT are identifiers for sensor node,
   base station and router, respectively.  R0 denotes a random number
   generated by the sensor node.  MAC indicates the message
   authentication code algorithm with a key and KBN is the shared secret
   key between the base station and the sensor node.

   After receiving the req message, the base station will check its
   revocation list whether the sensor node has been revoked.  If the
   sensor node is acceptable, then the base station verifies the MAC
   message.  If the result is positive, the base station will generate a
   session key KNR for the roaming sensor node and the router (or
   cluster head).

   KNR = H(KBN, SN||R0||R1)                                                (2)

   where H is a keyed one-way hash function, and R1 is the random number
   selected by the base station.  The base station then sends an
   approval message appv with the session key to the router:

   appv = {Src=BS, Dst=RT, E(KBT, SN||R0||R1||KNR)}                                (3)

   where E is an encryption algorithm, and KBT is the shared secret key
   between the base station and the router.

   After receiving the appv message, the router decrypts the payload and
   extracts the session key KNR, and then sends a notice to the sensor
   node.




Qiu, et al.             Expires December 30, 2010               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft          Lightweight Secure Router              June 2010


   notice = {Src=RT, Dst=SN, R0||R1|| MAC(KNR, RT||SN|| R0||R1)}                   (4)

   Upon getting the notice message, the sensor node extracts the random
   numbers R0 and R1.  After checking if the received random number R0
   is equal to the original R0, the sensor node recalculates the session
   key KNR = H(KBN, SN||R0||R1) and then verifies the MAC value.  If the
   result is positive, the sensor node will use the session key for the
   communication with this router afterwards.  In practice, the router
   could be any sensor node that the dynamic sensor node wants to
   connect to.

4.2.  Key Management

   In order to manage the keys, every sensor node maintains a table,
   called !oKey Cache!+/-.  Table 1 shows the structure of the Key
   Cache.

   In order to manage the keys, every sensor node maintains a table,
   called !oKey Cache!+/-.  Table 1 shows the structure of the Key
   Cache.

   When a sensor node, say node N, wants to connect to other sensor
   node, say node R, it executes the following procedure:

   (1)  Checks first if there is an existing key pair between them.

   (2)  Otherwise, processes the subroutine of shared-key discovery to
        find a common key between node N and node R based on those
        !oPreSharedKeys!+/- in their key caches.

   (3)  If there is still no common key between them, the sensor node
        allocates an entry in the key cache, and assigns Node ID as
        nodeR, Key Stuff as the random number R0 and Key Lifetime as 0,
        as shown in Table 2.

   (4)  Then the sensor node initiates the procedure of key
        establishment described in the above section.  After receiving
        the notice message, and recalculating the session key KNR, the
        sensor node updates the entry!_s key stuff and key lifetime
        accordingly.

   (5)  When the key lifetime is expired, the dynamic sensor node should
        re-initiate the procedure of key establishment described in the
        above section.







Qiu, et al.             Expires December 30, 2010               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft          Lightweight Secure Router              June 2010


   (6)  When the sensor node leaves the range of the connected router,
        the sensor node deletes the related entry from its cache table
        in order to save the storage.  In case there is no space for
        adding a new entry, it may first delete the oldest key which has
        expired or will expire soon.

   The base station also maintains a key table (Table 3) that includes
   the secret keys shared with all of the sensor nodes in the network.

   If a node is compromised and revoked, its field of key lifetime would
   be marked as negative.

4.3.  Distribution Mode

   In WSNs, the more hops between two communicating ends exist, the
   poorer the traffic performance becomes and the more energy
   consumption is required.  To overcome these problems, we introduce
   the distribution mode.

   The major idea of distribution mode is to deploy the cluster heads as
   the sub-base-stations because a cluster head is more powerful than
   normal sensor nodes.  The distribution mode includes the following
   steps:

   (1)  Each cluster head manages to establish the shared key with its
        neighboring cluster heads after deployment.  There are several
        ways to do this.  One could embed those keys in advance if the
        topology is known at deployment, or use the basic protocol
        described in the above sections, via the base station.  (As this
        is a one-time operation, the overheads may be acceptable.)

   (2)  Each sensor node keeps two base station identifiers (IDs): one
        is a real base station ID; the other is a sub-base-station (the
        cluster head) ID.  Initially, the ID of sub-base-station is a
        real base station.

   (3)  After deployment, the first round for a mobile node to establish
        the shared key with the nearest cluster head uses the basic
        protocol, too.

   (4)  When the mobile node moves, use the basic protocol to establish
        the shared key with the new cluster head, via the sub-base-
        station (old cluster head) rather than the real base station.

   (5)  After successfully establishing the keys, the sensor node
        updates the ID of sub-base-station with the current cluster
        head.




Qiu, et al.             Expires December 30, 2010               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft          Lightweight Secure Router              June 2010


   (6)  For security reasons, each sensor node must reset its sub-base-
        station ID to the real base station at a specified interval (say
        a few hours or days, depending on the various applications) and
        re-establish keys with its near cluster heads via the real base
        station.  If the base station does not receive any request from
        a sensor node, it considers the sensor node has been
        compromised.

   The distribution mode could provide an efficient and low energy-cost
   solution for the shared-key establishment.  The basic protocol can
   provide the stronger protection since it can immediately block and
   revoke compromised nodes.







































Qiu, et al.             Expires December 30, 2010               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft          Lightweight Secure Router              June 2010


5.  Security Consideration

   In this proposed protocol, the session key KNR between the sensor
   node and the router is generated by the base station and sensor node
   respectively, and the session key is directly sent to the router from
   the base station by an encrypted packet.  Hence, the session key KNR
   is never disclosed during transmission.  The session key KNR is only
   known by the related peers, i.e., the sensor node, the base station
   and the router.

   Referring to equation (2), the session key KNR is generated by a
   keyed hash function with the shared key KBN between sensor node and
   base station as well as two random numbers, R0 and R1, which are
   generated by the sensor node and base station respectively.  As both
   R0 and R1 are used only one time, there are not the same session keys
   KNR.  This property is useful to against the replication attacks.

   Since the session key KNR is generated by a keyed hash function with
   the secret key KBN between the sensor node and the base station, the
   different sensor nodes will have different session keys.  This
   feature is useful to protect sensor node privacy.

   Even though an eavesdropper at the edge of the sensor node can
   monitor and capture the random numbers R0 and R1 as well as the
   identity of the sensor node, it is still not able to regenerate the
   session key KNR due to lack of the secret key KBN.  Without a proper
   session key, the routers will not forward the packets to next nodes.
   This attribute could prevent camouflage and traffic attacks.

   Due to the fact that no trusted connection is established between
   sensor node and new router before the connection between them, the
   proposed protocol employs a random number R1 issued by the base
   station.  The sensor node needs to recalculate the KNR first based on
   the R1 together with KBN and R0.  Then using the calculated session
   key KNR to verify the received session key KNR and the random number
   R1.  If the result is positive, then the sensor node will trust that
   the router is authorized by the base station.

   Besides the function of informing the sensor node that the new
   session key KNR is ready to use in the router, the notice message
   also plays an important role to check if the sensor node!_s address
   is reachable.  Without this reachability check, the sensor node may
   claim that it is at any location rather than its real location.  It
   could launch redirecting attacks.

   The path between the base station and the router is secure because
   the packet between them is encrypted with a pre-shared key KBT.




Qiu, et al.             Expires December 30, 2010              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft          Lightweight Secure Router              June 2010


   The messages from the sensor node to the base station and from the
   router to the sensor node are authenticated by a keyed hash function.
   Before accepting the inward message and making further processing,
   the receivers must verify the authentication.  Since the cost of a
   hash algorithm is very small, the base station and sensor node could
   avoid the attacks of denial of service.

   In order to achieve high efficiency and low energy cost, the protocol
   deploys a distribution mode which uses the cluster headers as the
   sub-base-stations.  Due to the capability of cluster header, it is
   not able to recognize any compromised sensor nodes in time; the
   protocol requires each sensor node to reset its sub-base-station ID
   to the real base station regularly, and to re-establish keys with its
   near cluster heads via the real base station.  This step is also
   useful to avoid a sensor node binding a compromised cluster head for
   long time.

   According to the above analysis, this proposed protocol, which is
   simple and easy to implement, can provide relatively strong
   protection for sensor node networks.































Qiu, et al.             Expires December 30, 2010              [Page 11]

Internet-Draft          Lightweight Secure Router              June 2010


6.  IANA Consideration

   This version does not need new values to be assigned by IANA.
















































Qiu, et al.             Expires December 30, 2010              [Page 12]

Internet-Draft          Lightweight Secure Router              June 2010


7.  Conclusions

   In this paper, we have proposed an efficient and scalable protocol to
   establish and update the authentication key between any pair of
   sensor nodes in a dynamic wireless sensor network.  Our protocol has
   the following features:

   o  It is suitable for both static and dynamic WSNs.  Any pair of
      nodes can establish a key for secure communication.

   o  A roaming node only deals with its closest router for security.
      There is no need to change the rest of routing path to the base
      station.

   o  The base station can manage a revocation list for lost or
      compromised roaming nodes.

   o  The system is scalable and resilient against node compromise.

   After comparing with some of the popular and latest protocols used in
   WSNs, our protocol could save about 30% in communication energy, and
   has the higher probability (100%) of sharing a key between two sensor
   nodes with less memory cost than those pre-distribution schemes,
   without incurring in a considerable amount of communication.



























Qiu, et al.             Expires December 30, 2010              [Page 13]

Internet-Draft          Lightweight Secure Router              June 2010


8.  Normative References

   [1]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
        Levels", RFC 2119, March 1997.















































Qiu, et al.             Expires December 30, 2010              [Page 14]

Internet-Draft          Lightweight Secure Router              June 2010


Authors' Addresses

   Ying Qiu
   Institute for Infocomm Research, Singapore
   1 Fusionopolis Way
   #21-01 Connexis (South Tower)
   Singapore  138632

   Phone: +65-6408 2053
   Email: qiuying@i2r.a-star.edu.sg


   Jianying Zhou
   Institute for Infocomm Research, Singapore
   1 Fusionopolis Way
   #21-01 Connexis (South Tower)
   Singapore  138632

   Phone: +65-6408 2075
   Email: jyyzhou@i2r.a-star.edu.sg


   Feng Bao
   Institute for Infocomm Research, Singapore
   1 Fusionopolis Way
   #21-01 Connexis (South Tower)
   Singapore  138632

   Phone: +65-6408 2073
   Email: baofeng@i2r.a-star.edu.sg





















Qiu, et al.             Expires December 30, 2010              [Page 15]


