A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3501

        Title:      INTERNET MESSAGE ACCESS PROTOCOL - VERSION 4rev1
        Author(s):  M. Crispin
        Status:     Standards Track
        Date:       March 2003
        Mailbox:    MRC@CAC.Washington.EDU
        Pages:      108
        Characters: 227640
        Obsoletes:  2060

        I-D Tag:    draft-crispin-imapv-20.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3501.txt


The Internet Message Access Protocol, Version 4rev1 (IMAP4rev1) allows
a client to access and manipulate electronic mail messages on a
server.  IMAP4rev1 permits manipulation of mailboxes (remote message
folders) in a way that is functionally equivalent to local folders.
IMAP4rev1 also provides the capability for an offline client to
resynchronize with the server.

IMAP4rev1 includes operations for creating, deleting, and renaming
mailboxes, checking for new messages, permanently removing messages,
setting and clearing flags, RFC 2822 and RFC 2045 parsing,
searching, and selective fetching of message attributes, texts, and
portions thereof.  Messages in IMAP4rev1 are accessed by the use of
numbers.  These numbers are either message sequence numbers or unique
identifiers.

IMAP4rev1 supports a single server.  A mechanism for accessing
configuration information to support multiple IMAP4rev1 servers is
discussed in RFC 2244.

IMAP4rev1 does not specify a means of posting mail; this function is
handled by a mail transfer protocol such as RFC 2821.

This is now a Proposed Standard Protocol.

This document specifies an Internet standards track protocol for
the Internet community, and requests discussion and suggestions
for improvements.  Please refer to the current edition of the
"Internet Official Protocol Standards" (STD 1) for the
standardization state and status of this protocol.  Distribution
of this memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.
