A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3373

        Title:      Three-Way Handshake for Intermediate System to
                    Intermediate System (IS-IS) Point-to-Point
                    Adjacencies 
        Author(s):  D. Katz, R. Saluja
        Status:     Informational
        Date:       September 2002
        Mailbox:    dkatz@juniper.net, rajesh.saluja@tenetindia.com
        Pages:      9
        Characters: 19522
        Updates/Obsoletes/SeeAlso:    None

        I-D Tag:    draft-ietf-isis-3way-06.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3373.txt


The IS-IS routing protocol (ISO 10589) requires reliable protocols at
the link layer for point-to-point links.  As a result, it does not use
a three-way handshake when establishing adjacencies on point-to-point
media.  This paper defines a backward-compatible extension to the
protocol that provides for a three-way handshake.  It is fully
interoperable with systems that do not support the extension.

Additionally, the extension allows the robust operation of more than
256 point-to-point links on a single router.

This extension has been implemented by multiple router vendors; this
paper is provided as information to the Internet community in order
to allow interoperable implementations to be built by other vendors.

This document is a product of the IS-IS for IP Internets Working Group
of the IETF.

This memo provides information for the Internet community.  It does
not specify an Internet standard of any kind.  Distribution of this
memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.


