



Internet Engineering Task Force                               Q. Fu, Ed.
Internet-Draft                                                    Z. Cao
Intended status: Informational                              China Mobile
Expires: April 22, 2014                                          H. Song
                                                                  Huawei
                                                        October 19, 2013


              What's the Impact of Virtualization to ALTO?
                      draft-fu-alto-nfv-usecase-00

Abstract

   This draft presents a use case of Application Layer Traffic
   Optimization (ALTO) with the emergence of Network Function
   Virtualization (NFV).  The Application-Layer Traffic Optimization
   (ALTO) Service provides network information (e.g., basic network
   location structure and preferences of network paths) with the goal of
   modifying network resource consumption patterns while maintaining or
   improving application performance.  The emerging Network Functions
   Virtualisation (NFV), as currently being in progress in ETSI NFV,
   leverages standard IT virtualisation technology to consolidate many
   network equipment types onto industry standard high volume servers,
   switches and storage.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 22, 2014.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.





Fu, et al.               Expires April 22, 2014                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                  VNF-ALTO                    October 2013


   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   3.  Impact of Virtualized Endpoints . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   4.  ALTO usecase with NFV . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   5.  Interaction Architecture of ALTO and NFV  . . . . . . . . . .   6
   6.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7

1.  Introduction

   This draft present a use case of Application Layer Traffic
   Optimization (ALTO) with the emergence of Network Function
   Virtualization (NFV).  The Application-Layer Traffic Optimization
   (ALTO) Service provides network information (e.g., basic network
   location structure and preferences of network paths) with the goal of
   modifying network resource consumption patterns while maintaining or
   improving application performance.  Typical deployment scenarios of
   ALTO include P2P and CDN, in which P2P tracker or CDN request router
   queries ALTO server for network map and cost map, in order to make
   decisions on which peer to select for content sharing.

   The emerging Network Functions Virtualisation (NFV), as currently
   being in progress in ETSI NFV, leverages standard IT virtualisation
   technology to consolidate many network equipment types onto industry
   standard high volume servers, switches and storage.  The NFV
   architecture in ETSI ongoing work includes an NFV Management and
   Orchestrator (M&O), the VNF(Virtualized Network Function) and the
   VNFI(Virtualized Network Function Infrastructure), as is shown in
   Figure 1.  The NFV M&O is responsible for creating and managing the
   VNFs on the VNFI.  Interactions between NFV M&O, VNF and VNFI are
   beyond scope of this draft.

   With the trend of various network functions being virtualized, there
   will be impacts on cost and network characteristics of the service
   endpoints.  Under the ALTO architecture, we analyze the problems and
   the necessity of extending the ALTO protocols to faithfully reveal



Fu, et al.               Expires April 22, 2014                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                  VNF-ALTO                    October 2013


   the network to the clients.  The central problem this draft would
   like to investigate is: what's the impact of virtualization to ALTO.

                        +-----------+
                        |  NFV M&O  |
                        +-----+-----+
                              |
                              |
                   +----------+-----------+
                   |                      |
                   |                      |
              +----+----+           +-----+-----+
              |   VNF   |-----------|    VNFI   |
              +---------+           +-----------+

                    Figure 1: NFV Architecture in Brief

   This draft analyzes the impacts of virtualized endpoints to
   application layer traffic optimization and presents a usecase of ALTO
   in CDN and P2P network with the peers as a VNF(Virtualized Network
   Function). .

2.  Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].

   We use the following terms defined in [RFC5693].  Application, Peer,
   ALTO service, ALTO server, ALTO client, ALTO query, ALTO Reply.

   And the following terms used in this document have their definitions
   from the NFV end to end architecture [NFVE2E].

   NFV: network function virtualization.  NFV technology uses the
   commodity servers to replace the dedicated hardware boxes for the
   network functions, for example, home gateway, enterprise access
   router, carrier grade NAT and etc.  So as to improve the re-
   usability, allow more vendors into the market, and reduce time to
   market.  NFV architecture includes a NFV controller (orchestrator) to
   manage the virtual network functions and the infrastructure
   resources.

   NF: A functional building block within an operator's network
   infrastructure, which has well-defined external interfaces and a
   well-defined functional behavior.  Note that the totality of all
   network functions constitutes the entire network and services
   infrastructure of an operator/service provider.  In practical terms,



Fu, et al.               Expires April 22, 2014                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                  VNF-ALTO                    October 2013


   a Network Function is today often a network node or physical
   appliance.

   VNF: virtual network function, an implementation of an executable
   software program that constitutes the whole or a part of an NF that
   can be deployed on a virtualization infrastructure.

   VM: virtual machines, a program and configuration of part of a host
   computer server.  Note that the Virtual Machine inherits the
   properties of its host computer server e.g. location, network
   interfaces.

   SLA: Service Layer Agreement.

3.  Impact of Virtualized Endpoints

   This section analyzes the impact of virtualization when application
   or service endpoints are deployed on virtualized infrastructure.

   It is generally believed that generic computing equipment is
   difficult to accomplish the same capability of specilized and
   dedicated equipment.  Operator network normally consists of many
   dedicated equipment, and the services running on them are not
   vitualized.  NFV initiatives investigate the use cases, architecture
   and requirements of moving network functions to the virtualized
   infrastructure.

   We analyze the impacts of virtualized endpoints to application layer
   traffic optimization for the following aspects.

   1.  Performance.  The NFV framework is claimed to be able to
       instantiate and configure any given VNF over the underlying
       infrastructure so that the resulting VNF instance performance is
       conforming to the expressed requirement.  Using appropriate VNF
       configuration schemes
       [I-D.song-opsawg-virtual-network-function-config], the operator
       or service provider can express their performance requirement.
       From this point, it the same as physical and non-virtualized
       service endpoints.  The difference is that the service assurance
       of virtualized endpoints is more difficult to ensure.











Fu, et al.               Expires April 22, 2014                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                  VNF-ALTO                    October 2013


   2.  Portability.  Different from physical equipment, NFV framework is
       able to provide the capability to load, execute and move VNFs
       across different but standard mutlivendor environments, and have
       to support an interface to decouple VNF associated software
       instances from the underlying infrastructure.  Portability has
       impacts on the mobility and network location of the service
       points, which in the turn will impact the service point selection
       process and service continuity.

   3.  Elasticity.  The NFV framework is able to allow VNFs to be scaled
       with SLA requirements, on-demand scaling or automatically
       scaling.  With the elasticity capability, VNF endpoints
       capability with respect to computing and networking are dynamic.
       The ALTO discovery and selection process will be impact to
       reflect such dynamic information.

   4.  Resilience.  NFV framework provides the necessary mechanisms to
       allow VNF to be recreated after a failure.  In addition to OAM in
       traditional non-virtualized environment, the NFV M&O will manage
       the metrics such as packet loss rate, latency, delay variation of
       flows, maximum time to detect and recover from faults.  All of
       these information will be valuable to ALTO client.

   5.  Energy efficient.  Studies have indicated that NFV could
       potentially deliver up to 50% energy saving compared with
       traditional appliance based network infrastructure.  In service
       point selection, this could be a criteria when the service
       provider is interested in saving power.

   6.  Service assurance.  Dedicated carrier-grade devices normally have
       requirements like 99.999%, but the such high availability is
       still challenging for VNFs.  The ALTO server should be aware of
       the assurance level of these virtualized endpoints.

   7.  Network infrastructure maintenance.  The VNFs may be bridged and
       linked using the virtualized switches on the computing node.  The
       network layer performance and availability metrics are only
       possible to collect when the OAM have established the tunnels to
       the these virtual network infrastructure.  For example, normal
       PING can only reflect the physical computing node availability,
       but cannot reflect the VMs bridged using virual switchs and
       hidden with tunnel encapsulations.









Fu, et al.               Expires April 22, 2014                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                  VNF-ALTO                    October 2013


4.  ALTO usecase with NFV

   The emergance of NFV means that some legacy devices which used to
   work on a physical server, now can be moved to a VM and work as a
   VNF.  Under such circumstance, the NFV M&O can act as a Dynamic
   Network Info provider for ALTO.

   The following paragraph will present a usecase of ALTO in CDN with
   NFV.  In the CDN network, the user agent first makes initial request
   to the Request Router.  The Request Router will first query the ALTO
   server for network and cost map to select an appropriate surrogate.
   The Request Router then responds to the UA with a redirection to the
   selected surrogate.  The UA then connects directly to the suggested
   surrogate to obtain the content.

   When a certain surrogate changes to a VNF and is managed by a NFV
   M&O, The NFV M&O can dynamically update the network and cost info of
   the surrogate to the ALTO server.  In the meantime, the NFV M&O
   should also keep ALTO server informed about the virtualized nature of
   the VNF surrogate, since its performance might be lower than physical
   devices.  In the migration stage of NFV, in which VNF and physical
   devices coexist in the network, ALTO server may consider the
   virtualized nature of VNF as a rating criteria that should inform the
   clients.  Clients may choose physical devices instead of VNF
   surrogates due to consideration of performance.

   In the P2P scenario, similar situations can also happen when peers
   become VNFs.  In this case, NFV M&O should also inform ALTO server
   about the virtualize nature of the VNF peers.  And P2P trackers can
   take such nature into consideration when selecting peers to obtain
   content.

5.  Interaction Architecture of ALTO and NFV

   A vertical architecture is proposed in this draft for ALTO and NFV
   interaction, in which NFV M&O is in responsible of info update to the
   ALTO server, as is shown in Figure 2.

                           +-------------+
                           | ALTO server |
                           +-----+-------+
                                 |
                                 |
                           +-----+-----+
                           |  NFV M&O  |
                           +-----+-----+
                                 |
                      +----------+-----------+



Fu, et al.               Expires April 22, 2014                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                  VNF-ALTO                    October 2013


                      |                      |
                 +----+----+           +-----+-----+
                 |   VNF   |-----------|    VNFI   |
                 +---------+           +-----------+

   Figure 2  ALTO and NFV interaction architecture


   In this architecture, NFV M&O can automatically update fine or coarse
   grained VNF info to the ALTO server timely.  The virtualized nature
   of the VNFs should be informed to the ALTO server by NFV M&O as a
   rating criteria.  In the meantime, details of VNF can be updated to
   the ALTO server by NFV M&O according to privacy privilege configured
   by the user.

6.  Informative References

   [I-D.song-opsawg-virtual-network-function-config]
              Song, H. and Z. Cao, "The Problems of Virtual Network
              Function Configuration", draft-song-opsawg-virtual-
              network-function-config-01 (work in progress), October
              2013.

   [NFVE2E]   , "Network Functions Virtualisation: End to End
              Architecture, http://docbox.etsi.org/ISG/NFV/70-DRAFT/0010
              /NFV-0010v016.zip", .

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC5693]  Seedorf, J. and E. Burger, "Application-Layer Traffic
              Optimization (ALTO) Problem Statement", RFC 5693, October
              2009.

Authors' Addresses

   Qiao Fu (editor)
   China Mobile
   China
   China

   Email: fuqiao1@outlook.com









Fu, et al.               Expires April 22, 2014                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                  VNF-ALTO                    October 2013


   Zhen Cao
   China Mobile
   Xuanwumenxi Ave. No.32
   Beijing  100053
   China

   Email: zehn.cao@gmail.com, caozhen@chinamobile.com


   Haibin Song
   Huawei

   Email: haibin.song@huawei.com






































Fu, et al.               Expires April 22, 2014                 [Page 8]
