


MARTINI WG                                                     J. Elwell
Internet-Draft                         Siemens Enterprise Communications
Intended status:  Informational                        February 10, 2010
Expires:  August 14, 2010


     Requirements for multiple address of record (AOR) reachability
          information in the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)
                     draft-ietf-martini-reqs-00.txt

Abstract

   This document states requirements for a standardized SIP registration
   mechanism for multiple addresses of record, the mechanism being
   suitable for deployment by SIP service providers on a large scale in
   support of small to medium sized PBXs.  The requirements are for a
   solution that can, as a minimum, support AORs based on E.164 numbers.

   This work is being discussed on the martini@ietf.org mailing list.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 14, 2010.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.




Elwell                   Expires August 14, 2010                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft      Multiple AOR reachability in SIP       February 2010


   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   3.  Requirements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   4.  Desirables  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   5.  Non-requirements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   6.  IANA considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   7.  Security considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   8.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   9.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8




























Elwell                   Expires August 14, 2010                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft      Multiple AOR reachability in SIP       February 2010


1.  Introduction

   The Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) [RFC3261], together with its
   extensions, supports multiple means of obtaining the connection
   information necessary to deliver out-of-dialog SIP requests to their
   intended targets.  When a SIP proxy needs to send a request to a
   target address of record (AOR) within its domain, it can use a
   location service to obtain the registered contact URI(s), together
   with any associated path information [RFC3327], and build a route set
   to reach each target user agent (UA).  The SIP REGISTER method can be
   used to register contact URIs and path information.  SIP-outbound
   [RFC5626] enhances this mechanism to cater for UAs behind NATs and
   firewalls.  When a entity needs to send a request to a target for
   which it is not authoritative, the entity can follow [RFC3263]
   procedures for using the Domain Name System (DNS) to obtain the next-
   hop connection information.

   In practice, many small and medium-sized businesses use a SIP-PBX
   that is authoritative for tens or hundreds of SIP AORs.  This SIP-PBX
   acts as a registrar/proxy for these AORs for clients hosted by the
   SIP-PBX.  UAs register with the SIP-PBX on behalf of the AORs
   concerned.  A SIP Service Provider (SSP) provides SIP peering/
   trunking capability to the SIP PBX.  The SIP-PBX must be reachable
   from the SSP so that the SSP can handle inbound out-of-dialog SIP
   requests targeted at these AORs, routing these requests to the SIP-
   PBX for onward delivery to registered UAs.

   Experience has shown that existing mechanisms are not always
   sufficient to support SIP-PBXs for small/medium businesses.  In
   particular, RFC 3263 procedures are generally inappropriate, except
   for some larger SIP-PBXs, for reasons described in
   [I-D.kaplan-martini-mixing-problems].  In current deployments,
   mechanisms for the dynamic provision of reachability information
   based on the SIP REGISTER method are commonly used.  However,
   implementations of this mechanism vary in detail, leading to
   interoperability issues between SIP-PBXs and SSPs, and the need for
   equipment to support different variants.

   This document states requirements for a standardized SIP registration
   mechanism for multiple AORs, the mechanism being suitable for
   deployment by SSPs on a large scale in support of small to medium
   sized PBXs.  The requirements are for a solution that can, as a
   minimum, support AORs based on E.164 numbers.  The ability to handle
   other forms of AOR is outside the scope of this document, although a
   solution that can handle other forms of AOR is not precluded if it
   does not lead to significant additional complexity or a delay in
   producing the standard.




Elwell                   Expires August 14, 2010                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft      Multiple AOR reachability in SIP       February 2010


2.  Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].

   The terms address of record (AOR), proxy, REGISTER, registrar,
   request and user agent (UA) are to be interpreted as described in
   [RFC3261].


3.  Requirements

   The following are requirements of the mechanism.

   REQ1 - The mechanism MUST allow a SIP-PBX to enter into a trunking
   arrangement with an SSP whereby the two parties have agreed on a set
   of telephone numbers deemed to have been assigned to the SIP-PBX.

   REQ2 - The mechanism MUST allow a set of assigned telephone numbers
   to comprise E.164 numbers, which can be in contiguous ranges,
   discrete, or in any combination of the two.

   REQ3 - The mechanism MUST allow a SIP-PBX to register reachability
   information with its SSP, in order to enable the SSP to route to the
   SIP-PBX inbound requests targeted at assigned telephone numbers.

   REQ4 - The mechanism MUST NOT prevent UAs attached to a SIP-PBX
   registering with the SIP-PBX on behalf of AORs based on assigned
   telephone numbers in order to receive requests targeted at those
   telephone numbers, without needing to involve the SSP in the
   registration process.

   REQ5 - The mechanism MUST allow a SIP-PBX to handle internally
   requests originating at its own UAs and targeted at its assigned
   telephone numbers, without routing those requests to the SSP.

   REQ6 - The mechanism MUST allow a SIP-PBX to receive requests to its
   assigned telephone numbers originating outside the SIP-PBX and
   arriving via the SSP, so that the PBX can route those requests
   onwards to its UAs, as it would for internal requests to those
   telephone numbers.

   REQ7 - The mechanism MUST provide a means whereby a SIP-PBX knows
   which of its assigned telephone numbers an inbound request from its
   SSP is targeted at.

   REQ8 - The mechanism MUST provide a means of avoiding problems due to



Elwell                   Expires August 14, 2010                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft      Multiple AOR reachability in SIP       February 2010


   one side using the mechanism and the other side not.

      In other words, the mechanism is required to avoid the situation
      where one side believes it is using the mechanism and the other
      side believes it is not, e.g., the SIP-PBX believes it is
      performing registration of multiple telephone numbers, but the SSP
      believes a single AOR is being registered.

   REQ9 - The mechanism MUST observe SIP backwards compatibility
   principles.

      In other words, the mechanism is required to provide a graceful
      means of recovery or fall-back if either side does not support the
      mechanism.  For example, this might involve the use of an option
      tag.

   REQ10 - The mechanism MUST work in the presence of intermediate SIP
   entities on the SSP side of the SIP-PBX-to-SSP interface (i.e.,
   between the SIP-PBX and the SSP's domain proxy), where those
   intermediate SIP entities need to be on the path of inbound requests
   to the PBX.

      These intermediate SIP entities can be edge proxies, session
      border controllers, etc..

   REQ11 - The mechanism MUST work when a SIP-PBX obtains its IP address
   dynamically.

   REQ12 - The mechanism MUST work without requiring the SIP-PBX to have
   a domain name or the ability to publish its domain name in the DNS.

   REQ13 - For a given SIP-PBX and its SSP, there MUST be no impact on
   other domains, which are expected to be able to use normal RFC 3263
   procedures to route requests, including requests needing to be routed
   via the SSP in order to reach the SIP-PBX.

   REQ14 - The mechanism MUST be able to operate over a transport that
   provides integrity protection and confidentiality.

   REQ15 - The mechanism MUST support authentication of the SIP-PBX by
   the SSP and vice versa.

   REQ16 - The mechanism MUST allow the SIP-PBX to provide its UAs with
   public or temporary Globally Routable UA URIs (GRUUs).

   REQ17 - The mechanism MUST NOT preclude the ability of the SIP-PBX to
   route on-PBX requests directly, without hair-pinning the signalling
   through the SSP.



Elwell                   Expires August 14, 2010                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft      Multiple AOR reachability in SIP       February 2010


4.  Desirables

   The following are desirable properties of the mechanism.

   DES1 - The mechanism SHOULD allow an SSP to exploit its mechanisms
   for providing SIP service to ordinary subscribers in order to provide
   a SIP trunking service to SIP-PBXs.

   DES2 - The mechanism SHOULD scale to SIP-PBXs of several thousand
   assigned telephone numbers.

      This will probably preclude any mechanism involving a separate
      REGISTER transaction per assigned telephone number.

      In practice, the mechanism is more likely to be used on PBXs with
      up to a few hundred telephone numbers, but it is impossible to
      give a precise limit, and hence the desire to be able to support
      several thousand.

   DES3 - The mechanism SHOULD scale to support several thousand SIP-
   PBXs on a single SSP.

   DES4 - The mechanism SHOULD require relatively modest changes to a
   substantial population of existing SSP and SIP-PBX implementations,
   in order to encourage a fast market adoption of the standardized
   mechanism.

      Ease of market adoption is paramount here.  Many SIP-PBXs and SSPs
      have implemented mechanisms based on the REGISTER method, and the
      need for substantial changes to those implementations will
      discourage convergence on a single standard in the foreseeable
      future.


5.  Non-requirements

   The means by which a third domain can route a request to the SSP for
   onward delivery to the SIP-PBX is outside the scope of this work.
   This is related to REQ13, which requires normal routing based on RFC
   3263 to be used.

   Provisioning is outside the scope of this work.  In particular, a SSP
   will need to assign a set of numbers to a SIP-PBX, and a SIP-PBX will
   need to be aware of the set of assigned numbers and allocate those
   numbers to its users.  Automated means for a SIP-PBX to obtain, from
   its SSP, the set of assigned telephone numbers is considered to be a
   provisioning topic.




Elwell                   Expires August 14, 2010                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft      Multiple AOR reachability in SIP       February 2010


6.  IANA considerations

   This document requires no IANA actions.


7.  Security considerations

   Security of signaling between the SIP-PBX and the SSP is important.
   Some of the requirements above already address this.

   In particular, it is important that an entity acting as a SIP-PBX
   cannot register with an SSP and receive inbound requests to which it
   is not entitled.  The SSP is assumed to have procedures for ensuring
   that a SIP-PBX is entitled to use a set of E.164 telephone numbers
   prior to entering into agreement with that SIP-PBX for using those
   telephone numbers with this mechanism.  Furthermore, by
   authenticating the SIP-PBX when it provides reachability information,
   the SSP can be sure that it delivers inbound requests only to the
   correct destination.


8.  Acknowledgements

   The contents of the document have been compiled from extensive
   discussions within the MARTINI WG, the individuals concerned being
   too numerous to mention.


9.  Informative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC3261]  Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., Camarillo, G., Johnston,
              A., Peterson, J., Sparks, R., Handley, M., and E.
              Schooler, "SIP: Session Initiation Protocol", RFC 3261,
              June 2002.

   [RFC3263]  Rosenberg, J. and H. Schulzrinne, "Session Initiation
              Protocol (SIP): Locating SIP Servers", RFC 3263,
              June 2002.

   [RFC3327]  Willis, D. and B. Hoeneisen, "Session Initiation Protocol
              (SIP) Extension Header Field for Registering Non-Adjacent
              Contacts", RFC 3327, December 2002.

   [RFC5626]  Jennings, C., Mahy, R., and F. Audet, "Managing Client-
              Initiated Connections in the Session Initiation Protocol



Elwell                   Expires August 14, 2010                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft      Multiple AOR reachability in SIP       February 2010


              (SIP)", RFC 5626, October 2009.

   [I-D.kaplan-martini-mixing-problems]
              Kaplan, H., "SIP IP-PBX Registration Problems",
              draft-kaplan-martini-mixing-problems-00 (work in
              progress), December 2009.


Author's Address

   John Elwell
   Siemens Enterprise Communications

   Phone:  +44 1908 855608
   Email:  john.elwell@siemens-enterprise.com




































Elwell                   Expires August 14, 2010                [Page 8]


