TRILL Working Group                                              Y. Li
Internet Draft                                     Huawei Technologies
Intended status: Informational                            July 4, 2010
Expires: January 2011



        Requirements for multicast to unicast optimization in Trill
                 draft-liyz-trill-reqs-mlt2uni-opt-00.txt


Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 5, 2009.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors. All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document. Please review these documents carefully,
   as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect to this
   document.







Y. Li                  Expires January 5, 2011                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft      Reqs for mlt2uni optimization            July 2010


Abstract

   Instead of always blindly forwarding multicast/broadcast frames
   through a distribution tree in Trill, some optimizations can be done
   to convert multicast/broadcast to unicast for certain IP controlling
   packets. This draft shows the scenarios in which such optimizations
   are needed.

Table of Contents


   1. Introduction.................................................2
   2. Conventions used in this document............................3
   3. Problem Statement............................................3
      3.1. DHCP....................................................3
      3.2. ARP for address resolution..............................4
      3.3. NS/NA for DAD...........................................5
   4. Optimization requests in Trill...............................6
   5. Security Considerations......................................7
   6. IANA Considerations..........................................7
   7. Conclusions..................................................7
   8. References...................................................7
      8.1. Normative References....................................7
      8.2. Informative References..................................8
   9. Acknowledgments..............................................8

1. Introduction

   In traditional IP networks, some controlling frames such as DHCP
   replies [RFC2131], NS/NA(neighbor solicitation/neighbor advertisement)
   for duplicate address detection [RFC4861] in IPv6 may be
   multicasted/broadcasted. The basic reason behind is no valid IP
   address for an end station available at the time the IP packet is
   delivered so that broadcast or multicast has to be used to reach the
   end station. In addition, packets like ARP and NS/NA for address
   resolution are also required to be flooded in the whole VLAN.
   Subsequently their L2 frame is also multicasted/broadcasted.

   Unlike traditional bridge, RBridge defined in Trill maintains the
   forwarding table for MAC address of the end stations and the
   corresponding egress RBridge. The end station is typically reachable
   by the egress RBridge. Such information is available at the ingress
   RBridge. Theoretically the ingress RB does not need to flood the
   frames to all other RBs just for the reason of undefined IP address.
   Ingress RB may choose to unicast the frame to the right egress RB
   with proper Trill encapsulation without changing the native Ethernet
   frame in order to save bandwidth resource.


Y. Li                  Expires January 5, 2011                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft      Reqs for mlt2uni optimization            July 2010


   This draft tries to identify and analyze if unicasting instead of
   flooding in L2 by RBridges can be used for various controlling frames.
   Types of frames that may be appropriate for such optimization include

   o DHCP

   o ARP for address resolution

   o NS/NA for DAD (duplicate address detection)

   It is noted that ordinary multicast/broadcast data frames are not
   candidates for multicast-to-unicast optimization.

2. Conventions used in this document

   The same terminology and acronyms are used in this document as in
   [RFCtrill].

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [RFC2119].

3. Problem Statement

   Some frames are meant for single listener only though they are multi-
   destination in format. With the scaling of network and increased
   diversity of VLAN usage, flooding is expected to be avoided as much
   as possible to save the resource and minimize the potential security
   problem. The following sub sections will examine them in details.



3.1. DHCP

   DHCP client broadcasts DHCPDISCOVER message for address application
   and DHCP server replies with DHCPOFFER. The client may choose one
   from multiple offers and send DHCPREQUEST to DHCP server. If the
   selected DHCP server successfully allocates the IP address to the
   client, it replies with DHCPACK otherwise it replies with DHCPNAK.
   DHCP replies normally are broadcast frames since the client may not
   be able to receive unicast IP packet destined to the going-to-be-
   assigned IP address before whole DHCP process finishes.

   In Trill ingress RB of DHCP replies will deliver the broadcast frame
   to the proper distribution tree. Such procedures encounters flooding
   problem in large layer 2 network. There are some existing protocol
   in-band methods to eliminate such broadcast.


Y. Li                  Expires January 5, 2011                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft      Reqs for mlt2uni optimization            July 2010


   1. DHCP L2 snooping and relay. In fixed broadband network, access
      node (e.g. DSLAM) may act as a DHCP L2 relay. It inserts DHCP
      relay agent option [RFC3046], normally known as option 82, to the
      DHCP message. Circuit-Id is one of the information of relay agent
      option which identifies the port connecting to the subscriber.
      When DHCP replies reach the access node, access node checks the
      circuit-id information and unicasts the frame to the subscriber
      through the destined port.

      Option 82 was originally designed for L3 DHCP relay agent though
      some implementations use it for L2 equipment too. Draft Layer 2
      Relay Agent Information [I-D.ietf-dhc-l2ra] describes the detailed
      behaviors of DHCP L2 relay agent.

      If only egress RB of DHCP replies enabled with DHCP L2 relay agent
      function, it does not help to make the frame to be unicast from
      ingress to egress RB. Cascaded DHCP L2 relay agent may be useful
      but it is unclear how such relay agents work and what optimization
      to Trill encapsulation should be done to adapt their behavior.

   2. Multicast at L3 but unicast at L2. Destination MAC address is
      replaced by the content of chaddr field of DHCP reply message [I-D.
      ietf-dhc-l2ra-extensions]. It prevents DHCP server or DHCP L3
      relay agent from flooding the DHCP replies to L2 relay agent.

      The requirement for this approach is the correct deployment of L2
      and/or L3 DHCP relay agent at appropriate RBs. Trill is used in a
      relatively large scale L2 network with mixed RBs and normal
      bridges.  It may be preferred to have optimization on RBs to make
      the DHCP replies unicast from ingress to egress in Trill domain
      without touching the content of native frames.

    Other than DHCP replies, it may be desired to optimize DHCP requests
    (DHCPDISCOVER/DHCPREQUEST) too. If RB is configured to know the
    egress point of DHCP server or DHCP layer 3 relay agent, DHCP
    requests can be unicast to the proper edge RB. Such configuration is
    probably distributed via link state information.

3.2. ARP for address resolution

   ARP queries are broadcast frames. In the earlier version of RBridge
   base protocol, designated RB for an ARP reply may optionally send a
   link state update to inform other RBs about the binding information.
   Each RB caches the ARP bindings and may send local reply for a
   particular ARP request or send a unicast ARP request to target
   instead of flood.



Y. Li                  Expires January 5, 2011                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft      Reqs for mlt2uni optimization            July 2010


   It is a practical way to convert ARP request from broadcast to
   unicast. Detailed optimization is expected to be described in a
   separate document in TRILL WG (according to the updated charter of
   TRILL WG). The following points should be covered,

   o Format and frequency of binding information distributed via link
      state update. The amount of changes (including creation, aging and
      refreshing) of ARP binding information is probably huge at peak
      time. The frequency for sending the update should be carefully
      considered.

   o Aging time. Typically ARP entry at switch and end host has aging
      time. The dealing of inconsistency of ARP entry at edge RBs should
      be described. Longer aging time will result in less flooding but
      longer detection of stale record and higher possibility of packet
      loss. If end host nomadism was within consideration, the problem
      would be more complicated.

3.3. NS/NA for DAD

   Though ND [RFC4861] in IPv6 performs similar functions as ARP in IPv4,
   there are differences which should be considered in optimization.

   o Individual address resolution: request is sent in
      broadcast/multicast and reply is sent in unicast. ARP and ND
      perform almost the same in this case. Section 3.2 has covered this
      scenario.

   o Duplicate address detection: gratuitous ARP is sent in broadcast
      and if there is duplication ARP reply is returned to the sender in
      unicast. While in IPv6 DAD-NS and DAD-NA are both sent in
      multicast. The requests (ARP request and DAD-NS) can be optimized
      as that in section 3.2. It may be wanted that requests for DAD
      should always be identified so that RB with hit entry of
      duplicated address in local cache at RBridge does not do the local
      reply. In addition, optimization of DAD-NA may be required and is
      described in the later part of this sub section.

   o Address advertisement: gratuitous ARP is sent in broadcast in IPv4
      and unsolicited NA is sent in multicast in IPv6. Unlike ARP/ND for
      address resolution, such frames may be identified not to trigger
      the link state information to be distributed as end nodes and RBs
      may learn the binding information directly from the flooded frames.






Y. Li                  Expires January 5, 2011                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft      Reqs for mlt2uni optimization            July 2010


   To explain the second bullet above in details, NS/NA messages in IPv6
   basically are used for duplicate address detection(DAD), address
   resolution, and neighbor unreachability detection [RFC4861]. NS
   message with unspecified address as source address indicates a DAD
   request. A responding NA will be multicasted to all-nodes multicast
   address in case of address duplication. Target link-layer address
   field is set to the source link layer address of the solicited NS.

   If DAD-NA message was optimized to be delivered directly to the
   solicited sender instead of multicasting, it will not affect the
   correct function of DAD process. It is uncertain if multicasted DAD-
   NA message helps in distributing source IP and MAC binding
   information. If it is true, changing DAD-NA to unicast may have some
   minor side-effect. However, ordinarily binding information is learned
   from NS/NA for address resolution and probably unsolicited NA. DAD-NA
   is not a major learning source for information binding.

   There are similar ways to avoid flooding of DAD-NA as those in DHCP,
   e.g. add DHCP option 82 like information to NS/NA [I-D.li-6man-ns-
   mark] and multicast at L3 but unicast at L2 [I-D.gundavelli-v6ops-l2-
   unicast]. They are depending on either the proper deployment of
   agent-like node or the modification to the native frame.



4. Optimization requests in Trill

   ARP optimization is believed to be a requirement in Trill which needs
   more elaborated design. One of the functions of ARP optimization is
   to reduce the flooding among RBridges. In addition to ARP, it is
   expected that other frames such as DHCP and DAD-NA to be considered
   for optimization too.

   Trill may optionally provide the multicast to unicast optimization to
   the frames. Such optimization is within Trill domain only, i.e.
   between ingress to egress, and is compatible with current DHCP/ARP/ND
   implementation. Other nodes like ordinary bridges operate in their
   normal way which can be retaining the multicasting.

   Trill naturally tunnels native Ethernet frame from ingress RB to
   egress RB without the need of modifying the destination MAC address
   of native frame. Its working does not rely on the deployment of
   protocol in-band mechanism such as DHCP relay agent.






Y. Li                  Expires January 5, 2011                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft      Reqs for mlt2uni optimization            July 2010


5. Security Considerations

   Multicast to unicast optimization requires the snooping of specific
   frames at edge RB. However it does not introduce extra security
   vulnerability. The methods such as rate limiter and trusted port
   filter should be used normally.

6. IANA Considerations

   This document requires no IANA actions.

7. Conclusions

   Flooding has both pros and cons in Ethernet. It makes broadcast data
   frames naturally reaching every end station in a VLAN; on the other
   hand, it is a big burden for a large scaled network. Multicast to
   unicast optimization can be optionally used to decrease flooding. We
   suggest considering it for DHCP and DAD-NA messages together with ARP
   optimization.

8. References

8.1. Normative References

   [RFCtrill] R. Perlman, D. Eastlake, D. Dutt, S. Gai, and A. Ghanwani,
             "RBridges: Base Protocol Specification", draft-ietf-trill-
             rbridge-protocol-16.txt, work in progress.

   [RFC2131]  Droms, R., "Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol",
             RFC 2131, March 1997.

   [RFC3046]  Patrick, M., "DHCP Relay Agent Information Option", RFC
             3046, January 2001.

   [RFC4861]     Narten, T., Nordmark, E., Simpson, W., and H. Soliman,
             "Neighbor Discovery for IP version 6 (IPv6)", RFC 4861,
             September 2007.

   [I-D.ietf-dhc-l2ra] Joshi, B. and Kurapati, P., "Layer 2 Relay Agent
             Information", draft-ietf-dhc-l2ra-04, April 2009.

   [I-D.ietf-dhc-l2ra-extensions] Joshi, B., Kurapati, P., Kamath, M.,
             De Cnodder, S., "Extensions to Layer 2 Relay Agent", draft-
             ietf-dhc-l2ra-extensions-01, April 2009.





Y. Li                  Expires January 5, 2011                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft      Reqs for mlt2uni optimization            July 2010


8.2. Informative References

   [I-D.gundavelli-v6ops-l2-unicast] Gundavelli, S., Townsley, M., Troan,
             O., Dec, W., "Unicast Transmission of IPv6 Multicast
             Messages on Link-layer", draft-gundavelli-v6ops-l2-unicast-
             00, February 2010

   [I-D.li-6man-ns-mark] Li, H. and Li, Y., "Line identification in IPv6
             Neighbour Solicitation messages", draft-li-6man-ns-mark-00,
             July 2009

9. Acknowledgments

   This document was prepared using 2-Word-v2.0.template.dot.


































Y. Li                  Expires January 5, 2011                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft      Reqs for mlt2uni optimization            July 2010


Authors' Addresses

   Li Yizhou
   Huawei Technologies
   101 Software Avenue,
   Nanjing 210012
   China

   Phone: +86-25-56622310
   Email: liyizhou@huawei.com






































Y. Li                  Expires January 5, 2011                [Page 9]

