Network Working Group                                        K. Moriarty
Internet-Draft                                                  S. Tabet
Intended status: Standards Track                                     EMC
Expires: April 9, 2012                                   October 7, 2011


                          GRC Report Exchange
                draft-moriarty-mile-grc-exchange-01.txt

Abstract

   Governance, risk, and compliance (GRC) programs provide oversight
   (governance) of risks and compliance initiatives within an
   organization.  GRC reports are increasingly provided in an XML
   format.  This specification defines a common method to securely
   transport GRC and other XML reports.  The defined messaging
   capability provides policy options and markings in an XML schema,
   options for confidentiality at the document/report level, and
   security for the end-to-end communication.  XML reports may be shared
   between service providers and clients, enterprises, or within
   enterprises.  Reports may also be exchanged for official purposes
   such as business report filings, compliance report filings, and the
   handling of legal incidents (eWarrant, eDiscovery, etc.)  This work
   is a generalized format derived from the secure exchange of incident
   information defined by RFC6045-bis, Real-time Inter-network Defense
   (RID).

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 9, 2012.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.



Moriarty & Tabet          Expires April 9, 2012                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                grc-exchange                  October 2011


   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     1.1.  Normative and Informative  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     1.2.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   2.  Report Types . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   3.  Communication between Entities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.1.  Inter-network Provider GRC Messaging . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.2.  GRC Report Exchange Communication Topology . . . . . . . .  7
     3.3.  Message Formats  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     3.4.  GRC Report Exchange Data Types . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
       3.4.1.  Boolean  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     3.5.  GRC Report Exchange Message Types  . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   4.  GRC-Exchange Schema  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     4.1.  GRCPolicy Class  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     4.2.  RequestStatus  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
     4.3.  ReportSchema . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
     4.4.  Reference Class  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
     4.5.  GRC-Exchange Name Spaces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
   5.  Extending the Enumerated Values of Attributes  . . . . . . . . 21
   6.  GRC Report Exchange Messages . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
     6.1.  RequestAuthorization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
     6.2.  Result . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
     6.3.  ReportRequest  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
     6.4.  Report . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
     6.5.  ReportQuery  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
   7.  GRC-Exchange Communication Flows . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
     7.1.  Report Communication Flow  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
       7.1.1.  GRC-Exchange Report Example  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
     7.2.  Report Request Communication Flow  . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
       7.2.1.  ReportRequest Example  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
       7.2.2.  RequestAuthorization Message Example . . . . . . . . . 28
     7.3.  ReportQuery Communication Flow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
       7.3.1.  ReportQuery Example  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
       7.3.2.  RequestAuthorization Message Example . . . . . . . . . 30
       7.3.3.  Result Message Example . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
   8.  GRC-Exchange Schema Definition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30



Moriarty & Tabet          Expires April 9, 2012                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                grc-exchange                  October 2011


   9.  Requirements for GRC XML Schemas for GRC-Exchange  . . . . . . 31
   10. Security Requirements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
     10.1. XML Digital Signatures and Encryption  . . . . . . . . . . 32
     10.2. Message Transport  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
     10.3. Message Delivery Protocol - Integrity and
           Authentication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
     10.4. Transport Communication  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
     10.5. Authentication of The GRC Report Exchange Protocol . . . . 37
       10.5.1. Multi-Hop Authentication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
     10.6. Consortiums and Public Key Infrastructures . . . . . . . . 38
     10.7. Privacy Concerns and System Use Guidelines . . . . . . . . 39
   11. Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
   12. IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
   13. Summary  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
   14. References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
     14.1. Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
     14.2. Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45

































Moriarty & Tabet          Expires April 9, 2012                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                grc-exchange                  October 2011


1.  Introduction

   Governance, risk, and compliance (GRC) programs provide oversight
   (governance) of risks and compliance initiatives within an
   organization.  The areas typically covered by GRC include:

   o  Finance and Business Operations,

   o  Information Technology,

   o  Security, and

   o  Legal and Compliance

   GRC Report Exchange provides a secure method to communicate incident
   information, enabling the exchange of GRC extensible markup language
   (XML) documents.  GRC Report Exchange considers security, policy, and
   privacy issues related to the exchange of potentially sensitive
   information, enabling organizations accepting GRC report filings,
   service providers, or enterprises the options to make appropriate
   decisions according to their policies.  GRC Report Exchange includes
   provisions for confidentiality, integrity, and authentication.

   The data in GRC reports to be included in GRC Report Exchange are
   represented in an XML [XML1.0] document using the appropriate XML
   schema for the GRC report and the GRC Report Exchange schema.  By
   following this model, a single method for all GRC reports can be
   used, simplifying the integration of GRC reports across platforms.

   Security and privacy considerations are of high concern since
   potentially sensitive information may be passed through GRC Report
   Exchange messages.  GRC Report Exchange takes advantage of XML
   security and privacy policy information set in the GRC Report
   Exchange schema and provides standard settings for fine grain
   controls within GRC XML schemas.  The GRC Report Exchange schema acts
   as an XML envelope to support the communication of GRC report
   documents.  GRC Report Exchange messages are encapsulated for
   transport, which is defined in a separate document [RFC6046]
   [RFC6046].  The authentication, integrity, and authorization features
   GRC Report Exchange and RID transport offer are used to achieve a
   necessary level of security.

   GRC report exchange is not strictly a technical problem.  There are
   numerous procedural, trust, and legal considerations that might
   prevent an organization from sharing information.  GRC Report
   Exchange provides information and options that can be used by
   organizations who must then apply their own policies for sharing
   information.  Organizations must develop policies and procedures for



Moriarty & Tabet          Expires April 9, 2012                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                grc-exchange                  October 2011


   the use of the GRC Report Exchange protocol and XML reports.

1.1.  Normative and Informative

   The XML schema [XMLschema] and transport requirements contained in
   this document are normative; all other information provided is
   intended as informative.  More specifically, the following sections
   of this document are intended as informative: Sections XXX.  The
   following sections of this document are normative: Sections XXXX.

1.2.  Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].


2.  Report Types

   There are many possible report types that may be exchanged using GRC
   Report Exchange.  The reports MUST all be XML formatted reports and
   MAY leverage the data markings used by this specification to require
   security options such as encryption on the entire report (XML
   document) or a section of the report.

   The types of reports may vary within each area of GRC.  Example
   report types broken out by GRC focus areas include:

   o  Finance and Business Operations

      *  Finance or business Filing Report

   o  Information Technology

      *  Service Level Agreement (SLA) Reports from service providers
         (public cloud providers, community cloud providers, etc.)

   o  Security

      *  Security Report aligned to control requirements (ISO27002, NIST
         800-53, etc.) from service providers

   o  Legal and Compliance

      *  eDiscovery Reports

      *  eWarrant Reports




Moriarty & Tabet          Expires April 9, 2012                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                grc-exchange                  October 2011


      *  Compliance report aligned to specific regulations

      *  Report for internal or external audit aligned to risk and
         control frameworks (ISO27002, NIST 800-53, COSO, COBIT, etc.)


3.  Communication between Entities

   Trust relationships.  Service provider to tenant or client is the ms
   likely scenario for the initial use cases of GRC report exchange.

3.1.  Inter-network Provider GRC Messaging

   GRC Report Exchange provides a standard protocol and format is
   required to ensure inter-operability between vendors for the exchange
   of GRC reports and GRC filing of reports.  GRC Report Exchange
   provides the framework necessary for communication between entities
   filing or exchanging GRC reports.  Several message types described in
   Section 5 are necessary to facilitate the exchange or filing of
   reports.  The message types include the Report, ReportQuery,
   RequestAuthorization, Result, and the ReportRequest request message.

   The Report message is used when a GRC report is to be filed on a
   system or associated database accepting GRC Report Exchange messages,
   where no further action is required.  A ReportQuery message is used
   to request information on a particular report.  The
   RequestAuthorization and Report messages are used to communicate the
   status and result of a ReportQuery or ReportRequest request.

   Use of the communication network and the GRC Report Exchange protocol
   must be for pre-approved, authorized purposes only.  It is the
   responsibility of each participating party to adhere to guidelines
   set forth in both a global use policy established through the peering
   agreements for each bilateral peer or agreed-upon consortium
   guidelines.  The purpose of such policies is to avoid abuse of the
   system; the policies shall be developed by a consortium of
   participating entities.  The global policy may be dependent on the
   domain it operates under; for example, a government network or a
   commercial network such as the Internet would adhere to different
   guidelines to address the individual concerns.  Privacy issues must
   be considered in public networks such as the Internet.  Privacy
   issues are discussed in the Security Requirements section, along with
   other requirements that must be agreed upon by participating
   entities.

   The GRC Report Exchange system should be configurable to either
   require user input or automatically provide or file reports.  If the
   trust relationship is not strong, it may not be in the peer's best



Moriarty & Tabet          Expires April 9, 2012                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                grc-exchange                  October 2011


   interest to accept a report or respond to a request.  The trust
   relationship may be noted in a confidence rating based on
   relationships and experience working with peers.  The confidence
   ratings must adhere to specifications for selecting the percentage
   used to avoid abuse of the system.

3.2.  GRC Report Exchange Communication Topology

   The most basic topology for communicating GRC Report Exchanges is a
   direct connection or a bilateral relationship as illustrated below.

            ______________                     _____________
            |            |                     |           |
            |  GRC-RE    |_____________________|  GRC-RE   |
            |____________|                     |___________|


                      Figure 1: Direct Peer Topology

   A star topology may be desirable in instances where a peer may be a
   provider of GRC Reports.  This requires trust relationships to be
   established between the provider of information and each of the
   consumers of that information.  Examples may include clients that
   file compliance or business reports to an authoritative entity.

   The examples provided serve as an initial baseline set of expected
   topologies that may change over time.

3.3.  Message Formats

   Section 5 describes the five GRC Report Exchange message types, to be
   used with the appropriate XML documents.  The messages are generated
   and received on designated systems for GRC report exchanges.

3.4.  GRC Report Exchange Data Types

   GRC Report Exchange is derived from the RID and IODEF data models and
   inherits all of the data types defined in those models.

3.4.1.  Boolean

   A boolean value is represented by the BOOLEAN data type.

   The BOOLEAN data type is implemented as "xs:boolean" [XMLschema] in
   the schema.

   This Section will be expanded when the schema is further finalized




Moriarty & Tabet          Expires April 9, 2012                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                grc-exchange                  October 2011


3.5.  GRC Report Exchange Message Types

   The five GRC Report Exchange message types are as follows:

   1.  RequestAuthorization.  This message is sent to the requestor of a
       report (ReportRequest) or in response to a ReportQuery to notify
       on the state of a request (approved, pending, not approved).

   2.  Result.  This message is sent to the requestor of a GRC report
       (ReportRequest) or in response to ReportQuery.  The Result may
       contain the full report requested or a section of the report as
       appropriate for the request in the ReportQuery.

   3.  ReportRequest.  This message type is used to request a specific
       type of GRC report.  The ReportRequest MUST specify the XML
       schema and version for the requested report along with any other
       parameters required in the XML schema to generate the correct
       report.

   4.  Report.  This message is used to provide a GRC Report.  The
       message can be considered a wrapper for any approved GRC schema
       used to format a report for submission.

   5.  ReportQuery.  This message is used to request information about a
       specific GRC report.  The XML schema and version used MUST be
       specified along with any details required to provide the proper
       Report response.  The response is provided through the Report
       message.

   When an application receives a GRC Report Exchange message, it must
   be able to determine the type of message and parse it accordingly.
   The message type is specified in the GRCPolicy class.  The GRCPolicy
   class may also be used by the transport protocol to facilitate the
   secure communication of the GRC Report Exchange.


4.  GRC-Exchange Schema

   There are three classes included in the GRC Report Exchange schema
   required to facilitate communications.  The RequestStatus class is
   used to indicate the approval status of a ReportRequest or
   ReportQuery; the ReportSchema class identifies the XML schema to be
   used by the provided or requested report; and the GRCPolicy class
   provides information on the agreed-upon policies and specifies the
   type of communication message being used.

   The GRC Report Exchange schema acts as an envelope for the GRC XML
   schema to facilitate secure GRC report communications.  The intent in



Moriarty & Tabet          Expires April 9, 2012                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                grc-exchange                  October 2011


   maintaining a separate schema is for the flexibility of sending
   messages between participating entities.  Since GRC-Exchange is a
   separate schema that includes the appropriate GRC XML schema, the
   GRC-Exchange information acts as an envelope, and then the GRCPolicy
   class can be easily extracted for use by the transport protocol.

   The security requirements of sending GRC reports and associated
   information on finance, IT operations, legal, compliance, and
   security across the network include the use of confidentiality
   (encryption prior to the transport level), authentication
   (potentially multi-hop), integrity, and non-repudiation.  GRCPolicy
   uses labels that correspond to policy and agreements to standardize
   on handling requirements such as encryption and sharing limitations.
   The GRCPolicy information should not be encrypted, hence GRC-Exchange
   is maintained separate from the GRC XML schema used to send or
   request a report.  This segregation enables flexibility for GRC-
   Exchange to be used with any GRC XML schema and removes the need for
   decrypting and parsing the entire GRC Report and GRC-Exchange
   document to determine how it should be handled at each entity
   communicating via GRC-Exchange.

   The purpose of the GRCPolicy class is to specify the message type for
   the receiving host, facilitate the policy needs of GRC Reports, and
   provide routing information in the form of an IP address of the
   destination entity accepting GRC-Exchange messages.

   The policy information and guidelines are discussed in Section 9.7.
   The policy is defined between GRC-Exchange peers and within or
   between consortiums.  The GRCPolicy is meant to be a tool to
   facilitate the defined policies.  This MUST be used in accordance
   with policy set between clients, peers, consortiums, and/or regions.
   Security, privacy, and confidentiality MUST be considered as
   specified in this document.

   The GRC-Exchange schema is defined as follows:

           +------------------+
           |   GRC-Exchange   |
           +------------------+
           | ANY              |
           |                  |<>---{0..1}----[ GRCPolicy      ]
           | ENUM restriction |
           |                  |<>---{0..1}----[ RequestStatus  ]
           | STRING meaning   |
           |                  |<>---{0..1}----[ ReportSchema   ]
           +------------------+

                     Figure 2: The GRC-Exchange Schema



Moriarty & Tabet          Expires April 9, 2012                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft                grc-exchange                  October 2011


   The aggregate classes that constitute the GRC-Exchange schema in the
   grc-exchange namespace are as follows:

   GRCPolicy

      Zero or One. The GRCPolicy class is used by all message types to
      facilitate policy agreements between peers, consortiums, or
      federations, as well as to properly route messages.

   RequestStatus

      Zero or One. The RequestStatus class is used only in
      RequestAuthorization messages to report back to the entity
      requesting a report or sending a ReportQuery if the request is
      denied or remains in a pending state.

   ReportSchema

      Zero or One. The ReportSchema class is used in each of the message
      types to state the XML schema and version for the included XML
      report, XML report request, or response.

   The GRC-Exchange class defines two attributes as follows:

   restriction

      Optional.  ENUM.  This attribute indicates the disclosure
      guidelines to which the sender expects the recipient to adhere for
      the information represented in this class and its children.  This
      guideline provides no security since there are no specified
      technical means to ensure that the recipient of the document
      handles the information as the sender requested.

      The value of this attribute is logically inherited by the children
      of this class.  That is to say, the disclosure rules applied to
      this class, also apply to its children.

      It is possible to set a granular disclosure policy, since all of
      the high-level classes (i.e., children of the Incident class) have
      a restriction attribute.  Therefore, a child can override the
      guidelines of a parent class, be it to restrict or relax the
      disclosure rules (e.g., a child has a weaker policy than an
      ancestor; or an ancestor has a weak policy, and the children
      selectively apply more rigid controls).  The implicit value of the
      restriction attribute for a class that did not specify one can be
      found in the closest ancestor that did specify a value.





Moriarty & Tabet          Expires April 9, 2012                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft                grc-exchange                  October 2011


      This attribute is defined as an enumerated value with a default
      value of "private".  Note that the default value of the
      restriction attribute is only defined in the context of the
      Incident class.  In other classes where this attribute is used, no
      default is specified.

      This attribute is derived from IODEF [RFC5070] and fully included
      within this schema.

      1.  public.  There are no restrictions placed in the information.

      2.  need-to-know.  The information may be shared with other
          parties that are involved in the incident as determined by the
          recipient of this document (e.g., multiple victim sites can be
          informed of each other).

      3.  private.  The information may not be shared.

      4.  default.  The information can be shared according to an
          information disclosure policy pre-arranged by the
          communicating parties.

   meaning

      Optional.  STRING.  A free-form description of the element
      content.

   Each of the three listed classes may be the only class included in
   the GRC-Exchange class, hence the option for zero or one.  In some
   cases, GRCPolicy MAY be the only class in the GRC-Exchange definition
   when used by the transport protocol [RFC6046], as that information
   should be as small as possible and may not be encrypted.  The
   RequestStatus message MUST be able to stand alone without the need
   for an GRC XML document to facilitate the communication, limiting the
   data transported to the required elements per [RFC6046].

4.1.  GRCPolicy Class

   The GRCPolicy class facilitates the delivery of GRC Report Exchange
   messages.











Moriarty & Tabet          Expires April 9, 2012                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft                grc-exchange                  October 2011


          +------------------------+
          | GRCPolicy              |
          +------------------------+
          |                        |
          | ENUM restriction       |<>-------------[ Node         ]
          | ENUM MsgType           |
          | ENUM MsgDestination    |<>---{1..*}----[ Contact      ]
          | ENUM ext-MsgType       |
          | ENUM ext-MsgDestination|<>---{0..1}----[ ReportID     ]
          |                        |
          |                        |<>---{1..*}----[ PolicyRegion ]
          |                        |
          |                        |<>---{1..*}----[ ReportType   ]
          +------------------------+

                       Figure 3: The GRCPolicy Class

   The aggregate elements that constitute the GRCPolicy class are as
   follows:

   Node

      One. The Node class is used to identify a host or network device,
      in this case to identify the system communicating GRC-Exchange
      messages.  The base definition of this class is reused from the
      IODEF specification [RFC5070], Section 3.16.  This definition is
      fully included in the GRC-Exchange specification to prevent the
      need to use the IODEF schema.

   Contact

      One or more.  Contact information for the parties involved in the
      GRC Report Exchange.  This definition is from the IODEF
      specification [RFC5070], Section 3.7.  This definition is fully
      included in the GRC-Exchange specification to prevent the need to
      use the IODEF schema.

   ReportID

      Zero or one.  Global reference pointing back to the ReportID
      defined in the GRC XML data model.  The ReportID includes the
      domain name of the entity who creates the report, a report number,
      and an instance of that report number.  The default report number
      is a date, where the requested report is the most recent report on
      or prior to the date specified.  The format for the date SHALL be
      YYYYMMDD, where Y is the year, M is the month, and D is the day.
      The instance number is appended with a dash separating the values
      and is used in cases for which there may be multiple reports



Moriarty & Tabet          Expires April 9, 2012                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft                grc-exchange                  October 2011


      issued in a day.  The format for the instance SHALL be HHMMSS,
      where H is the hour as specified in a 24hour range, M is the
      minute, S is the second provided in GMT.  An alternate ID may be
      specified within the GRC XML schema for the specific report.

   PolicyRegion

      One or many.  REQUIRED.  The values for the attribute "region" are
      used to determine what policy area may require consideration
      before a trace can be approved.  The PolicyRegion may include
      multiple selections from the attribute list in order to fit all
      possible policy considerations when crossing regions, consortiums,
      or networks.

   region

      One. ENUM.

      1.  ClientToSP.  An enterprise initiated the request to their
          service provider.

      2.  SPToClient.  An service provider passed a GRC request or
          report to a client or an enterprise based on requested
          services or service level agreements.

      3.  IntraConsortium.  GRC report information that should have no
          restrictions within the boundaries of a consortium with the
          agreed-upon use and abuse guidelines.

      4.  PeerToPeer.  GRC report information that should have no
          restrictions between two peers but may require further
          evaluation before continuance beyond that point with the
          agreed-upon use and abuse guidelines.

      5.  BetweenConsortiums.  GRC report information that should have
          no restrictions between consortiums that have established
          agreed-upon use and abuse guidelines.

      6.  AcrossNationalBoundaries.  This selection must be set if the
          message type will cross national boundaries.  There could be
          instances of reports or report requests where that may not be
          known in advance, but should be known at the instance where
          boundaries are crossed during the communication exchange.
          This must also be set if the security requirements of the
          request is based upon regulations of a specific nation that
          may not apply to all nations.  The stricter requirements
          should be upheld.  This is different from the
          "BetweenConsortiums" setting since it may be possible to have



Moriarty & Tabet          Expires April 9, 2012                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft                grc-exchange                  October 2011


          multiple nations as members of the same consortium, and this
          option must be selected if the report information may have
          different restrictions in other nations.

      7.  LawEnforcement.  This option is used when GRC information is
          exchanged with LawEnforcement, local government, or other
          authorities requesting or receiving a report.  Examples may
          include eDiscovery or eWarrant use cases.  If the law
          enforcement agency resides within a different nation that the
          sending entity, the "AcrossNationalBoundaries" enumeration
          MUST also be set.

      8.  ext-value.  An escape value used to extend this attribute.
          This attribute has been derived from IODEF [RFC5070], Section
          5.1 and is explained in Section 5, Extending the Enumerated
          Values of Attributes.

   ReportType

      One or many.  REQUIRED.  The values for the attribute "type" are
      meant to assist in determining if a report or report request is
      appropriate for the entity receiving the request or report.
      Multiple values may be selected for this element; however, where
      possible, it should be restricted to one value that most
      accurately describes the report type.

   type

      One. ENUM.

      1.  Filing.  This ReportType is used when a GRC report is included
          for expected filing purposes.  Examples may include the filing
          of a regulatory or business operations report to a regulatory
          body.

      2.  Service Level Agreement.  This option specifies the report
          type as a report on a service level agreement.  This report
          may be sent from a service provide (SP) to a tenant or client
          or from a trust authority to a requesting entity.  An SLA
          report may be associated with any report format (XML)
          associated with an SLA agreement, including but not limited to
          an IT or security report.

      3.  Operational.  An operational report may include any standard
          operating reports used within or between businesses or
          enterprises.  This may be a routine business, IT operational,
          or other type of report.




Moriarty & Tabet          Expires April 9, 2012                [Page 14]

Internet-Draft                grc-exchange                  October 2011


      4.  Compliance.  A compliance report is specified when there is a
          specific compliance report format required (as specified by
          the schema used for the report).  This type may be used for
          internal or external compliance report exchanges.

      5.  Audit.  The Audit report type is distinguished from a
          compliance report as the report contents may vary depending on
          the report or report request in the exchange.  An audit report
          may take an approach of only providing the state of compliance
          or details of findings from an automated control review.

      6.  RiskAssessment.  A RiskAssessment report differs from the
          Compliance and Audit reports in that the report may prioritize
          risks as specified in the XML schema and may include GRC-XML
          risk ratings.  A RiskAssessment may be provided for any GRC
          area or on the GRC program as specified by the ReportSchema.

      7.  OfficialBusiness.  This option MUST be used if the GRC
          information is requested by or affiliated with any government
          or other official business request.  This could be used during
          an investigation for an eDiscovery, eWarrant, or other use
          case.

      8.  Other.  If this option is selected, a description of the
          request MUST be provided so that policy decisions can be made
          to proceed with the request or act upon the report.  The
          information should be provided in the GRC-Exchange class
          meaning attribute.

      9.  ext-value.  An escape value used to extend this attribute.
          This attribute has been derived from IODEF [RFC5070], Section
          5.1 and is explained in Section 5, Extending the Enumerated
          Values of Attributes.

   The GRCPolicy class has five attributes:

      restriction

         OPTIONAL.  ENUM.  This attribute indicates the disclosure
         guidelines to which the sender expects the recipient to adhere.
         This guideline provides no real security since it is the choice
         of the recipient of the document to honor it.  This attribute
         follows the same guidelines as "restriction" used in IODEF and
         is explained in the GRCPolicy Class description.

      MsgType





Moriarty & Tabet          Expires April 9, 2012                [Page 15]

Internet-Draft                grc-exchange                  October 2011


         REQUIRED.  ENUM.  The type of GRC-Exchange message sent.  The
         five types of messages are described in Section 5 and can be
         noted as one of the five selections below.

      2.  RequestAuthorization.  This message is sent to the initiating
          GRC-Exchange entity if a ReportRequest or ReportQuery has been
          denied or is pending.

      3.  Result.  This message provides the result of a ReportQuery.

      4.  ReportRequest.  The purpose of the ReportRequest is to request
          a report from an entity.

      5.  Report.  This message is used to provide a GRC XML report.

      6.  ReportQuery.  This message is used to request information
          either about a specific report or group of reports.  The
          actual query is specified in the GRC XML Schema and is outside
          the scope of this specification.

      Additionally, there is an extension attribute to add new
      enumerated values:

         ext-value.  An escape value used to extend this attribute.
         This attribute has been derived from IODEF [RFC5070], Section
         5.1 and is explained in Section 5, Extending the Enumerated
         Values of Attributes.

      MsgDestination

         REQUIRED.  ENUM.  The destination required at this level may
         either be the system accepting GRC report exchange requests or
         reports.  The Node element lists the address of the host
         receiving the GRC-Exchange message.

         1.  GRCSystem.  The address listed in the Node element of the
             GRCPolicy class is the GRC-Exchange system that will
             receive the message.

         2.  ext-value.  An escape value used to extend this attribute.
             This attribute has been derived from IODEF [RFC5070],
             Section 5.1 and is explained in Section 5, Extending the
             Enumerated Values of Attributes.

      MsgType-ext

         OPTIONAL.  STRING.  A means by which to extend the MsgType
         attribute.  This attribute has been derived from IODEF



Moriarty & Tabet          Expires April 9, 2012                [Page 16]

Internet-Draft                grc-exchange                  October 2011


         [RFC5070], Section 5.1 and is explained in Section 5, Extending
         the Enumerated Values of Attributes.

      MsgDestination-ext

         OPTIONAL.  STRING.  A means by which to extend the
         MsgDestination attribute.  This attribute has been derived from
         IODEF [RFC5070], Section 5.1 and is explained in Section 5,
         Extending the Enumerated Values of Attributes.

4.2.  RequestStatus

   The RequestStatus class is an aggregate class in the GRC-Exchange
   class.

                       +--------------------------------+
                       | RequestStatus                  |
                       +--------------------------------+
                       |                                |
                       | ENUM restriction               |
                       | ENUM AuthorizationStatus       |
                       | ENUM Justification             |
                       | STRING ext-AuthorizationStatus |
                       | STRING ext-Justification       |
                       |                                |
                       +--------------------------------+

                     Figure 4: The RequestStatus Class

   The RequestStatus class has five attributes:

      restriction

         OPTIONAL.  ENUM.  This attribute indicates the disclosure
         guidelines to which the sender expects the recipient to adhere.
         This guideline provides no real security since it is the choice
         of the recipient of the document to honor it.  This attribute
         follows the same guidelines as "restriction" used in IODEF and
         is explained in the GRCPolicy Class description.

      AuthorizationStatus

         REQUIRED.  ENUM.  The listed values are used to provide a
         response to the requesting entity of the ReportRequest or
         ReportQuery.

         1.  Approved.  The request was approved and will be provided.
             The approved message MAy be sent if there will be a delay



Moriarty & Tabet          Expires April 9, 2012                [Page 17]

Internet-Draft                grc-exchange                  October 2011


             in providing the report, otherwise, the Report or Result
             MAY be provided without sending a RequestAuthorization
             message.

         2.  Denied.  The request has been denied.

         3.  Pending.  Awaiting approval; a timeout period has been
             reached, which resulted in this Pending status and
             RequestAuthorization message being generated.

         4.  ext-value.  An escape value used to extend this attribute.
             This attribute has been derived from IODEF [RFC5070],
             Section 5.1 and is explained in Section 5, Extending the
             Enumerated Values of Attributes.

         Justification

            OPTIONAL.  ENUM.  Provides a reason for a Denied or Pending
            message.

         2.  SystemResource.  A resource issue exists on the systems
             that would be involved in the request.

         3.  Authentication.  The enveloped digital signature [RFC3275]
             failed to validate.

         4.  AuthenticationOrigin.  The detached digital signature for
             the original requestor on the RecordItem entry failed to
             validate.

         5.  Encryption.  Unable to decrypt the request.

         6.  Other.  There were other reasons this request could not be
             processed.

         7.  ext-value.  An escape value used to extend this attribute.
             This attribute has been derived from IODEF [RFC5070],
             Section 5.1 and is explained in Section 5, Extending the
             Enumerated Values of Attributes.

         AuthorizationStatus-ext

            OPTIONAL.  STRING.  A means by which to extend the
            AuthorizationStatus attribute.  This attribute has been
            derived from IODEF [RFC5070], Section 5.1 and is explained
            in Section 5, Extending the Enumerated Values of Attributes.





Moriarty & Tabet          Expires April 9, 2012                [Page 18]

Internet-Draft                grc-exchange                  October 2011


         Justification-ext

            OPTIONAL.  STRING.  A means by which to extend the
            Justification attribute.  This attribute has been derived
            from IODEF [RFC5070], Section 5.1 and is explained in
            Section 5, Extending the Enumerated Values of Attributes.

4.3.  ReportSchema

   The ReportSchema class is an aggregate class in the GRC-Exchange
   class.

          +-------------------+
          |   ReportSchema    |
          +-------------------+
          |                   |
          |  STRING Version   |
          |  ENUM GRCSchemaID |<>---{1..*}----[ GRCSchema      ]
          |  ENUM restriction |
          |                   |<>---{0..*}----[ Reference      ]
          |                   |
          +-------------------+

                     Figure 5: The ReportSchema Class

   The elements that constitute the ReportShema class are as follows:

      GRCSchema

         One or more.  EM_XML.  The GRCSchema is a complete XML document
         formatted according to the specification identified in the
         attributes of this class.

      Reference

         OPTIONAL.  One. A reference to the XML schema types included
         for the exchange.  The Reference class is derived from IODEF
         [RFC5070] and fully included within this specification to avoid
         the need for including the IODEF schema.

      The ReportSchema class has three attributes:

      Version

         REQUIRED.  One. The Version attribute is the version number of
         the specified XMLSchema.





Moriarty & Tabet          Expires April 9, 2012                [Page 19]

Internet-Draft                grc-exchange                  October 2011


      GRCSchemaID

         REQUIRED.  One. The GRCSchemaID attribute is the identifier
         (ID) of the XMLSchema used to exchange data.  The GRCSchemaID
         and Version specify the format of the GRCSchema element.

      restriction

         OPTIONAL.  ENUM.  This attribute indicates the disclosure
         guidelines to which the sender expects the recipient to adhere.
         This guideline provides no real security since it is the choice
         of the recipient of the document to honor it.  This attribute
         follows the same guidelines as "restriction" used in IODEF and
         is explained in the GRCPolicy Class description.

4.4.  Reference Class

   The Reference class is a reference to the GRC Schema used for the
   exchange.  A reference consists of a name, a URL to this reference,
   and an optional description.

      +------------------+
      | Reference        |
      +------------------+
      |                  |<>----------[ ReferenceName ]
      |                  |<>--{0..*}--[ URL           ]
      |                  |<>--{0..*}--[ Description   ]
      +------------------+

                       Figure 6: The Reference Class

   The aggregate classes that constitute Reference:

      ReferenceName

         One. ML_STRING.  Name of the reference.

      URL

         Zero or many.  URL.  A URL associated with the reference.

      Description

         Zero or many.  ML_STRING.  A free-form text description of this
         reference.






Moriarty & Tabet          Expires April 9, 2012                [Page 20]

Internet-Draft                grc-exchange                  October 2011


4.5.  GRC-Exchange Name Spaces

   The GRC-Exchange schema declares a namespace of "grc-exchange-1.0"
   and registers it per [XMLnames].  Each XXXXX document MUST use the
   "grc-exchange-1.0" namespace in the top-level element GRC-Exchange-
   Document.  It can be referenced as follows:

   <GRC-Exchange-Document version="1.00" lang="en-US"
      xmlns:grc-exchange="urn:ietf:params:xml:ns:grc-exchange-1.0"
      xsi:schemaLocation=http://www.iana.org/assignments/xml-registry/
      schema/grc-exchange-1.0.xsd">


5.  Extending the Enumerated Values of Attributes

   In order to support the evolving needs of XML Schema exchanges, some
   extensibility is built into the GRC Report Exchange protocol.  This
   section discusses how new attributes that have no current
   representation in the data model can be incorporated into GRC-
   Exchange.  These techniques are designed so that adding new data will
   not require a change to the schema.  With proven value, well
   documented additions can be incorporated into future versions of the
   specification.  However, this approach also supports private
   additions relevant only to a closed consortium.

   The data model supports a means by which to add new enumerated values
   to an attribute, following the method used in IODEF [RFC5070] for the
   same purpose.  For each attribute that supports this extension
   technique, there is a corresponding attribute in the same element
   whose name is identical, less a prefix of "ext-".  This special
   attribute is referred to as the extension attribute, and the
   attribute being extended is referred to as an extensible attribute.
   For example, an extensible attribute named "foo" will have a
   corresponding extension attribute named "ext-foo".  An element may
   have many extensible, and therefore many extension, attributes.  In
   addition to a corresponding extension attribute, each extensible
   attribute has "ext-value" as one its possible values.  This
   particular value serves as an escape sequence and has no valid
   meaning.

   In order to add a new enumerated value to an extensible attribute,
   the value of this attribute MUST be set to "ext-value", and the new
   desired value MUST be set in the corresponding extension attribute.
   For example, an extended instance of the type attribute of the Impact
   class would look as follows:

       <Impact type="ext-value" ext-type="new-attack-type">




Moriarty & Tabet          Expires April 9, 2012                [Page 21]

Internet-Draft                grc-exchange                  October 2011


   A given extension attribute MUST NOT be set unless the corresponding
   extensible attribute has been set to "ext-value".


6.  GRC Report Exchange Messages

   The GRC-Exchange schema is used in combination with GRC XML documents
   to facilitate GRC Report Exchange communications.  Each message type
   varies slightly in format and purpose; hence, the requirements vary
   and are specified for each.

   Note: The implementation of GRC-Exchange may automate the ability to
   fill in the content required for each message type from the GRC
   management systems involved in the message exchange.

6.1.  RequestAuthorization

   Description: This message is sent in response to a ReportRequest or a
   ReportQuery message to provide status as to the approval of a
   request.

   The following information is required for RequestAuthorization
   messages and is provided through:

   GRC-Exchange Information:

      GRCPolicy

         GRC-Exchange message type, ReportID, and destination policy
         information

      RequestStatus class:

         AuthorizationStatus of request

   Standards for encryption and digital signatures [RFC3275], [XMLsig]:

      Digital signature of responding entity authenticity of GRC-
      Exchange Message, from the entity creating this message using an
      enveloped XML digital signature.

      XML encryption as required by policy, agreements, and standard
      data markers.

   A pending status is automatically generated after a 5-minute timeout
   without system predefined or administrator action taken to approve or
   deny the request.  If a request is left in a pending state for more
   than a configurable period of time (default of 5 minutes), a response



Moriarty & Tabet          Expires April 9, 2012                [Page 22]

Internet-Draft                grc-exchange                  October 2011


   is sent to the requestor with the enumeration value set to pending.
   If a request is denied, the response sets the enumeration value to
   denied.  If the request is approved, but the response will be
   delayed, a response MAY be sent with the enumerated value set to
   approved.  The approved message is not mandatory, however the pending
   and denied message types MUST be sent if the conditions are reached.

6.2.  Result

   Description: This message provides the result of an approved
   ReportQuery.  The ReportQuery may be used when a query is made on a
   group of reports or a request is made for specific details within a
   report.  If a standard report is requested based on a specific XML
   schema, ReportRequest MUST be used.  The details of the ReportQuery
   will vary depending on the included GRC XML schema.  The XML schema
   may provide specific guidance on how queries are conducted as this
   specification is intended to provide a generalized structure for many
   types of GRC information exchanges.

   The following information is required for Result messages and will be
   provided through:

      GRC-Exchange Information:

         GRCPolicy

            GRC-Exchange message type, ReportID, and destination policy
            information

         ReportSchema

            The ReportSchema class specifies the specific GRC-Exchange
            XML schema that is required per the ReportQuery.  The Result
            will include the necessary information to appropriately
            respond to the request.

      GRC XML Information:

         GRC XML schema elements and attributes as appropriate for the
         ReportQuery.

      Standards for encryption and digital signatures [RFC3275]:

         Digital signature of sending entity for authenticity of Result
         message, from the entity creating this message using an
         enveloped XML digital signature.





Moriarty & Tabet          Expires April 9, 2012                [Page 23]

Internet-Draft                grc-exchange                  October 2011


         XML encryption as required by policy, agreements, and standard
         data markers.

   A Result message is sent back to the requesting entity of a
   ReportQuery.  This will include the results of the query using the
   appropriate XML schema named in the request.  Details of what
   standard queries are automated in addition to the standard responses
   are to be detailed by the appropriate GRC communities (GRC-XML, LI-
   XML, etc.) in guidance documents associated with each of the relevant
   schemas.

6.3.  ReportRequest

   Description: The ReportRequest is used to request a report in a
   standardized format using the referenced XML schema in the
   ReportSchema class.  The report requested will be the most recent
   report to the date and time requested.

   The following information is required for ReportRequest messages and
   is provided through:

      GRC-Exchange Information:

         GRCPolicy

            GRC-Exchange message type, ReportID, and destination policy
            information

      GRC XML Information:

         GRC XML schema elements and attributes as appropriate for the
         ReportRequest.

      Standards for encryption and digital signatures [RFC3275]:

         Digital signature from initiating entity sending the GRC-
         Exchange message using a detached XML digital signature on the
         GRC-Exchange information.

         Digital signature of requesting entity for authenticity of the
         GRC-Exchange message, from the entity sending this message
         using an enveloped XML digital signature on the included GRC-
         XML document document.

         XML encryption as required by policy, agreements, and data
         markers.

   Security requirements include the ability to encrypt [XMLencrypt] the



Moriarty & Tabet          Expires April 9, 2012                [Page 24]

Internet-Draft                grc-exchange                  October 2011


   contents of the ReportRequest message using the public key of the
   destination entity communicating via GCR-Exchange.  If no report is
   available for the exact date and time in the request, the most recent
   report details prior to the date requested will be provided.  If
   there is no report to provide per the specified date and time, the
   RequestAuthorization message will be sent instead setting the
   AuthorizationStatus to denied and providing the appropriate reason
   for the deny.

6.4.  Report

   Description: This message is used to provide a report using a
   specified GRC XML schema.  This message does not require any actions
   to be taken, except to file the report on the receiving system or
   associated database.  This message may be in response to a
   ReportRequest or sent as a regularly scheduled report.

   The following information is required for Report messages and will be
   provided through:

      GRC-Exchange Information:

         GRCPolicy GRC-Exchange message type, ReportID, and destination
         policy information

      The following data is recommended if available and can be provided
      through:

      GRC XML Information:

         GRC XML schema elements and attributes as appropriate for the
         ReportRequest.

      Standards for encryption and digital signatures [RFC3275]:

         Digital signature from initiating entity, passed to all systems
         receiving the report using an enveloped XML digital signature.

         XML encryption as required by policy, agreements, and standard
         data markers.

   Security requirements include the ability to encrypt [XMLencrypt] the
   contents of the Report message using the public key of the
   destination entity.  Senders of a Report message should note that the
   information may be used to correlate information for the purpose of
   trending, pattern detection, etc., and may be shared with other
   parties unless otherwise agreed upon with the receiving entity in an
   established contract or agreement.  Therefore, sending parties of a



Moriarty & Tabet          Expires April 9, 2012                [Page 25]

Internet-Draft                grc-exchange                  October 2011


   Report message may obfuscate or remove sensitive information before
   sending a Report message.  A Report message may be sent either to
   file a report or in response to an ReportRequest, and data
   sensitivity must be considered in both cases.

6.5.  ReportQuery

   Description: The ReportQuery message is used to request information
   from a trusted entity participating in GRC-Exchanges.  The request
   can include the ReportID number, if known, or detailed information
   about the report or group of reports applicable to the query.

   The following information must be used for a ReportQuery message and
   is provided through:

      GRC-Exchange Information:

         GRCPolicy

            GRC-Excahnge message type, ReportID, and destination policy
            information

      GRC XML information (optional):

         GRC XML schema elements and attributes as appropriate for the
         ReportQuery.

      Standards for encryption and digital signatures [RFC3275]:

         Digital signature from the entity initiating the GRC-Excahnge
         message, passed to all systems receiving the ReportQuery using
         an enveloped XML digital signature.

         XML encryption as required by policy, agreements, and standard
         data markers.

   The proper response to the ReportQuery message is a Result message.
   Security requirements include the ability to encrypt [XMLencrypt] the
   contents of the ReportRequest message using the public key of the
   destination entity communicating via GCR-Exchange.  If no report is
   available for the exact date and time in the request, the most recent
   report details prior to the date requested will be provided.  If
   there is no report to provide per the specified date and time, the
   RequestAuthorization message will be sent instead setting the
   AuthorizationStatus to denied and providing the appropriate reason
   for the deny.





Moriarty & Tabet          Expires April 9, 2012                [Page 26]

Internet-Draft                grc-exchange                  October 2011


7.  GRC-Exchange Communication Flows

   The following section outlines the communication flows for GRC-
   Exchange and also provides examples of messages.

7.1.  Report Communication Flow

   The diagram below outlines the communication flow for a GRC-Exchange
   Report message sent from one entity to another.  This communication
   flow is the simplest as no response is required.  The Report may be a
   regularly scheduled report filing.

        Sending Entity                    Receiving Entity

        1. Generate Report message

        2.        o----------Report---------->

        3.                                Receive and process report
                                          No Response


             Figure 7: GRC-Exchange Report Communication Flow

   The Report message MAY be encrypted [XMLencrypt] for the recipient of
   the report depending upon the markers included in the restriction
   class either in the GRC-Exchange schema or in the GRC XML schema used
   for the report.  When a report is received, the the receiving entity
   must verify that the report has not already been filed.  The ReportID
   and other distinguishing information in the specific report type can
   be used to compare with existing database entries.  The Report
   message typically does not have a response. .

7.1.1.  GRC-Exchange Report Example

   The example listed is of a Report based on ...

   In the following example, use of [XMLsig] to generate digital
   signatures does not currently provide digest algorithm agility, as
   [XMLsig] only supports SHA-1.  A future version of [XMLsig] may
   support additional digest algorithms to support digest algorithm
   agility.


   Example to be provided in an updated version of this document.






Moriarty & Tabet          Expires April 9, 2012                [Page 27]

Internet-Draft                grc-exchange                  October 2011


7.2.  Report Request Communication Flow

   The diagram below outlines the GRC-Exchange report request
   communication flow between participating entities.  The proper
   response to a ReportRequest is a Report message.  If there is a
   problem with the request, such as a failure to validate the digital
   signature or decrypt the request, a RequestAuthorization message is
   sent to the requestor.  The RequestAuthorization message should
   provide the reason why the message could not be processed.

     Sending Entity                    Receiving Entity

     1. Generate ReportRequest

     2.          o----ReportRequest-------->

     3.                                Receive and process request

     4.                                If denied or pending, send notice

     5.         <---RequestAuthorization---o

     6.                                If request is approved,

     7.         <----------Report----------o


                Figure 8: ReportRequest Communication Flow

7.2.1.  ReportRequest Example

   The following example of the ReportRequest is based on the ReportID
   time-based identifier tied to the specified GRC XML ReportSchema.


   Example to be provided in an updated version of this document.


7.2.2.  RequestAuthorization Message Example

   The example RequestAuthorization message is in response to the
   ReportRequest listed above.  The entity that received the request was
   unable to validate the digital signature used to authenticate the
   sending RID system.


   Example to be provided in an updated version of this document.




Moriarty & Tabet          Expires April 9, 2012                [Page 28]

Internet-Draft                grc-exchange                  October 2011


   An example Report has been provided in the previous section.  No
   Report message would be provided in this example as a result of the
   denied request.

7.3.  ReportQuery Communication Flow

   The diagram below outlines the GRC-Exchange ReportQuery communication
   flow between participating entities.

     Sending Entity                    Receiving Entity

     1. Generate ReportQuery

     2.          o------ReportQuery-------->

     3.                                Receive and process request

     4.                                If denied or pending, send notice

     5.         <---RequestAuthorization---o

     6.                                If request approved

     7.         <----------Result----------o



                 Figure 9: ReportQuery Communication Flow

   The ReportQuery communication flow is used to request specific
   information about a GRC report or group of reports.  Information may
   be shared between participating entities using this format.  If there
   is a problem with the ReportQuery message, such as a failure to
   validate the digital signature [RFC3275] or decrypt the request, a
   RequestAuthorization message is sent to the requestor.  The
   RequestAuthorization message should provide the reason why the
   message could not be processed.

7.3.1.  ReportQuery Example

   The following example includes the GRC-Exchange information and an
   example query using an included XML schema, which is also referenced
   in the ReportSchema class.


   Example to be provided in an updated version of this document.





Moriarty & Tabet          Expires April 9, 2012                [Page 29]

Internet-Draft                grc-exchange                  October 2011


7.3.2.  RequestAuthorization Message Example

   The example RequestAuthorization message is in response to the
   ReportQuery message listed above.  The entity that received the
   request is responding with an answer to the ReportQuery.  The Result
   in this instance will be delayed for more than the 5-minute default
   time period, hence a RequestAuthorization message is sent to notify
   of the approval status.


   Example to be provided in an updated version of this document.


7.3.3.  Result Message Example

   The example Result message is in response to the ReportQuery request.
   This message type may be preceded by a RequestAuthorization within
   the ReportQuery flow of messages.  It may be a direct response to an
   ReportQuery request if the request is approved prior to the timeout
   period.  This message provides a response to the request in the
   ReportQuery.


   Example to be provided in an updated version of this document.



8.  GRC-Exchange Schema Definition























Moriarty & Tabet          Expires April 9, 2012                [Page 30]

Internet-Draft                grc-exchange                  October 2011


   <?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
   <xs:schema xmlns:grc-xml="urn:ietf:params:xml:ns:grc-xml-1.0"
    xmlns:xs="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema"
    xmlns:ds="http://www.w3.org/2000/09/xmldsig#"
    targetNamespace="urn:ietf:params:xml:ns:grc-xml-1.0"
    elementFormDefault="qualified" attributeFormDefault="unqualified">

   <xs:import namespace="http://www.w3.org/2000/09/xmldsig#"
    schemaLocation=
    "http://www.w3.org/TR/xmldsig-core/xmldsig-core-schema.xsd"/>

   <!-- ****************************************************************
   *********************************************************************
   ***     GRC Report Exchange - GRC-Exchange                        ***
   ***     Namespace - grc-exchange, October 2011                    ***
   ***     The namespace is defined to support transport of XML      ***
   ***     documents for exchanging GRC information.                 ***
   *********************************************************************
   -->
   <!--GRC-Exchange acts as an envelope for XML documents to support the
       exchange of messages-->
   <!--
   ======          GRC Report Exchange          ======
   ====  Suggested definition for GRC messaging ======
    -->


   ***  Schema to be included here  ***




9.  Requirements for GRC XML Schemas for GRC-Exchange

   GRC Report Exchange is a generalized version of the Real-time Inter-
   network Defense (RID) [RFC6045-bis] protocol.  RID leverages certain
   aspects of the Incident Object Description Exchange Format (IODEF)
   [RFC5070] schema to provide the necessary security features such as
   confidentiality and integrity required for the exchange of
   potentially sensitive information.  In generalizing RID into a schema
   and set of message exchange flows for GRC reports, the GRC XML
   schemas MUST include the following classes, elements, and
   enumerations to facilitate the automated security and confidentially
   fears of GRC Report Exchange.  A GRC XML schema within this document
   may refer to any type of XML schema used for Governance, Risk, and
   Compliance information or reporting.  Examples include, but are not
   limited to GRC-XML, LI-XML, and security automation XML schemas.




Moriarty & Tabet          Expires April 9, 2012                [Page 31]

Internet-Draft                grc-exchange                  October 2011


      The restriction attribute, reused from IODEF [RFC5070] into GRC-
      Exchange, MUST be included in any individual class of a GRC XML
      schema that could require XML encryption [XMLencrypt] just on the
      data contained in that class.  If encryption is only required at
      the full document level based on the sensitivity and sharing
      requirements, the restriction attribute in GRC-Exchange may be
      sufficient.


10.  Security Requirements

10.1.  XML Digital Signatures and Encryption

   GRC-Exchange leverages existing security standards and data markings
   in GRCPolicy to achieve the required levels of security for the
   exchange of GRC information.  The use of standards include TLS and
   the XML security features of encryption [XMLencrypt] and digital
   signatures [RFC3275], [XMLsig].  The standards provide clear methods
   to ensure that messages are secure, authenticated, and authorized,
   and that the messages meet policy and privacy guidelines and maintain
   integrity.

   As specified in the relevant sections of this document, the XML
   digital signature [RFC3275] and XML encryption [XMLencrypt] are used
   in the following cases:

   XML Digital Signature

   o  The originator of the ReportRequest or ReportQuery MUST use an
      enveloped signature to sign the included GRC XML document.  The
      enveloped digital signature provides authentication to all
      participants receiving the original Report or a forwarded Report.
      If the Report details could change, the XML digital signature
      specification [XMLsig] MUST be followed to specify what elements
      may be changed within the signed document to allow the signature
      to be validated.  If the GRC XML document is changed within the
      allowed parameters, the entity including the changes MUST
      digitally sign [XMLsig] the updated document, while including the
      original detached signature.  This signature MUST be passed to all
      recipients of the Report or Result.  If this option is used, the
      implementation MUST follow the guidance specified in the XML
      Digital Signature [XMLsig] specification for two or more enveloped
      signatures.

   o  For all message types, the full GRC XML and GRC-Exchange document
      MUST be signed using an enveloped signature by the sending peer to
      provide authentication and integrity to the receiving entity.




Moriarty & Tabet          Expires April 9, 2012                [Page 32]

Internet-Draft                grc-exchange                  October 2011


   XML Encryption

   o  The GRC XML and GRC-Exchange document may be encrypted to provide
      an extra layer of security between peers so that the message is
      not only encrypted for the transport, but also while stored.  This
      behavior would be agreed upon between peers or a consortium, or
      determined on a per-message basis, depending on security
      requirements.  It should be noted that there are cases for
      transport where the GRCPolicy class needs to be presented in clear
      text, as detailed in the transport document [RFC6046-bis].

   o  A Report, Result, or any other message type that may be relayed
      through multiple entities may be in part of whole encrypted for a
      set of intended recipients.  This may be necessary if some parties
      receiving the XML document require full access based on need-to-
      know requirements and some only require access to a portion of the
      XML document.  In cases such as this, the GRC-Exchange information
      is maintained in clear text while the appropriate portions of the
      XML document are encrypted.

   o  The restriction attribute sets expectations for the privacy of an
      XML document and is defined in section 3.2 of RFC5070.  Following
      the guidance for XML encryption in the Security Requirements
      Section, the restriction attribute can be set in any of the GRC-
      Exchange classes to define restrictions and encryption
      requirements for the exchange of GRC information.  The restriction
      options enable encryption capabilities for the complete exchange
      of a GRC XML document, within specific classes of the GRC XML
      schema where more limited restrictions are desired.  The
      restriction attribute is contained in each of the GRC-Exchange
      classes and MUST be used in accordance with confidentiality
      expectations for either sections of the GRC XML document or the
      complete GRC XML document.  Consortiums and organizations should
      consider this guidance when creating exchange policies.

   o  Expectations based on restriction setting:

      *  If restriction is set to "private", the class or document MUST
         be encrypted for the recipient using XML encryption and the
         public key of the recipient.  The use of PKI between entities
         SHOULD adhere to any applicable certificate policy and
         practices agreements for the use of GRC-Exchange.

      *  If restriction is set to "need-to-know", the class or document
         MUST be encrypted to ensure only those with need-to-know access
         can decrypt the data.  The document can either be encrypted for
         each individual for which access is intended or a single group
         key may be used.  The method used SHOULD adhere to any



Moriarty & Tabet          Expires April 9, 2012                [Page 33]

Internet-Draft                grc-exchange                  October 2011


         certificate policy and practices agreements between entities
         for the use of GRC-Exchange.  A group key in this instance
         refers to a single key (symmetric) that is used to encrypt the
         block of data.  The users with need-to-know access privileges
         may be given access to the shared key via a secure distribution
         method, for example, providing access to the symmetric key
         encrypted with each of users public keys.

      *  If restriction is set to "public", the class or document MUST
         be sent in clear text.  This setting can be critical if certain
         sections of a document or an entire document are to be shared
         without restrictions.  This provides flexibility within a
         report to share out certain information freely where
         appropriate.

      *  If restriction is set to "default", The information can be
         shared according to an information disclosure policy pre-
         arranged by the communicating parties.

   o  Expectations based on placement of the restriction setting:

      *  If restriction is set within one of the GRC-Exchange classes,
         the restriction applies to the entire GRC XML document.

      *  If restriction is set within individual classes of the GRC XML
         schema included, the restriction applies to the specific class
         of the GRC XML document and the children of that class.

   The formation of policies is a very important aspect of using a
   messaging system to exchange potentially sensitive information.  Many
   considerations should be involved for peering parties, and some
   guidelines to protect the data, systems, and transport are covered in
   this section.  Policies established should provide guidelines for
   communication methods, security, and fall-back procedures.  See
   sections 8.5 and 8.6 for additional information on consortiums and
   PKI considerations.

   The security considerations for the storage and exchange of
   information in GRC-Exchange messaging may include adherence to local,
   regional, or national regulations in addition to the obligations to
   protect client information.  GRCPolicy is a necessary tool for
   listing the requirements of messages to provide a method to
   categorize data elements for proper handling.  Controls are also
   provided for the sending entity to protect messages from third
   parties through XML encryption.

   GRC-Exchange provides a method to communicate request and Report
   messages between peers, from a provider to client, or to file reports



Moriarty & Tabet          Expires April 9, 2012                [Page 34]

Internet-Draft                grc-exchange                  October 2011


   to a centralized repository as required.  GRC-Exchange provides the
   ability for participating entities to manage their own security
   controls, leveraging the information listed in GRCPolicy, mapped to
   their policies and agreements.

10.2.  Message Transport

   The transport specifications are fully defined in a separate
   document, leveraging the transport for RID in [RFC6046-bis].  The
   specified transport protocols MUST use encryption to provide an
   additional level of security and integrity, while supporting mutual
   authentication through bi-directional certificate usage.  Any
   subsequent transport method defined should take advantage of existing
   standards for ease of implementation and integration of RID systems.
   Session encryption for the transport of GRC Report Exchange messages
   is enforced in the transport specification.  The privacy and security
   considerations are addressed fully in GRC Report Exchange to protect
   sensitive portions of documents and provide a method to authenticate
   the messages.  Therefore, GRC Report Exchange messages do not rely on
   the security provided by the transport layer alone.  The encryption
   requirements and considerations for RID are discussed in Section 9.1
   of this document.

   XML security functions such as the digital signature [RFC3275] and
   encryption [XMLencrypt] provide a standards-based method to encrypt
   and digitally sign messages.  GRC-Exchange messages specify system
   use and privacy guidelines through the GRCPolicy class.  A public key
   infrastructure (PKI) provides the base for authentication and
   authorization, encryption, and digital signatures to establish trust
   relationships between members of a consortium or a peering
   consortium.

   XML security functions such as the digital signature [RFC3275] and
   encryption [XMLencrypt] can be used within the contents of the
   message for privacy and security in cases for which certain elements
   must remain encrypted or signed as they are sent or forwarded to
   multiple recipients.  For example, the digital signature on a Report
   can be used to verify the identity of originator of the Report.

10.3.  Message Delivery Protocol - Integrity and Authentication

   The GRC-Exchange protocol must be able to guarantee delivery and meet
   the necessary security requirements of a state-of-the-art protocol.
   In order to guarantee delivery, TCP should be considered as the
   underlying protocol within the current network standard practices.

   Security requirements must include the integrity, authentication,
   privacy, and authorization of the messages sent between systems



Moriarty & Tabet          Expires April 9, 2012                [Page 35]

Internet-Draft                grc-exchange                  October 2011


   communicating via GRC-Exchange.  The communication between GRC-
   Exchange systems must be authenticated and encrypted to ensure the
   integrity of the messages and the systems involved in the
   communications.  Another concern that needs to be addressed is
   authentication for a request that traverses multiple networks.  In
   this scenario, systems in the path of the multi-hop ReportRequest
   need to authorize a request from not only the direct peer but also
   from the initiating entity as discussed in Section 9.5.  Several
   methods can be used to ensure integrity and privacy of the
   communication.

   The transport mechanism selected MUST follow the defined transport
   protocol [RFC6046] when using GRC-Exchange messaging to ensure
   consistency among the peers.  Consortiums may vary their selected
   transport mechanisms and thus must decide upon a mutual protocol to
   use for transport when communicating with peers in a neighboring
   consortium using GRC-Exchange.  GRC-Exchange systems MUST implement
   and deploy HTTPS as defined in the transport document [RFC6046] and
   optionally support other protocols such as the Blocks Extensible
   Exchange Protocol (BEEP).  GRC-Exchange, the XML security functions,
   and transport protocols must properly integrate with a public key
   infrastructure (PKI) managed by the consortium or one managed by a
   trusted entity.  For the Internet, a few of examples of existing
   efforts that could be leveraged to provide the supporting PKI include
   the American Registry for Internet Numbers (ARIN) and the Regional
   Internet Registry's (RIR's) PKI hierarchy, vendor issued
   certificates, or approved issuers of Extended Validation (EV)
   Certificates.  Security and privacy considerations related to
   consortiums are discussed in Sections 8.5 and 8.6.

10.4.  Transport Communication

   In order to address the integrity and authenticity of messages,
   transport encryption MUST be used to secure the traffic sent between
   entities exchanging GRC requests and reports.  Systems with
   predefined relationships for GRC-Exchange include those who peer
   within a consortium with agreed-upon appropriate use regulations and
   for peering consortiums.  Trust relationships may also be defined
   through a bridged or hierarchical PKI in which both peers belong.

   Systems used to send authenticated GRC-Exchange messages between
   networks MUST use a secured system and interface to connect to a
   border network's RID systems.  Each connection to a GRC-Excahnge
   system MUST meet the security requirements agreed upon through the
   consortium regulations, peering, or SLAs.  The GRC-Exchange system
   MUST only listen for and send GRC-Exchange messages on the designated
   port, which also MUST be over an encrypted tunnel meeting the minimum
   requirement of algorithms and key lengths established by the



Moriarty & Tabet          Expires April 9, 2012                [Page 36]

Internet-Draft                grc-exchange                  October 2011


   consortium, peering, or SLA.  The selected cryptographic algorithms
   for symmetric encryption, digital signatures, and hash functions MUST
   meet minimum security levels of the times.  The encryption strength
   MUST adhere to import and export regulations of the involved
   countries for data exchange.

10.5.  Authentication of The GRC Report Exchange Protocol

   In order to ensure the authenticity of the GRC-Exchange messages, a
   message authentication scheme is used to secure the protocol.  XML
   security functions utilized in GRC-Exchange require a trust center
   such as a PKI for the distribution of credentials to provide the
   necessary level of security for this protocol.  Layered transport
   protocols also utilize encryption and rely on a trust center.  Public
   key certificate pairs issued by a trusted Certification Authority
   (CA) MAY be used to provide the necessary level of authentication and
   encryption for the GRC-Exchange protocol.  The CA used for GRC-
   Exchange messaging must be trusted by all involved parties and may
   take advantage of similar efforts, such as the Internet2 federated
   PKI or the ARIN/RIR effort to provide a PKI to network providers.
   The PKI used for authentication also provides the necessary
   certificates needed for encryption used for the RID transport
   protocol [RFC6046].

   The use of pre-shared keys may be considered for authentication.  If
   this option is selected, the specifications set forth in "Pre-Shared
   Key Ciphersuites for Transport Layer Security (TLS)" [RFC4279] MUST
   be followed.

   Hosts receiving a GRC-Exchange message MUST be able to verify that
   the sender of the request is valid and trusted.  Using digital
   signatures on a hash of the GRC-Exchange message with an X.509
   version 3 certificate issued by a trusted party MUST be used to
   authenticate the request.  The X.509 version 3 specifications as well
   as the digital signature specifications and path validation standards
   set forth in [RFC5280] MUST be followed in order to interoperate with
   a PKI designed for similar purposes.  The use of digital signatures
   in GRC-Exchange XML messages MUST follow the World Wide Web
   Consortium (W3C) recommendations for signature syntax and processing
   when either the XML encryption [XMLencrypt] or digital signature
   [XMLsig], [RFC3275] is used within a document.  Transport
   specifications are detailed in a separate document [RFC6046].

   It might be helpful to define an extension to the authentication
   scheme that uses attribute certificates [RFC5755] in such a way that
   an application could automatically determine whether human
   intervention is needed to authorize a request; however, the
   specification of such an extension is out of scope for this document.



Moriarty & Tabet          Expires April 9, 2012                [Page 37]

Internet-Draft                grc-exchange                  October 2011


10.5.1.  Multi-Hop Authentication

   The use of multi-hop authentication for a Report message may be used
   when a Report is sent to multiple entities in an iterative manner.
   For practical reasons, the entities may want to prioritize report
   requests based upon the immediate peer making the request, the
   originator of a request (if different from the peer sending the
   request), and other information contained int he GRC XML schema.

   A second measure MUST be taken to ensure the identity of the
   originator of the request or report.  The originating entity MUST
   include an enveloped digital signature of the GRC XML document
   following the XML digital signature specifications from W3C [XMLsig].
   The signature MUST be passed to all parties that receive the
   forwarded message, and each party MUST be able to perform full path
   validation on the digital signature [RFC5280].  Full path validation
   verifies the chaining relationship to a trusted root and also
   performs a certificate revocation check.  In order to accommodate
   that requirement, the XML Digital Signature [XMLsig] specification
   must be followed for two or more enveloped signatures.  If additions
   are made to a Report, the specification for two or more digital
   signatures [XMLsig] MUST be followed to authenticate the origin of
   the XML document components.

   In the case in which an enterprise network using GRC-Exchange sends a
   report or request to its service provider (SP), the signature from
   the enterprise MUST be included in the initial request.  The SP may
   generate forward the request if appropriate.  If the original request
   is sent, the originating SP, acting on behalf of the enterprise
   network, MUST also digitally sign, with an enveloped signature, the
   full GRC XML document to assure the authenticity of the request.  An
   SP that offers GRC-Exchange to provide reports as a service may be
   using its own PKI to secure communications between the SP and its
   tenants or clients.

10.6.  Consortiums and Public Key Infrastructures

   Direct relationships may be ideal for most GRC-Exchange
   communications, such as those between a service provider and its
   tenants for which reports will be issued.  Consortiums can be used to
   establish a communication web of trust for GRC-Exchange messaging
   where appropriate.  The consortium could provide centralized
   resources, such as a PKI, and established guidelines for use of the
   GRC-Exchange protocol.  The consortium may assist in establishing
   trust relationships between the participating entities to achieve the
   necessary level of cooperation and experience-sharing among the
   consortium entities.  This may be established through PKI certificate
   policy [RFC3647] reviews to determine the appropriate trust levels



Moriarty & Tabet          Expires April 9, 2012                [Page 38]

Internet-Draft                grc-exchange                  October 2011


   between organizations or entities.  The consortium may also be used
   for other purposes to better facilitate communication among entities
   in a common area (Internet, region, government, education, private
   networks, etc.).

   Using a PKI to distribute certificates used in GRC-Exchange
   communication provides an already established method to link trust
   relationships between entities or consortiums that peer with entities
   belonging to a separate consortium.  In other words, consortiums
   could peer with other consortiums to enable communication of GRC-
   Exchange messages between the participating entities to extend trust
   relationships.  The PKI along with Memorandums of Agreement could be
   used to link border directories to share public key information in a
   bridge, a hierarchy, or a single cross-certification relationship.

   Consortiums also need to establish guidelines for each participating
   entities to adhere.  The RECOMMENDED guidelines include:

   o  Physical and logical practices to protect of systems;

   o  Network and application layer protection for systems and
      communications;

   o  Proper use guidelines for GRC-Exchange messages and requests; and

   o  A PKI and policy to provide authentication, integrity, and
      privacy.

   The functions described for a consortium's role parallel that of a
   PKI federation.  The PKI federations that currently exist are
   responsible for establishing security guidelines and PKI trust
   models.  The trust models are used to support applications to share
   information using trusted methods and protocols.

   A PKI can also provide the same level of security for communication
   between an end entity (enterprise, educational, or government
   customer network) and the SP.  The PKI may be a subordinate CA or in
   the CA hierarchy from the SP or consortium to establish the trust
   relationships necessary as the request is made to other connected
   networks.

10.7.  Privacy Concerns and System Use Guidelines

   The GRCPolicy class is used to automate the enforcement of the
   privacy concerns listed within this document.  The privacy and system
   use concerns that MUST be addressed in the GRC-Exchange communication
   system and other integrated components include the following:




Moriarty & Tabet          Expires April 9, 2012                [Page 39]

Internet-Draft                grc-exchange                  October 2011


   Privacy Concerns:

   o  Privacy of data collected for continuous monitoring for IT
      Operations, Security, Compliance, and Audit reports.  This data
      may be of the entity being monitored or tenant data in a service
      provider model.  Agreements MUST be established for the proper
      handling of this data to the data owners requirements.

   o  Privacy of data monitored and stored on systems used in legal
      exchanges such as eDiscovery or eWarrant reorts.

   Information Sharing Considerations:

   o  System use between peering consortiums MUST also adhere to any
      government communication regulations that apply between those two
      regions, such as encryption export and import restrictions.  This
      may include consortiums that are categorized as
      "BetweenConsortiums" or "AcrossNationalBoundaries".

   o  System use between consortiums MUST NOT request reports beyond the
      scope intended and permitted by law or established agreements.

   o  GRC Report Exchange communications between entities classified as
      "AcrossNationalBoundaries" MUST respect national boundary issues
      and limit requests to appropriate agreements including those which
      involve peering consortia.

   The security and privacy considerations listed above are for the
   consortiums, SPs, and enterprises to agree upon.  The agreed-upon
   policies may be facilitated through use of the GRCPolicy class.  Some
   privacy considerations are addressed through the GRC-Exchange
   guidelines for encryption and digital signatures as described in
   Section 9.1.

   Privacy becomes an issue whenever sensitive data traverses a network.
   The specific concerns for each GRC XML schema used must be considered
   individually.  The exchange of information in provided Reports,
   should be detailed in agreements and contracts prior to information
   sharing exchanges taking place.  The agreements should consider the
   level of detail to be provided in a report, what information MUST not
   be communicated, and how information is protected in exchanges.

   Intra-consortium GRC-Exchange communications raise additional issues,
   especially when the peering consortiums reside in different regions
   or nations.  Data privacy regulations and other applicable
   regulations MUST be considered in information sharing or exchange
   policies.




Moriarty & Tabet          Expires April 9, 2012                [Page 40]

Internet-Draft                grc-exchange                  October 2011


   The privacy concerns listed in this section address issues among the
   trusted parties involved in a GRC Report exchanges.  Data used in
   GRC-Exchange communications must also be protected from parties that
   are not trusted.  This protection is provided through the
   authentication and encryption of documents as they traverse the path
   of trusted servers.  Each system communicating GRC-Exchange messages
   MUST perform a bi-directional authentication when sending a GRC-
   Exchange message and use the public encryption key of the upstream or
   downstream peer to send a message or document over the network.  This
   means that the document is decrypted and re-encrypted at each GRC-
   Exchange system via TLS over the transport protocol [RFC6046].  The
   GRC-Exchange messages may be decrypted at each GRC-Exchange system in
   order to properly process the request or relay the information.
   Today's processing power is more than sufficient to handle the
   minimal burden of encrypting and decrypting relatively small typical
   GRC Report Exchange messages.


11.  Security Considerations

   GRC Report Exchange has many security requirements and considerations
   built into the design of the protocol, several of which are described
   in the Security Requirements section.  For a complete view of
   security, considerations include the availability, confidentiality,
   and integrity concerns for the transport, storage, and exchange of
   information.

   Authenticated encrypted tunnels between systems accepting GRC-
   Exchange communications are used to provide confidentiality,
   integrity, authenticity, and privacy for the data at the transport
   layer.  Encryption and digital signatures are also used at the GRC
   XML document level through GRC-Exchange options to provide
   confidentiality, integrity, authenticity, privacy and traceability of
   the document contents.  Trust relationships may be through direct
   peers or consortiums using established trust relationships of public
   key infrastructure (PKI) via cross-certifications.  Trust levels can
   be established in cross-certification processes where entities
   compare PKI policies that include the specific management and
   handling of an entity's PKI and certificates issued under that
   policy.  [RFC3647] defines an Internet X.509 Public Key
   Infrastructure Certificate Policy and Certification Practices
   Framework that may be used in the comparison of policies to establish
   trust levels and agreements between entities, an entity and a
   consortium, and consortia.  The agreements SHOULD consider key
   management practices including the ability to perform path validation
   on certificates [RFC5280], key distribution techniques [RFC2585],
   Certificate Authority and Registration Authority management
   practices.



Moriarty & Tabet          Expires April 9, 2012                [Page 41]

Internet-Draft                grc-exchange                  October 2011


   The agreements between entities SHOULD also include a common
   understanding of the usage of GRC-Exchange security, policy, and
   privacy options discussed in this section.  The formality,
   requirements, and complexity of the agreements for the certificate
   policy, practices, and the use of GRC-Exchange options SHOULD be
   decided by the entities or consortiums creating those agreements.


12.  IANA Considerations

   This document uses URNs to describe XML namespaces and XML schemas
   [XMLschema] conforming to a registry mechanism described in
   [RFC3688].

   Registration request for the grc-exchange namespace:

   URI: urn:ietf:params:xml:ns:grc-exchange-1.0

   Registrant Contact: See the "Author's Address" section of this
   document.

   XML: None.  Namespace URIs do not represent an XML specification.

   Registration request for the grc-exchange XML schema:

   URI: urn:ietf:params:xml:schema:grc-exchange-1.0

   Registrant Contact: See the "Author's Address" section of this
   document.

   XML: See Section 7, "GRC-Exchange Schema Definition", of this
   document.


13.  Summary

   Governance, Risk, and Compliance reports may contain some of the most
   sensitive information for a business.  Reports may contain the the
   prioritized risks for the effective management of Business
   Operations, IT, Security, Compliance, and Legal departments of an
   enterprise.  There may be a regulatory or legal requirement to share
   information or formatted reports with a regulatory body or other
   entities in a legal review.  Outsourcing of computer infrastructure
   has necessitated the need for service providers to share reports with
   tenants or clients to ensure SLAs and agreements on security
   requirements are met.  Each of these use cases require a secure
   method to exchange reports.  GRC Report Exchange provides a
   standardized method to exchange reports while considering the



Moriarty & Tabet          Expires April 9, 2012                [Page 42]

Internet-Draft                grc-exchange                  October 2011


   security, privacy and policy requirements without relying on the
   transport layer for security.  Security is provided at the document
   level to provide methods to share a report where policy requirements
   can be implemented by mapping to technical options and data markers
   in the GRC-Exchange protocol.


14.  References

14.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC2585]  Housley, R. and P. Hoffman, "Internet X.509 Public Key
              Infrastructure Operational Protocols: FTP and HTTP",
              RFC 2585, May 1999.

   [RFC3275]  Eastlake, D., Reagle, J., and D. Solo, "(Extensible Markup
              Language) XML-Signature Syntax and Processing", RFC 3275,
              March 2002.

   [RFC3688]  Mealling, M., "The IETF XML Registry", BCP 81, RFC 3688,
              January 2004.

   [RFC4279]  Eronen, P. and H. Tschofenig, "Pre-Shared Key Ciphersuites
              for Transport Layer Security (TLS)", RFC 4279,
              December 2005.

   [RFC5070]  Danyliw, R., Meijer, J., and Y. Demchenko, "The Incident
              Object Description Exchange Format", RFC 5070,
              December 2007.

   [RFC5275]  Turner, S., "CMS Symmetric Key Management and
              Distribution", RFC 5275, June 2008.

   [RFC5280]  Cooper, D., Santesson, S., Farrell, S., Boeyen, S.,
              Housley, R., and W. Polk, "Internet X.509 Public Key
              Infrastructure Certificate and Certificate Revocation List
              (CRL) Profile", RFC 5280, May 2008.

   [RFC5755]  Farrell, S., Housley, R., and S. Turner, "An Internet
              Attribute Certificate Profile for Authorization",
              RFC 5755, January 2010.

   [RFC6045]  Moriarty, K., "Real-time Inter-network Defense (RID)",
              RFC 6045, November 2010.




Moriarty & Tabet          Expires April 9, 2012                [Page 43]

Internet-Draft                grc-exchange                  October 2011


   [RFC6046]  Moriarty, K. and B. Trammell, "Transport of Real-time
              Inter-network Defense (RID) Messages", RFC 6046,
              November 2010.

   [XML1.0]   Bray, T., Maler, E., Paoli, J., Sperberg-McQueen, C., and
              F. Yergeau, "Extensible Markup Language (XML) 1.0", W3C
              Recommendation XML 1.0, November 2008,
              <http://www.w3.org/TR/xml/>.

   [XMLNames]
              Bray, T., Hollander, D., Layman, A., Tobin, R., and H.
              Thomson, "Namespaces in XML 1.0 (Third Edition)", W3C
              Recommendation , December 2009,
              <http://www.w3.org/TR/xml-names/>.

   [XMLencrypt]
              Imaura, T., Dillaway, B., and E. Simon, "XML Encryption
              Syntax and Processing", W3C Recommendation ,
              December 2002, <http://www.w3.org/TR/xmlenc-core/>.

   [XMLschema]
              Thompson, H., Beech, D., Maloney, M., and N. Mendelsohn,
              "XML Schema Part 1: Structures", W3C Recommendation Second
              Edition, October 2004,
              <http://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-1/>.

   [XMLsig]   Bartel, M., Boyer, J., Fox, B., LaMaccia, B., and E.
              Simon, "XML-Signature Syntax and Processing", W3C
              Recommendation Second Edition, June 2008,
              <http://www.w3.org/TR/xmldsig-core/>.

14.2.  Informative References

   [RFC1930]  Hawkinson, J. and T. Bates, "Guidelines for creation,
              selection, and registration of an Autonomous System (AS)",
              BCP 6, RFC 1930, March 1996.

   [RFC3647]  Chokhani, S., Ford, W., Sabett, R., Merrill, C., and S.
              Wu, "Internet X.509 Public Key Infrastructure Certificate
              Policy and Certification Practices Framework", RFC 3647,
              November 2003.

   [RFC5735]  Cotton, M. and L. Vegoda, "Special Use IPv4 Addresses",
              BCP 153, RFC 5735, January 2010.

   Acknowledgements

   Many thanks to colleagues and the Internet community for reviewing



Moriarty & Tabet          Expires April 9, 2012                [Page 44]

Internet-Draft                grc-exchange                  October 2011


   and commenting on the document.


Authors' Addresses

   Kathleen M. Moriarty
   EMC Corporation
   176 South Street
   Hopkinton, MA
   United States

   Phone:
   Email: Kathleen.Moriarty@emc.com


   Said Tabet
   EMC Corporation
   176 South Street
   Hopkinton, MA
   United States

   Phone:
   Email: Said.Tabet@emc.com




























Moriarty & Tabet          Expires April 9, 2012                [Page 45]