


Individual Submission                                   S. Probasco, Ed.
Internet-Draft
Intended status: Informational                             T. Derryberry
Expires: September 2, 2011                                      B. Patil
                                                                   Nokia
                                                           March 1, 2011


Protocol to Access White Space database: Overview and Use case scenarios
                draft-probasco-paws-overview-usecases-00

Abstract

   Wireless spectrum is a commodity that is regulated by governments.
   The spectrum is used for various purposes which include entertainment
   (eg. radio and television), communication (telephony and Internet
   access), military (radars etc.) and, navigation (satellite
   communication, GPS).  Portions of the radio spectrum that are unused
   or unoccupied at specific locations and times are defined as "white
   space".  TV White space refers to those unused channels, within the
   range allocated for TV transmission, that can be used without
   interfering with the primary purpose for which it is allocated.

   This document provides an overview of TV white space and describes
   examples of how a radio system might operate using TV white space
   spectrum.  Not only does it describe the operation of a radio system,
   but also how the radio system including a white space database
   enables location based services.  The description is high level and
   generic.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 2, 2011.

Copyright Notice



Probasco, et al.        Expires September 2, 2011               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft               PAWS: Use Cases                  March 2011


   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   3.  White space and cognitive radio technology overview . . . . . . 4
   4.  TV white space Use cases  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
     4.1.  Hot spot: Internet connectivity service . . . . . . . . . . 5
     4.2.  Location based service usage scenario . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   5.  Summary and Conclusion  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   6.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8


























Probasco, et al.        Expires September 2, 2011               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft               PAWS: Use Cases                  March 2011


1.  Introduction

   Wireless spectrum is a commodity that is regulated by governments.
   The spectrum is used for various purposes which include entertainment
   (eg. radio and television), communication (telephony and Internet
   access), military (radars etc.) and, navigation (satellite
   communication, GPS).  Additionally spectrum is allocated for use
   either on a license basis or for unlicensed use.  Television
   transmission until now has primarily been analog.  The switch to
   digital transmission has begun.  As a result the spectrum allocated
   for television transmission can now be more effectively used.  Unused
   channels and bands between channels can be used as long as they do
   not interfere with the primary service for which that channel is
   allocated.  While urban areas tend to have dense usage of spectrum
   and a number of TV channels, the same is not true in rural and semi-
   urban areas.  There can be a number of unused TV channels in such
   areas that can be used for other services.  The figure below shows TV
   white space within the lower UHF band:



     Avg  |
     usage|                             |-------------- White Space
          |                    |    |   |   |  |
       0.6|                   ||    ||  V   V  ||
          |                   ||   |||    |    ||
       0.4|                   ||   ||||   |    ||
          |                   ||   ||||   |    ||<----TV transmission
       0.2|                   ||   ||||   |    ||
          |----------------------------------------
          400     500       600      700       800
                   Frequency in MHz ->



                Figure 1: High level view of TV White space

   Regulatory entities in several countries including the US, Canada,
   UK, Finland to quote a few are specifying the regulations for the use
   of TV white space.  The availability of TV white space opens up the
   potential for its use for various purposes.  Regulation may mandate
   its use for certain specific applications or services.

   This document describes an example of how a radio system might
   operate using TV white space spectrum.  Not only does it describe the
   operation of a radio system for providing Internet access at a hot
   spot or in a rural area, but also how the radio system including a
   white space database enables location based services.  The



Probasco, et al.        Expires September 2, 2011               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft               PAWS: Use Cases                  March 2011


   description is high level and generic.  It is not meant to be
   specific to any particular radio technology.  The examples described
   here are however real and based on existing work by the authors.


2.  Terminology

   Location Based Service

      An application or device which provides data, information or
      service to a user based on their location.


3.  White space and cognitive radio technology overview

   TV white space is considered the first generation of spectrum access
   utilizing cognitive radio techniques.  Cognitive radio requires a
   functional entity, namely a database that provides location dependent
   spectrum availability information for secondary use.  The database is
   required to provide in simple terms an "ask and answer" service to
   provide secondary use spectrum resources to radio devices.  The
   concept of "white space" in the context of broadband wireless access
   service is likely to expand to other spectral bands in the future
   increasing the value and role of databases responsible for
   determining location dependent spectrum availability.  A
   comprehensive tutorial and introduction to TV white space by IEEE is
   available at [TV Whitespace Tutorial Intro].

   Spectrum is a scarce resource.  Current usage model is typically
   wherein it is allocated for a specific purpose.  This results in
   inefficient use of the resource.  The actual usage of the spectrum
   could vary based on time and location.  Better spectrum efficiency
   could be achieved for example by making available the same spectrum
   for use during periods when the primary service does not require it
   or in locations where the service does not apply.  Any device or
   entity that would benefit from available spectrum could potentially
   verify availability at a given location and time via a database and
   claim resources for some period of time.  Such usage models are
   beginning to emerge with TV WS being a leading example.


4.  TV white space Use cases

   There are many potential use cases that could be considered for the
   TV white space spectrum.  Providing broadband internet access in
   rural and underserved areas is one example.  Available channels may
   also be used by towns and cities to monitor/control traffic lights or
   read utility meters.  Yet another use case could be the ability to



Probasco, et al.        Expires September 2, 2011               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft               PAWS: Use Cases                  March 2011


   deliver location based services.  A couple of these use cases are
   described in the following sections.

4.1.  Hot spot: Internet connectivity service

   In this use case a small town could offer Internet connectivity
   service to local businesses and residents by creating a hot spot
   using TV white space spectrum.  The access point in this example uses
   IEEE 802.11af air interface technology.  The backhaul connectivity to
   the Internet from the access point to is via microwave or cable.  End
   user devices which are 802.11af capable would access the Internet
   through the access point.  The access point in such a deployment
   could cover several kilometers and create a fairly large hot spot.

   The figure below shows an example deployment of this scenario.



         -------
         |Dev 1|\                   \|/                                ----------
         |.11af| (.11af AirIF)       |                                 |Database|
         -------       \             |                        .---.   /----------
            o           \          |-|---------|             (     ) /
            o                      |802.11af AP|            /       \
            o            /         |Router     |===========( Internet )
            o           /          |-----------|            \        /
         -------  (.11af AirIF)                              (      )
         |Dev n| /                                            (----)
         |.11af|
         -------


         Figure 2: Hot-spot service using TV white space spectrum

   Once the rural town has correctly installed and setup the equipment,
   a simplified power up and operation scenario utilizing TV White Space
   to provide Internet connectivity service consists of the following
   steps:

   1.   The access point (AP) powers up; however its WS radio and all
        other WS capable devices will power up in idle/listen only mode
        (No active transmissions on the WS frequency band)

   2.   The AP which has Internet connectivity via the backhaul
        establishes a connection to a trusted white space database
        administrator.





Probasco, et al.        Expires September 2, 2011               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft               PAWS: Use Cases                  March 2011


   3.   The AP (First time) registers its geolocation, address, contact
        information, etc. associated with the owner/operator of the AP
        with the trusted database administrator.  Meanwhile the DB
        administrator may be required to store and forward the
        registration information to the regulatory authority

   4.   Following the registration process, the AP will send a query to
        the trusted database requesting a list of available WS channels
        based upon its geolocation.

   5.   If the AP has been previously authenticated, the database
        responds with a list of available white space channels that may
        be used along with a duration of time.

   6.   Once the AP authenticates the WS channel list response message
        from the databaase, the AP selects the available WS channel(s)
        from the list.

   7.   The AP acknowledges to the database which of the available WS
        channels, the AP has selected for its operation.

   8.   The AP transmits the appropriate control messages to the
        "listening" peripherals under its control including WS channel
        numbers for use.

   9.   Devices can attach to the AP using the channel information
        provided in the beacon and obtain Internet connectivity.

   10.  Periodically the AP contacts the database for the purpose of
        "refreshing" the WS channel availability information.

4.2.  Location based service usage scenario

   The owner of a shopping mall wants to provide internet access to
   customers when they are at the shopping mall.  His internet service
   provider (ISP) recommends using access points (APs) in the TV white
   space frequency band since these radios will have good propagation
   characteristics, and thus will require fewer APs, and also because
   the frequency band used by traditional Wi-Fi is crowded with users
   such as individual stores operating their own Wi-Fi network and also
   Bluetooth devices.  The ISP installs access points in each large
   store in the mall, and several other APs throughout the mall
   building.  For each AP, the professional installer programs the
   location (latitude & longitude) of the device.  Special tools are
   required to determine the location, since typical GPS receivers do
   not function indoors.  When each AP is powered on, the radio does not
   transmit initially.  The AP contacts a white space database, using
   its wired internet connection, via a URL and provides its programmed



Probasco, et al.        Expires September 2, 2011               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft               PAWS: Use Cases                  March 2011


   location coordinates plus other information required by the database.
   A reply is received by the AP from the database containing a list of
   available channels where the AP can operate its transmitter.  The AP
   selects a channel for operation and notifies the database, which
   records information about the AP including the identity of the AP and
   its location coordinates.  The AP activates its radio and begins to
   function as a typical wireless AP, providing internet access to
   connected devices.

   A user has a device that is capable of operating in the TV white
   spaces frequency band.  A typical device would be a smartphone with
   multiple radios, including a cellular radio, a Wi-Fi radio, and TV
   white space radio.  The user arrives at the shopping mall and enters
   the building.  The white space radio in the smartphone is on, and is
   scanning for an AP.  As the user gets near the entrance to the
   shopping mall, the smartphone locates one of the APs in the building
   and connects to it.  The smartphone begins to use this TVWS radio for
   internet access.  This internet access does not count against the
   users cellular data cap (the mall owner is providing the internet
   access) and also the data rates are better than cellular data.  As
   the user walks throughout the mall the smartphone moves between
   coverage of different APs, and the smartphone connects to a new AP
   when the user and smartphone move near it.

   In order to encourage customers to come to the shopping mall, the
   mall owner has a loyalty program where members register, build
   points, and receive coupons and other notices from the shops in the
   mall.  Before installing the internet service in the mall, all
   loyalty program information was mailed to the user, at an address
   which was provided by the user when joining the loyalty program.

   The ISP provider describes to the mall owner how the loyalty program
   can be improved using the internet service provided by the APs in the
   TV white space.  A new app is developed for this loyalty program, and
   promoted to users, asking them to install the app on their
   smartphone.  The app is provisioned with the user's loyalty program
   information.  When the user comes to the shopping mall, the
   smartphone locates the AP providing internet service and connects to
   the AP.  The app in the smartphone sees that a radio connection to an
   AP in the TV white space frequency band is now active.  The app
   registers the identity of the AP and forwards this to the home server
   for the loyalty program, using the internet connection provided by
   the AP in the TV white space band.  The loyalty program server
   registers the identity of the user from the loyalty program
   credentials and also the identity of the AP.  Next the loyalty
   program server contacts the TV white space database and requests the
   location of the AP having the identity forwarded by the app &
   smartphone.  When the TV white space database replies with the



Probasco, et al.        Expires September 2, 2011               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft               PAWS: Use Cases                  March 2011


   location coordinates of the AP, the loyalty program server knows the
   approximate location of the user and smartphone.  With this location
   information, the loyalty program server can now forward loyalty
   program information to the user.  As the user moves through the mall,
   the smartphone connects to different APs.  The process is repeated,
   allowing the loyalty program to delivery current location based
   information to the user.


5.  Summary and Conclusion

   The above are a couple of examples describing the role of the white
   space database in the operation of a radio network.  It also shows an
   example of a location based service.  This is not intended to
   describe a fully functional deployment, only an example.  In a real
   deployment, there are multiple issues which must be addressed
   including user privacy.


6.  Informative References

   [TV Whitespace Tutorial Intro]
              IEEE 802 Executive Committee Study Group on TV White
              Spaces, "TV Whitespace Tutorial Intro; http://
              grouper.ieee.org/groups/802/802_tutorials/2009-03/
              2009-03-10%20TV%20Whitespace%20Tutorial%20r0.pdf",
              March 2009.


Authors' Addresses

   Scott Probasco (editor)
   6021 Connection drive
   Irving, TX  75039
   USA

   Email: scott.probasco@nokia.com


   Tom Derryberry
   Nokia
   6021 Connection drive
   Irving, TX  75039
   USA

   Email: tom.derryberry@nokia.com





Probasco, et al.        Expires September 2, 2011               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft               PAWS: Use Cases                  March 2011


   Basavaraj Patil
   Nokia
   6021 Connection drive
   Irving, TX  75039
   USA

   Email: basavaraj.patil@nokia.com












































Probasco, et al.        Expires September 2, 2011               [Page 9]


