

Internet Engineering Task Force                                   LiOu
Internet-Draft                                             Sun  Wujian
Intended status: Standards Track                                  NDSC
Expires: June 10, 2011                                            
                                                      December 10, 2010


           Proactive Channel Handoff in wireless cognitive networks
               draft-liou-sunwujian-manet-proactive-handoff-00

Abstract

   Driven by government policy and advanced radio technologies
   , opportunistic spectrum usage plays an     ever-increasing role in
   the next generation communication system. Due to the random 
   characteristics of primary users, it is impossible to fully describe
   the activity feature in terms of time and space, rendering 
   opportunity usage unsafe.  In order to minimize interference to 
   primary users, a history knowledge based algorithm is proposed in 
   this work, which compound historical statistics with current 
   information. Random early detection (RED) algorithm, which proves to 
   be efficient in active queue management (AQM) for switching fabrics,
   is introduced to help select the desirable channel. In order to 
   further suppress the collision probability, all the channels are 
   sorted according to availability. Simulation results show that, 
   compared with completely random spectrum selection method, the 
   proposed RED-based channel access method gives better 
   performance in terms of channel selection delay.


Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at 
   any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on June 10, 2011.





LiOu & SunWujian             Expires June 10, 2011             [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                 Proactive                   December 2010
  

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.
   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document 
   must include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e
   of the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.1.  Requirements Language  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Proactive channel handoff method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     2.1. Proactive channel handoff introduction . . . . . . . . . . . 4
     2.2 Random Early Detection . . . . . . . . .  . . . . . . . . . . 4
   3.  System Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     3.1.  Statement of the Problem. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
     3.2.  Channel reliablity and average remaining time. . . . . . .  6
     3.3.  Prediciton-based proactive channel selection. . . . . . . . 7
   4.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   5.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   6.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   7.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     7.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     7.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   8. Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . 10









LiOu & SunWujian              Expires June 10, 2011            [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                 Proactive                  December 2010


1. Introduction

   The rapid developments in wireless communication technologies and 
   excessive growth of short-distance devices have resulted in ever-
   crowding spectrum usage. For the sake of static allocation of radio
   frequency, the entire spectrum band has already been handed out. Due 
   to shortage of available licensed spectrum, wireless communication 
   systems seem to encounter a bottleneck. However, according to 
   authoritative reports of spectrum usage observation, at any given 
   time and location, only a small proportion (less than 15%) of 
   valuable spectrum is working, leaving much of the precious resources 
   critically underutilized. Cognitive radio (CR) is proposed as a 
   promising technology to cope with current spectrum scarcity problem 
   by means of enabling cognitive users (or, secondary user) to 
   dynamically adjust its operating parameters and thus dynamically 
   reuse the spectrum which is always statistically underutilized by 
   authorized users (or, primary users (PU)) in a intelligent and 
   cautious manner. One challenging issue that CR networks 
   inevitably encounter is channel selection when initiating a data 
   link between the cognitive users. Compared to other hot topics of
   CR (i.e., spectrum sensing, spectrum management, and resources 
   allocation), spectrum handoff problem receives little attention 
   and is less investigated in the research area. 

1.1. Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", 
   "SHALL NOT",   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", 
   "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].


2.  Proactive channel handoff method

   Spectrum handoff occurs when detecting the usual return of primary 
   user. This leads to 1) interruption of the communication between 
   cognitive users, 2) interference to primary users according to 
   system mechanisms. Nearly all the current literatures simply assume
   that all the channels are well synchronized, whether by primary 
   users (usually infrastructures of primary user network, such as 
   GSM base station, etc) or just omitted such complicated scenario. 
   Current channel scheduling methods concentrate mainly on sense-
   and-react approach, which means to randomly pick up a channel to 
   access from preferable channel lists (PCL) if it were sensed idle 
   at some given time t. This always leads to disruptions to both 
   primary users and cognitive users. Proactive method in a sense-and
   -avoid manner instead seems more reasonable. However, due to the 
   randomness of the reappearance of primary users, it is extremely 
   challenging to perform fast, smooth and seamless channel handoff 



LiOu & SunWujian             Expires June 10, 2011             [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                 Proactive                  December 2010


   for cognitive communicating parties, leading to inevitable 
   performance degradation during a spectrum handoff. This problem 
   becomes even more difficult in ad hoc networks where there is no 
   centralized infrastructure to coordinate the spectrum mobility.
   
2.1. Proactive channel handoff introduction

   Currently, most channel selection algorithms take a reactive 
   sense-and-react approach to perform spectrum handoff based 
   entirely on the latest observations. One common way employed in 
   relevant literatures is that cognitive users (CU) perform 
   spectrum handoff as soon as perceiving the return of primary user
   .Borrowing the idea of proactive routing protocols 
   designed for wireless Ad-hoc networks, proactive channel selection 
   adopts a similarly active way that prepares one or more channel(s) 
   before there is a need for communication parties. Although the 
   merits of this approach are obvious, preparation of channels, or 
   rather prediction of channel availability status is relatively 
   difficult. Until very recently, only a few literatures focus on 
   the spectrum handoff issue, among which fewer are concerned with 
   proactive channel selection. But the idea is widely accepted of 
   performing spectrum handoff and RF reconfiguration before a PR user 
   reoccupies the spectrum band based on historical channel usage 
   statistics, usually referred to as proactive channel selective 
   approach. Also a comprehensive introduction is presented and a 
   framework of proactive channel selection is briefly given without 
   detailed analysis. A predictive model is proposed for 
   dynamic spectrum access based on the past channel usage history. In
   , spectrum occupancy features and channel prediction model is 
   proposed by means of the analysis of binary time series. In these 
   few proposals, the multi-user network coordination problem is 
   either not taken into consideration or purely assumed there 
   exists a stable global common control channel (CCC), which 
   in practice seems impossible due to the high dynamical nature of 
   primary user. Nearly all the existing literatures pay little 
   attention to the channel selection method employed in the cognitive 
   users, nor does the residual time on each selected channel.
   
2.2. Random Early Detection
   
   Random early detection algorithm is first proposed in active queue 
   management for gateways to keep the average queue size reasonably 
   low while allowing occasional bursts of packets in the queue. 
   Using a feedback mechanism, RED are capable of timely 
   reconfiguration before congestion happens. According to, the 
   average length of queue is:
           
                Qave=Alpha*Qave+(1-Alpha)*Qcurrent



LiOu & SunWujian             Expires June 10, 2011             [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                 Proactive                  December 2010


   In other words, the expectation value of the length of queue should 
   be calculated according to the long history and latest observation. 
   This means some unusual busty arrival must be dropped. Such a 
   tradeoff between admission rate and buffer size have to be carefully 
   chosen. Numerical results are shown in Figure 1. 
   It can be seen that with Alpha big enough (more than 0.975), the 
   average value is less than 50 even if instantaneous arrivals reaches  
   200. This fits much well with the idea that impulsive congestion is 
   smoothly averaged at the cost of dropping some packets. The 
   parameter Beta=1-Alpha is called time constant in term of low-pass       
   filter. This is similar to the time constant in low-pass filter,
   which is an exponential weighted moving average (EWMA): 
   This is the same with the conclusion of. The determination of   
   is the key of using RED. To the best of our knowledge, this is the 
   first paper that incorporates the random early detection algorithm 
   in the spectrum handoff design.
   
3. System Model

   The cognitive networks contain two kinds of nodes, or rather users, 
   namely primary users and cognitive users. The resource of cognitive 
   users comes from the primary users, in a manner of opportunistic 
   usage.  In this work, resources are actually frequency channels 
   authorized to licensed users. Each channel is of two states, busy 
   (occupied) or idle. So, an alternative renewal process can be used 
   to model the licensed channel. The model of a primary networks is 
   shown Figure 2.

   In this work, we assume that each cognitive user is equipped with 
   two radio units, one for channel statistics (both long and near 
   history) and the other for data transmission (Sending, receiving 
   and sensing). The one for channel statistic is further assumed to 
   be wide enough, capable of scanning all the licensed channels among 
   the cognitive networks.  

3.1. Statement of the Problem
   As assumed above, each channel is modeled as an alternative renewal
   process. Then the aim of cognitive users is to opportunistically 
   utilize the idle fraction (mostly large part) of time. Assume that 
   the beginning state of channel is busy (idle is also acceptable and 
   it does not matter in the long run), it lasts a random time, say
   X1, then it changes to the contrary state, lasting a random time, 
   say Y1, then goes to busy state again with random duration X2, and 
   so on and so forth. In this sense, random vector{Xn,Yn} is 
   obtained.Xn,Yn is independent of each other.Without losing 
   
   
   
   
   
   
LiOu & SunWujian             Expires June 10, 2011             [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                 Proactive                  December 2010


   generality, we identify each channel a different parameter, i.e.,
   the random variable sequence {Xn,Yn}   are subjected to different    
   parameters, noted as (Xni,Yni),1<=i<=N,n>=1.The distribution 
   function of Xi and Yi is expressed as FXi,FYi.
   
   The available channel for cognitive users is the licensed channel 
   with idle state. This work aims to pick up a more reliable channel 
   in terms of remaining time of idle phase. At any specified time, 
   there are several (even many as stated above that 85% of total
   channels are unused) channel for cognitive users to select. Our 
   questions turn out to be that choose a channel with more idle time 
   left. 

3.2. Channel reliablity and average remaining time

   Based on the renewal theory, given the existence of E(Y*Y),
   namely E(Y*Y)<inf, then the average remaining time of any specified 
   time t can be calculated as lim E[Y(t)]=E(Yi*Yi)/[2*E(Yi)]. Such a 
   result can be interpreted that when the system enters equilibrium            
   state, the average remaining time of any specified time is expected 
   to be E(Y*Y)/[2*E(Yi)]. Furthermore, the probability density 
   function of remaining time of any given time t is f(y)=[1-FYi(y)]/
   E(Yi),where FYi(y) is the probability distribution function of Y in   
   channel i. Based on f(y) of each channel, the probability 
   distribution function of Y(t) can be calculated. That is to say, 
   given any time length that cognitive user needs to use, full 
   knowledge about the channel are known, it is self-evident that the   
   probability of availability may vary. From the perspective of 
   reducing the interference with primary users, the channel with  
   larger probability as well as more remaining time than others is   
   desirable.

   For the sake of mathematical tractability, we assume that each 
   group of X and Y is exponentially distributed, and each channel 
   owns different X and Y, then the probability that the channel i  
   is idle at given time t can be represented as :
   P(t)=E(Yi)/[E(Xi)+E(Yi)]-{E(Xi)*exp[-E(Xi)-E(Yi)]/t}/SUM
   where SUM=E(Xi)+E(Yi).

   Here we can calculate the expected time left of any given time t:
   Ei[Y(t)]=1/E(Yi)+E(Yi)/(E(Xi)[E(Xi)+E(Yi)]-exp[-E(Xi)-E(Yi)]/t/SUM
   where SUM=E(Xi)+E(Yi).

   Recall in RED algorithm, long-term history and latest observation 
   are both considered in determining the average queue. For the 
   simplicity of implementation, a go-back-to-M history is taken for 




   
LiOu & SunWujian             Expires June 10, 2011             [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                 Proactive                  December 2010


   long history. Every time when evaluating the availability of a 
   specific channel, the  Since there is  
   t(remain)=alpha*t(ave_M-1)+(1-alpha)*t(obser)
   t(ave_M-1)=t-Sm(t)   Where Sm(t) is the starting time of M-th
   idle time interval up to a given time t. We now obtain:
   t(remain)=alpha*sum(Yi)/(M-1)+(1-alpha)*Sm(t)
 
   Now, we are going to find the channel that owns bigger idle time 
   left: 
   k=arg{max[t(remain)]}

   An instance with N channels is shown in Figure 3. Without losing 
   generality, we assume all the channels are different, namely with 
   different parameters, or even different distributions. Compared with 
   most literatures assuming memoryless exponential distribution, the 
   proposed algorithm can be widely used to estimate channel 
   availability with generally distributed random variable sequences. 

   Until now, we just find a channel that mostly seems to be idle at 
   some t. In practical circumstances, such a method is far from being 
   satisfied.This is somewhat like tossing a coin; none can claim that
   the next toss is head even though the probability of head is 50% 
   (big enough). The detailed operation about selecting channel will be 
   discussed in the next section.

3.3. Prediciton-based proactive channel selection
    
   The proposed proactive channel selection algorithm depend not only on 
   the probability of being idle but also on the current state of given 
   time t, that is to say, combining the historical statistic results 
   with current sample to make the future decision.

   As stated above, the proposed proactive channel selection algorithm 
   sorts the licensed channel of primary users according to the idle  
   probability. Based on the history records from the statistical radio, 
   the probability characteristics of each channel can be obtained. For
   the means of getting such feature is beyond the topics of this
   paper. We now continue work with the assumption that probability
   feature of each channel is obtained and the channels are listed
   in an ascending order of probability that channel is idle.

   Suppose that a cognitive user want to establish a  link in cognitive
   network, it follows that the cognitive user first checks the 
   seemingly most available channel in the top of channel list, if it 
   turns out to be idle, then a data link can be established. But if 
   not, it has to move to the next position to check secondary-
   optimal (in the sense of idle probability) channel. 
   The trial process goes on till it




LiOu & SunWujian             Expires June 10, 2011             [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                 Proactive                  December 2010
   
   
   finds an available channel. If all the channel are happened to be 
   busy (Though seemingly available), then the data link can not be
   established. Yet we believed that our proposed algorithm 
   outperforms the randomly selected method in terms of collision
    rate and throughput of cognitive users, which can be seen
    in the evaluation section.

   Here we are concerned with the time delay of finding a better 
   channel. According the trial process stated in previous paragraph
   , let Ui(t) be the busy probability of channel i at given time t,
   it is easy to see that Ui(t)=1-Pi(t), denoted as Ui for convenience
   We can get that the average searching time of finding an available
   channel is: 
   
   Where Ti denotes the time of sensing and determining the channel 
   availability of each channel i. The average channel searching time of 
   finding an available channel in random method can also be
   calculated. The only difference between randomly selective method 
   and the proposed algorithm is that the prior method picks up 
   a channel without using historical statistics information but 
   selects a channel with equal possibility. But the trial process can
   be any sequence of N! possible sets. By conditioning on any 
   given sequence, we obtain:
   
   Where P{random=Sk}=1/N!
   
   where Sk is a sequence among all N! sequences set, numbered as k
   1<=k<=N!,   Sjk is the j-th element in the sequence Sk. So, we can 
   get the average channel searching time in randomly selective 
   method.
   
   In this section we evaluate the performance of our proposed algorithm 
   by Matlab-based simulation. We compare our algorithm with randomly 
   opportunistic spectrum access method. Parameters are summarized 
   below:





















LiOu & SunWujian             Expires June 10, 2011             [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                 Proactive                   December 2010


        +---------------------------+--------------------------------+
        |        Parameter          |      value                     |
        +---------------------------+--------------------------------+
        |     Primary User model    |lamdaX:rand(1,5),lamdaX:(8.5,15)|
        +---------------------------+--------------------------------+
        |      Data Link Rate       |            100kbps             |
        +---------------------------+--------------------------------+
        |   Number of PU Channels   |              20                |
        +---------------------------+--------------------------------+
        |       Number of SU        |              10                |
        +---------------------------+--------------------------------+
        |   Cognitive User model    |      The same as primary user  |
        +---------------------------+--------------------------------+
        | Packets length of CR User |Exponentially distributed,para=1|
        +---------------------------+--------------------------------+
        |     Simulation time       |         1000 Time Units        |
        +---------------------------+--------------------------------+ 
   
   The interested metrics of this simulation is access delay of SU.
   All the results are obtained by both proactive channel selection 
   algorithm and randomly selective access method.   It can be seen  
   that the proposed algorithm outperforms the one in random way. The 
   number of collided transmission of random method increases 
   dramatically with the increasing of PU busy parameters. On the 
   contrary, the proposed algorithm are shows a competent capability
    when the data transmission time gradually grows. 
   
   This work provides a simple framework of proactive channel selection
   in wireless cognitive networks, with primary user modeled as 
   alternative renewal process. Such a work gives better performance 
   in exploiting the largely underused spectrum band. 
   While conventional randomly selective method shows a
   dramatic deterioration as the primary user
   becoming more active, the proposed algorithm presents a stable 
   performance. Future works include a more general distribution of the
   busy and idle periods of primary users and more metrics of the 
   overall performance of cognitive users.



4.  Acknowledgements

   The authors wish to acknowledge the guidance and wisdom from Cheng
   Dongnian for all the insightful discussions and ideas.


5.  IANA Considerations

   This memo includes a request to IANA to register the following 
   channel handoff method :

   

LiOu & SunWujian             Expires June 10, 2011             [Page 9]

Internet-Draft                 Proactive                   December 2010

   o  Prediction-based channel method

   o  REC-based channel prediction method
   
   Type name: application

   Encoding considerations: The "charset" MIME parameter, if present,
   MUST be set to "UTF-8", as defined in [RFC3629].

6.  Security Considerations

   This section was developed with RFC 3552 [RFC3552] as guide.  

7.  References

7.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC3629]  Yergeau, F., "UTF-8, a transformation format of ISO
              10646", STD 63, RFC 3629, November 2003.

7.2.  Informative References

   [RFC3552]  Rescorla, E. and B. Korver, "Guidelines for Writing RFC
              Text on Security Considerations", BCP 72, RFC 3552,
              July 2003.


8. Authors' Addresses

   Li Ou
   China National Digital Switching System 
   Engineering&Technological  R&D Center 
   No. 825, BOX 1001 
   Zhengzhou,Henan,450001 
   P.R.China 

   Phone: +86-0371-81630548 
   EMail: zzliou@126.com 

   Sun Wujian
   China National Digital Switching System 
   Engineering&Technological  R&D Center 
   No. 825, BOX 1001 
   Zhengzhou,Henan,450001 
   P.R.China 

   Phone: +86-0371-81630543 
   EMail: alex802.11@gmail.com 


LiOu & SunWujian             Expires June 10, 2011             [Page 10]




