


DISPATCH                                                       P. Pfautz
Internet-Draft                                                      AT&T
Intended status: Standards Track                           July 11, 2011
Expires: January 12, 2012


                                 SP URN
            draft-pfautz-service-provider-identifier-urn-01

Abstract

   This document requests a service provider identifier URN namespace.

Conventions used in this document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC2119 [RFC2119].

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 12, 2012.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of



Pfautz                  Expires January 12, 2012                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                   SP URN                        July 2011


   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


1.  Background

   A number of industry bodies have identified the need for a common
   global service provider identifier.  In the IETF the DRINKS working
   group has sought an identifier for the owner of objects to be
   provisioned in registries for the exchange of Session Establishment
   Data and the ENUM WG and E2MD BOF discussed the need for a service
   provider identifier to associate with E.164 numbers.  Outside of the
   IETF, the need for a service provider identifier has been discussed
   in ITU-T Study Group 2, in the i3 Forum, the GSMA, and ATIS.  In most
   of these discussions a preference has been expressed for a numeric
   identifier that might be obtained by any type of entity as opposed to
   only certain types of entities, e.g., carriers with a particular
   national legal status.  Although preference was also expressed for
   reuse of some existing identifier, if possible, as requirements have
   been elaborated no current identifier seems appropriate.  Thus, this
   document requests registration of a service provider identifier URN
   namespace.


2.  Requirements for Service Provider identifier

   It is suggested that Service Provider Identifiers have the following
   characteristics:
   o  They SHOULD be globally unique
   o  They SHOULD be numeric, at least 8 digits long
   o  They SHOULD be fixed length
   o  they SHOULD be available to any type of entity
   o  Entities SHOULD be able to obtain mulitple identifiers.
   o  Some range of identifiers SHOULD be reserved for internal entity
      usage.


3.  Namespace Considerations

   URN values are to be assigned by IANA on a first come first served
   basis.  The resources to be identified are service providers, e.g.,
   (but not limited to) SIP service providers.  Entities may obtain
   multiple assignments.  A variety of services might be supported
   including exchange VoIP and other traffic types.







Pfautz                  Expires January 12, 2012                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                   SP URN                        July 2011


4.  Community Considerations

   Open assignment will allow all types of entities to exchange traffic
   as opposed to limiting the entities that may be represented as is the
   case with some other identifies (e.g., ITU-T M.1400 Carrier Codes).
   A fixed length digit string will be more easily processed by
   implementations that make use of prefixing as compared to Private
   Enterprise Numbers or ITADs, which are integer values.  The Private
   Enterprise Number approach of supporting multiple identifiers through
   subdelegation is also less suitable for use in prefixing contexts or
   where the SP identifier makes up part of a domain name, e.g.,
   spn{SPID}.ipxsp.org.  [GSMAPRDIR67]


5.  URN Namespace Definition Template

   Namespace ID:

   to be assigned

   Registration Information:

   Version 1

   Date: 2011-06-04

   Declared registrant of the namespace:

   Name: IETF

   Contact: P. Pfautz

   E-mail: ppfautz@att.com

   Declaration of structure:

   The identifier structure is as follows:

   URN:SPID:<8>DIGIT

   DIGIT=%x30-39

   Relevant ancillary documentation:

   Identifier uniqueness considerations:

   Uniqueness is guaranteed as long as the assigned number is never
   reassigned.



Pfautz                  Expires January 12, 2012                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                   SP URN                        July 2011


   Identifier persistence considerations:

   TBD

   Process of identifier assignment:

   First come first served by IANA.

   Process for identifier resolution:

   None at this time.

   Rules for Lexical Equivalence:

   exact digit string match

   Conformance with URN Syntax:

   No special considerations.

   Validation mechanism:

   None specified.

   Scope:

   Global.


6.  Security Considerations

   Any security considerations would be a product of the applications
   making use of the new service provider identifiers.


7.  IANA Considerations

   TBD


8.  References

8.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.





Pfautz                  Expires January 12, 2012                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                   SP URN                        July 2011


8.2.  Informative References

   [GSMAPRDIR67]
              GMSA, "PRD IR.67 DNS/ENUM Guidelines for Service Providers
              & GRX/IPX PRoviders 5.1", August 2010.


Author's Address

   Penn Pfautz
   AT&T
   200 S. Laurel Ave
   Middletown, NJ  07748
   USA

   Email: ppfautz@att.com



































Pfautz                  Expires January 12, 2012                [Page 5]

