



Network Working Group                                      J. Jeganathan
Internet-Draft                                                H. Gredler
Intended status: Standards Track                        Juniper Networks
Expires: January 31, 2014                                    B. Decraene
                                                 France Telecom - Orange
                                                           July 30, 2013


                 2547 egress PE Fast Failure Protection
            draft-minto-2547-egress-node-fast-protection-02

Abstract

   This document specifies a fast-protection mechanism for protecting
   [RFC2547] based VPN service against egress node failure.  This
   mechanism enables local repair to be performed immediately upon a
   egress node failure.  In particular, the routers upstream to egress
   node could redirect VPN traffic to a protector (a new role) to repair
   in the order of tens of milliseconds, achieving fast protection that
   is comparable to MPLS fast reroute.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 31, 2014.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect



Jeganathan, et al.      Expires January 31, 2014                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft   2547 egress PE Fast Failure Protection        July 2013


   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Specification of Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   3.  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   4.  Reference topology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   5.  Theory of Operation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     5.1.  Protector and Protection Models . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
       5.1.1.  Co-located protector  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
       5.1.2.  Centralized protector . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
       5.1.3.  Hybrid protector  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     5.2.  Context Identifier and VPN prefixes.  . . . . . . . . . .   7
     5.3.  MPLS egress Fast reroute  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
       5.3.1.  RSVP  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
       5.3.2.  LDP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     5.4.  Forwarding State on Protector PE  . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
       5.4.1.  Alternate egress PE for protected prefix. . . . . . .   9
   6.   Egress node Failure  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   7.  Deployment Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
     7.1.  Discussion on deployment models.  . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
     7.2.  Simple deployment model.  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
     7.3.  Deployment requirements.  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   8.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   9.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   10. References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
     10.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
     10.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14

1.  Introduction
















Jeganathan, et al.      Expires January 31, 2014                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft   2547 egress PE Fast Failure Protection        July 2013


   This document specifies a fast-protection mechanism for protecting
   RFC 2547 based VPN against egress PE failure.  The procedures in this
   document are relevant only when a VPN site is multi-homed to two or
   more PEs.  This is mainly designed based on MPLS context specific
   label switching[RFC5331].  This fast-protection refers to the ability
   to provide local repair upon a failure in the order of tens of
   milliseconds, which is comparable to MPLS fast-reroute [RFC4090].
   This fast-protection is achieved by establishing local protection as
   close to a failure as possible.  Compared with the existing global
   repair mechanisms that rely on control plane convergence, these
   procedures could provide faster and more deterministic restoration
   for VPN traffic.  However, this is intended to complement the global
   repair mechanisms, rather than replacing them in any way.

2.  Specification of Requirements

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119.

3.  Terminology

   Protected PE: A PE which request fast-protection for set of VPN-IP
   prefixes.

   Protected VPN-IP prefix: A multi-homed VPN-IP prefix that required
   protection in event of protected node goes down.

   Protector: A router which protect one or more Protected VPN-IP prefix
   when a Protected node goes down.

   BGP nexthop: A nexthop advertised in the BGP-Update for the VPN-IP
   prefix by a BGP speaker.

   VPN label: A label advertised by a BGP speaker for set of VPN-IP
   prefixes.  This label could be per-VRF label or per-nexthop label or
   per-prefix label.

   Transport LSP: A MPLS LSP setup to BGP nexthop either by LDP or RSVP.

   Alternative egress PE: A PE originates VPN-IP prefix with same IP
   prefix of the protected VPN-IP prefix in a same VPN.

   Context MPLS table: A context-specific label space FIB.  This table
   is populated with VPN labels advertised by the protected-PE for the
   protected VPN-IP prefix.





Jeganathan, et al.      Expires January 31, 2014                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft   2547 egress PE Fast Failure Protection        July 2013


   Context label: A label from protector provides context for context-
   specific label forwarding.

   Context VRF: A IP FIB with alternate nexthop per context per site.

   PLR: Point of Local Repair.

4.  Reference topology

   This document refers to the following topologies to describe various
   roles, procedures and solution.



                          .......................
                          .                     .
           +-------+--CE1----PE1            PE4----CE5---+-------+
           | red   |      .     \           /   .        | red   |
           | site1 |      .      \         /    .        | site2 |
           +-------+--CE2-----+   P--P--PLR1  +----CE6---+-------+
                          .   |  /   |   | \  | .
                          .   PE2    RR  |  PE5 .
                          .   |  \   |   | /  | .
           +-------+--CE3-----+   P--P--PLR2  +----CE7--+-------+
           | blue  |      .      /        \     .       |blue   |
           | site1 |      .     /          \    .       |site2  |
           +-------+--CE4-----PE3           PE6----CE8--+-------+
                          .                     .
                          .                     .
                          .......................

                                 Figure 1

   In Figure 1 there are two VPNs red and blue with two multi-homed
   sites connecting to their PEs.  Assume blue VPN site2 and red VPN
   site2 required egress protection in case of PE5 goes down.  Then PE5
   is protected PE for red VPN site2 for and blue VPN site2.  VPN-IP
   prefixes originated by PE5 associated with red site2 and blue site2
   are protected VPN prefixes.  The MPLS label associated with VPN-IP
   prefix is VPN Label.  The PE4 is an alternative egress PE for red
   site2 and PE6 is an alternative egress PE for blue site2.  The
   protector role could be delegated to any existing router in the
   network.  For example PE4 could act as protector for red VPN site2
   and PE6 could acts as protector for blue VPN site2.  This protector
   model is co-located model.  Alternatively, RR or any other router
   participates in VPN-IP control plane and not connected to VPN sites
   could also act as protector for both red and blue VPN site2.  This
   model is centralized model.



Jeganathan, et al.      Expires January 31, 2014                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft   2547 egress PE Fast Failure Protection        July 2013


                          .......................
                          .                     .
           +-------+--CE1----PE1            PE4----CE5---+-------+
           | red   |      .     \           /   .        | red   |
           | site1 |      .      \         /    .        | site2 |
           +-------+--CE2-----+   P--P--PLR1  +----CE6---+-------+
                          .   |  /   |   | \  | .
                          .   PE2    RR  |  PE5 .
                          .   |  \   |   | /  | .
           +-------+--CE3-----+   P--P--PLR2  +----CE7--+-------+
           | red   |      .      /        \     .       |red    |
           | site3 |      .     /          \    .       |site4  |
           +-------+--CE4-----PE3           PE6----CE8--+-------+
                          .                     .
                          .                     .
                          .......................

                                 Figure 2

   In Figure 2 there is a VPN red with four sites and all sites are
   multi homed to their PEs.  Assume site2 and site4 require egress
   protection in case PE5 goes down.  Then PE5 is the protected PE for
   site2 and site4.  PE4 and PE6 are alternate PEs for site2 and site4
   respectively.  Here also the protector role could be delegated to any
   existing router in the network.  For example PE4 could act as a
   protector for site2 and PE6 could act as a protector for site4.  This
   is called the 'co-located model'.  Also PE4 or PE6 could act as
   protector for both sites.  This is called the 'hybrid model'.

   The various protector models and deployment guidance are spelled-out
   in Section 5.1 and Section 7.

5.  Theory of Operation

   Each (egress) PE attached to a given multi-homed site originates VPN-
   IP route(s) associated with the destination(s) within that site.
   Each such route should have its own Route Distinguisher, and its own
   next-hop, although all these routes have the same Route Target(s).
   Each (ingress) PE attached to other sites within the same VPN, import
   these route(s) into VRF creating more than one possible path to
   multi-homed sites.  When an egress PE goes down, all VPN traffic
   destined to the multi homed sites attached to the downed egress PE
   gets rerouted to alternate egress PE(s) attached to same multi-homed
   site by ingress PE(s) after it detects the egress PE down.  Until
   ingress PE(s) reroute the VPN traffic, the traffic that used to go
   through the failed PE get dropped in penultimate hop router.  Even
   though connectivity of multi-homed site is not bound to an egress PE,
   the VPN traffic gets dropped in the P router as a result of the



Jeganathan, et al.      Expires January 31, 2014                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft   2547 egress PE Fast Failure Protection        July 2013


   downed transport LSP that binds to that egress PE.  This document
   specifies a mechanism that repairs VPN traffic at the point of
   failure (typically a P router which is penultimate hop of the
   transport LSP) and still keep P router unaware of the VPN information
   with the help of a protector.  Section 5.1 explain the details.  The
   penultimate hop router(s) of the transport LSP to egress PE(PLR)
   reroutes VPN traffic to protector through a bypass LSP in the event
   of egress PE failure.  Protector forwards VPN traffic received from
   PLR in the bypass LSP to the alternative egress PE until the ingress
   PE reroute traffic to alternate egress PE.

5.1.  Protector and Protection Models

   Protector, a new role, could be delegated to a router which
   participates in VPN-IP control plane for VPN-IP prefixes that
   requires egress node protection.  In a network, protector could be
   the alternate egress PE of a egress protected multi homed site
   (precisely: the egress protected VPN-IP prefixes), or any other PE or
   stand-alone router for egress protection.

   This specification defines three types of protector:

   o  co-located

   o  centralized

   o  hybrid

   Its designation is dependent on the protector having direct links to
   the alternate site for a given VPN.  A network MAY use either
   protection model or a combination depending on the requirements and
   actual network topology.

5.1.1.  Co-located protector

   In this model, the protector role is delegated to the alternate
   egress PE for a protected VPN site.  Protector is co-located with the
   alternate PE for the protected VPN site, and it has a direct
   connection to the multi-homed site that originates the protected VPN-
   IP prefix.  In the event of an egress node failure, the protector
   receives traffic from the PLR, and forwards VPN traffic to the multi-
   homed site.  In the Figure 1 co-located protector could be PE4 red
   VPN site2 and PE6 could be the co-located protector for blue VPN
   site2.

5.1.2.  Centralized protector





Jeganathan, et al.      Expires January 31, 2014                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft   2547 egress PE Fast Failure Protection        July 2013


   In this model, the protector serves as a centralized protector and
   does not have a direct connection to egress protected multi-homed
   sites.  This model can be played by existing PEs or a dedicated
   protector.  In the event of an egress PE failure, protector MUST
   forwards the traffic to an alternate egress PE with the VPN label
   advertised by the alternate egress PE for the VPN-IP prefix, which in
   turn forwards the traffic to the multi-homed site.  In the Figure 1RR
   could act as protector for red's site2 and blue's site2 or PE6 could
   act as protector for red's site2 and PE4 acts as protector for VPN
   blue's site2.  This is centralized protector model (A PE protecting
   VPN(s) and not connected to any protected VPN site).

5.1.3.  Hybrid protector

   In this model, the protector is co-located for some egress protected
   sites and centralized for other egress protected sites.  These
   protected egress sites could be in the same VPN or in different VPN.
   In the Figure 2either PE4 or PE6 could act as hybrid protector.
   Figure 1PE6 could act as hybrid protector for VPNs red site2 and blue
   site2.

5.2.  Context Identifier and VPN prefixes.

   Context-identifier is an IP address that is either globally unique or
   unique in the private address space of the routing domain.  A
   context-identifier is shared between protected PE and protector(s)
   and It provides forwarding context for protected PE and protector.
   In the Protected PE each VPN-IP prefix is assigned to a context-
   identifier.  The granularity of a context identifier is {Egress PE,
   VPN-IP prefix} tuple.  However, a given context identifier MAY be
   assigned to one or multiple VPN-IP prefixes.  A given context
   identifier MUST NOT be used by more than one protected PE and should
   never used for setting up BGP sessions or any control plane sessions.

   The egress PE that requires protection for a VPN-IP prefix MUST set
   context-identifier as the BGP nexthop for VPN-IPv4 and IPv4-Mapped
   context-identifier for VPN-IPv6.  This context-identifier as nexthop
   indicates to the protector that a particular VPN-IP prefix need
   protection.  For example in Figure 1 PE5 (protected PE) advertises
   VPN-IP prefixes with context-identifier as BGP nexthop.  The context
   identifier MUST also be advertised in the IGP and in LDP if LDP is
   used to establish transport LSP.

   Possible context identifier assignments are

   o  Unique context-identifier for all VPN-IP prefixes, both VPN-IPv4
      and VPN-IPv6.  Here all the VRFs on a PE share same context-
      identifier.



Jeganathan, et al.      Expires January 31, 2014                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft   2547 egress PE Fast Failure Protection        July 2013


   o  Unique context-identifier per address family.  Here all the VRFs
      on the PE share the same context-identifier for given address
      family.

   o  Unique context-identifier per site for all VPN-IP prefixes, both
      VPN-IPv4 and VPN-IPv6.  Here every VRFs has different context-
      identifier.

   o  Unique context-identifier per site per address family.  Here every
      VRFs has different context-identifiers for a given address family.

   o  Unique context-identifier per CE address (nexthop).  Here every CE
      in a VRF has a different context-identifier.

   o  Unique context identifier for each VPN-IP prefix.  Here every VPN-
      IP has a different context-identifier.

   The first one is coarsest granularity of a context identifier and the
   last one is finest granularity of a context identifier.  While all of
   the above options are possible in principle, their practical usage is
   likely to vary, as not all of them may be of practical usage.

5.3.  MPLS egress Fast reroute

   A Protector should be able to receive the traffic from PLR in the
   event of an egress PE failure with forwarding context that enables
   protector to repair VPN traffic.

5.3.1.  RSVP

   If RSVP LSP is used for transport then protector and primary MUST
   follow procedures specified in [rsvp-egress-frr].  The context-
   identifier will be used as destination address of the protected LSP
   and the protector will be backup egress node of the protected LSP.
   PLR MUST follow [rsvp-egress-frr] procedure if alias method is used.

5.3.2.  LDP

   If LDP is used for transport then LDP FEC MUST be the context
   identifier.  The protector for the context identifier and context
   label could be learned through IGP which is beyond the scope of the
   document.  The node protecting bypass path could be computed either
   by remote LFA or LFA for the context identifier to protector.  This
   bypass LSP to protector with context label, learned through IGP,
   provide forwarding context to protector.

5.4.  Forwarding State on Protector PE




Jeganathan, et al.      Expires January 31, 2014                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft   2547 egress PE Fast Failure Protection        July 2013


   A Protector MUST maintain multiple forwarding tables.  Protector
   maintains the forwarding state in context-specific label space on per
   context-Identifier basis.  It also maintains context specific IP
   forwarding table, context VRF, populated by extracting IP from VPN-IP
   prefix with nexthop to alternate egress PE for egress protected
   prefixes.  In particular, the protector MUST learn VPN labels
   associated with VPN-IP prefixes by participating in VPN routing and
   MUST keep routes and labels associated with VPN(s) site(s) that
   required protection.  For each VPN label with an associated context-
   identifier, the protector MUST map the context identifier to a
   context-specific label space [RFC5331], and programs the VPN label in
   that label space into its forwarding plane.  The VPN label in the
   context-specific label space identifies the IP forwarding table, that
   need to be looked up to send it alternate egress PE.

   The protector MAY maintain only VPN-IP prefix originated with-in the
   multi-homed site for given {egress PE, VPN} tuple.  These VPN labels
   in context table and context VRF will not be used in forwarding after
   the ingress PE reroutes the traffic to the new best PE.  Protector
   MUST delete VPN label and the VPN context table after ingress reroute
   the traffic.  This SHOULD be achieved with a timer.  This timer
   default value is 180 seconds, allowing to be able to sustain large
   reroute events.

   Note that if the protected PE does advertise a distinct label per
   VPN-IP prefix, as an optimization, the protector PE does not need to
   create an context VRF as the MPLS lookup on the VPN label is enough
   to identify the outgoing PE and label.

5.4.1.  Alternate egress PE for protected prefix.

   Any route with BGP nexthop which has the following properties

      Exact matching route-target set

      Exact matching Prefix part (excluding the RD)

   will be eligible as alternate egress PE for prefix.

6.  Egress node Failure











Jeganathan, et al.      Expires January 31, 2014                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft   2547 egress PE Fast Failure Protection        July 2013


   This section summarizes the procedure for egress protection as
   described in the above section for completeness.  A Egress PE,
   Protector, PLR follows the methods described in Section 5.3.  The
   protector programs forwarding state in such a way that packets
   received on the bypass LSP will be forwarded based on VPN label in
   the context table, and prefix lookup in context VPN table.  The
   context table is identified by the UHP label of the bypass LSP, i.e.
   the context identifier.

   When the penultimate Hop router receives a VPN packet from the MPLS
   network, if the egress PE is down, the PLR tunnels the packet through
   the bypass LSP to the protector.  The protector PE identifies the
   forwarding context of the egress PE based on the top label of the
   packet which is the UHP label of the bypass LSP.  The protector
   further performs a second label lookup in the protected PE's context
   label space followed by layer-3 lookup in the VPN context table.
   These UHP label, context table label and layer-3 lookup results in
   forwarding the packet to the site or send it to alternate egress PE
   based on protector model.

   For example in Figure 1 RR acts as Protector and PE5 requires
   protection for red, blue site2 VPN-IP prefixes.  As red site2 and
   blue site2 VPN-IP prefixes are advertised with context-identifier,
   the protector sets up the forwarding table for VPN-IP prefixes from
   site2 with alternative egress PE as nexthop.  When PLR detects PE5
   failure it sends all the traffic that PLR used to forward directly to
   PE5 to protector through bypass LSP.  In the protector the top label
   identifies the context specific table.  The VPN label in the context
   table identifies the VPN layer-3 forwarding table which contains
   site2 VPN-IP prefixes with alternate PE as nexthop.  A Layer-3 lookup
   gives mpls path to alternate egress PE and protector will forward the
   packet to alternate egress PE and reach to the site2.

7.  Deployment Considerations

7.1.  Discussion on deployment models.

   As the context-identifiers are advertised in the IGP, they introduce
   additional states in the network and the forwarding tables.  As such,
   in general, it's desirable to keep their number limited.  The
   granularity of context-identifier is also related to the protector
   model used.  If a centralized or hybrid protector model is used, a
   unique context-identifier per egress PE is enough.  If a co-located
   protector model is used, a context identifier per VPN or per CE may
   be needed.

   The centralized protector model, using a single context identifier
   per protected PE, limits the number of additional states in the



Jeganathan, et al.      Expires January 31, 2014               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft   2547 egress PE Fast Failure Protection        July 2013


   network (IGP, forwarding tables) but may add extra latency during the
   protection time.  It also minimizes the configuration effort as zero
   configuration is achievable.  On the contrary the co-located mode,
   having a more granular context identifier, will minimize the latency
   during the protection time at the cost of adding more states in the
   network.  It requires more configuration as the service provider will
   need to defines the PE pairs (protected, protector).  The hybrid
   model is expected to offer the best trade-off as the number of IGP
   states in the network can be minimized by using a single context
   identifier per protected PE, while the additional latency can be
   limited by geographically distributing the protector PE in the
   network.

7.2.  Simple deployment model.

   We propose the following simple deployment model:

   o  a single centralized Protector PE.

   o  a single context-identifier per protected PE, with all VPN routes
      advertised with this context-identifier as BGP next-hop.

   It provides the following benefits:

   o  minimize the number of IGP states in the network.

   o  minimize the configuration required: no per VPN configuration on
      the protector PE.

   Regarding the IGP states, no additional states are required if the
   PEs uses secondary loopback address as BGP nexthop for VPN-IP address
   family.  Otherwise, one additional IP address per PE need is needed.
   However, the number of IP address used as BGP next-hop for the
   customer traffic is not increased, hence if the routers allows the
   prioritization of the prefix during FIB update, there is no impact on
   the IGP convergence time.

   Regarding the configuration required on the network:

   o  The protected PE is configured once with an additional IP address
      which serves as a context identifier.  The BGP Next-Hop of the BGP
      routes are set to this context-identifier.









Jeganathan, et al.      Expires January 31, 2014               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft   2547 egress PE Fast Failure Protection        July 2013


   o  The centralized protector PE does not required per VPN
      configuration.  But it should allow set of context-identifiers to
      control VPN or PE it need to protects.  This will be useful in
      multiple protectors in the network and set of PEs are protected by
      a given protector.  The configured context-identifiers in
      protector protects subset of sites or PEs.

   If one want to limit the protection to only a subset of VPN or a
   subset of PE (for lower VPN-SLA reasons, FIB capacities reasons on
   the protector, forwarding capacity reason during the protection time,
   for the hybrid model), one may not set context-identifier as a
   nexthop to the VPN-IP routes that required protection.  VPN per
   protected PE configuration is required if user wants to limit egress
   protection for subset of sites.  In this case protected be should
   allow user to not set the context-identifier as BGP nexthop for
   advertised VPN-IP prefixes.

7.3.  Deployment requirements.

   This solution does not mandate any protocol extension on any router.
   It does not mandate any additional feature on any routers except the
   new protector PE.  In particular, it does not mandate implementation
   change on ingress nor egress PE, hence could works with legacy PE.
   In most topology, when LDP is used, the PLR will need to support the
   use of a LDP LSP as a targeted LFA.  This is similar to R-LFA but the
   ability to configure a specific LSP to reach the protector PE may be
   specific.

8.  Security Considerations

   The security considerations discussed in RFC 5036, RFC 5331, RFC
   3209, and RFC 4090 apply to this document.

9.  Acknowledgements

   This draft is based on the ideas originally developed by JL Le Roux,
   Bruno Decraene and Zubair Ahmad.  This document leverages work done
   by Yakov Rekhter and several others on LSP tail-end protection.
   Thanks to Nischal Sheth, Nitin Bahadur, Yimin shen, Kaliraj
   Vairavakkalai and Maciek Konstantynowicz for their valuable
   contribution.

10.  References

10.1.  Normative References






Jeganathan, et al.      Expires January 31, 2014               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft   2547 egress PE Fast Failure Protection        July 2013


   [RFC5331]  Aggarwal, R., Rekhter, Y., and E. Rosen, "MPLS Upstream
              Label Assignment and Context-Specific Label Space", RFC
              5331, August 2008.

   [RFC2547]  Rosen, E. and Y. Rekhter, "BGP/MPLS VPNs", RFC 2547, March
              1999.

   [RFC4364]  Rosen, E. and Y. Rekhter, "BGP/MPLS IP Virtual Private
              Networks (VPNs)", RFC 4364, February 2006.

   [RFC5036]  Andersson, L., Minei, I., and B. Thomas, "LDP
              Specification", RFC 5036, October 2007.

   [RFC2205]  Braden, B., Zhang, L., Berson, S., Herzog, S., and S.
              Jamin, "Resource ReSerVation Protocol (RSVP) -- Version 1
              Functional Specification", RFC 2205, September 1997.

   [RFC3209]  Awduche, D., Berger, L., Gan, D., Li, T., Srinivasan, V.,
              and G. Swallow, "RSVP-TE: Extensions to RSVP for LSP
              Tunnels", RFC 3209, December 2001.

   [RFC4090]  Pan, P., Swallow, G., and A. Atlas, "Fast Reroute
              Extensions to RSVP-TE for LSP Tunnels", RFC 4090, May
              2005.

   [RFC3471]  Berger, L., "Generalized Multi-Protocol Label Switching
              (GMPLS) Signaling Functional Description", RFC 3471,
              January 2003.

   [RFC3031]  Rosen, E., Viswanathan, A., and R. Callon, "Multiprotocol
              Label Switching Architecture", RFC 3031, January 2001.

   [LDP-UPSTREAM]
              Aggarwal, R. and J. Roux, "MPLS Upstream Label Assignment
              for LDP", draft-ietf-mpls-ldp-upstream (work in progress),
              2011.

   [RSVP-NON-PHP-OOB]
              Ali, A., Swallow, Z., and R. Aggarwal, "Non PHP Behavior
              and out-of-band mapping for RSVP-TE LSPs", draft-ietf-
              mpls-rsvp-te-no-php-oob-mapping (work in progress), 2011.

10.2.  Informative References

   [RFC5920]  Fang, L., "Security Framework for MPLS and GMPLS
              Networks", RFC 5920, July 2010.





Jeganathan, et al.      Expires January 31, 2014               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft   2547 egress PE Fast Failure Protection        July 2013


   [RFC5286]  Atlas, A. and A. Zinin, "Basic Specification for IP Fast
              Reroute: Loop-Free Alternates", RFC 5286, September 2008.

   [RFC5714]  Shand, M. and S. Bryant, "IP Fast Reroute Framework", RFC
              5714, January 2010.

   [rsvp-egress-frr]
              Jeganathan, J., Gredler, H., and Y. Shen, "IP Fast Reroute
              Framework", draft-minto-rsvp-lsp-egress-fast-protection-01
              (work in progress), Oct 2012, <rsvp egress frr>.

Authors' Addresses

   Jeyananth Minto Jeganathan
   Juniper Networks
   1194 N Mathilda Avenue
   Sunnyvale, CA  94089
   USA

   Email: minto@juniper.net


   Hannes Gredler
   Juniper Networks
   1194 N Mathilda Avenue
   Sunnyvale, CA  94089
   USA

   Email: hannes@juniper.net


   Bruno Decraene
   France Telecom - Orange
   38 rue du General Leclerc
   Issy Moulineaux cedex 9  92794
   France

   Email: bruno.decraene@orange.com













Jeganathan, et al.      Expires January 31, 2014               [Page 14]
