


DISPATCH Working Group                                      R. Jain, Ed.
Internet-Draft                                               IPC Systems
Intended status: Standards Track                              V. Gurbani
Expires: March 12, 2010                Bell Laboratories, Alcatel-Lucent
                                                               H. Kaplan
                                                              AcmePacket
                                                       September 8, 2009


Reusing Transport Layer Connections in Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)
         draft-jain-dispatch-sip-transport-connection-reuse-00

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.  This document may contain material
   from IETF Documents or IETF Contributions published or made publicly
   available before November 10, 2008.  The person(s) controlling the
   copyright in some of this material may not have granted the IETF
   Trust the right to allow modifications of such material outside the
   IETF Standards Process.  Without obtaining an adequate license from
   the person(s) controlling the copyright in such materials, this
   document may not be modified outside the IETF Standards Process, and
   derivative works of it may not be created outside the IETF Standards
   Process, except to format it for publication as an RFC or to
   translate it into languages other than English.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on March 12, 2010.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2009 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the



Jain, et al.             Expires March 12, 2010                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft           Connection Reuse in SIP          September 2009


   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents in effect on the date of
   publication of this document (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info).
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.

Abstract

   The current Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) specification dictates
   that a transport layer connection can carry SIP requests in only one
   direction i.e. from the client to the server.  This presents
   scalability problems as twice the number of connections are needed
   for each pair of SIP entities that communicate with each other.  The
   internet-draft [I-D.ietf-sip-connect-reuse] specifies a mechanism for
   reusing SIP over TLS connections.  However, that document is
   predicated on secure TLS mutual authentication and specifically
   refrains connection reuse for transports such as SIP over TCP and
   SCTP.  There are many situations, such as in Trust Domains [RFC3324],
   where TLS mutual authentication may not be required but where
   connection reuse is beneficial.  This document specifies connection
   reuse for SIP over connection-oriented transports such as TCP and
   SCTP.  It specifies the same mechanism for connection reuse as
   specified in [I-D.ietf-sip-connect-reuse], however, the solution is
   presented in the context of Trust Domains.

























Jain, et al.             Expires March 12, 2010                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft           Connection Reuse in SIP          September 2009


Table of Contents

   1.  Requirements notation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.  Applicability Statement  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   4.  Benefits of TCP, SCTP Connection Reuse . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   5.  Overview of operation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   6.  Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   7.  Formal Syntax  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   8.  Normative Behavior . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     8.1.  Client Behavior  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     8.2.  Server Behavior  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     8.3.  Closing a TCP or SCTP connection . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   9.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   10. IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   11. References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     11.1. Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     11.2. Informational References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
































Jain, et al.             Expires March 12, 2010                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft           Connection Reuse in SIP          September 2009


1.  Requirements notation

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].

   This document uses the concepts of Trust Domain and Spec(T), as
   specified in section 2.3 of RFC 3324 [RFC3324].

   This document uses the same terminology as defined in section 1 of
   [I-D.ietf-sip-connect-reuse].


2.  Applicability Statement

   This document describes a mechanism that allows two SIP entities
   separated by a single hop that communicate over a connection-oriented
   transport protocol (e.g.  TCP, SCTP) to reuse a connection for SIP
   requests sent in both directions.  Many existing SIP implementations
   currently support this feature in their own proprietary ways.  This
   document standardizes a mechanism for SIP over TCP and SCTP
   connection reuse.

   This document makes use of the same SIP extension for connection
   reuse as the one specified in [I-D.ietf-sip-connect-reuse], expect
   that the security considerations in this document are different.
   This document assumes that the SIP entities that make use of this
   mechanism are in a Trust Domain [RFC3324] or they have mutually
   authenticated themselves through some other means.  Therefore, unlike
   [I-D.ietf-sip-connect-reuse], this document does not mandate TLS
   mutual authentication as a prerequisite for connection reuse.


3.  Introduction

   The current Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) [RFC3261] specification
   dictates that a transport layer connection can carry SIP requests in
   only one direction i.e. from the client to the server.  This
   characteristic of SIP presents scalability problems as typically
   twice the number of connections are needed for each pair of SIP
   entities that communicate with each other.

   The client and server roles in SIP are transactional.  Therefore,
   there is no fundamental reason why SIP initiated connections cannot
   be reused for requests in both directions.  An existing internet-
   draft [I-D.ietf-sip-connect-reuse] proposes a mechanism for reusing
   SIP over TLS connections.  However, that specification is predicated
   on secure TLS mutual authentication and specifically refrains



Jain, et al.             Expires March 12, 2010                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft           Connection Reuse in SIP          September 2009


   connection reuse for transports such as SIP over TCP and SCTP.

   There are many situations, such as in Trust Domains [RFC3324], where
   TLS mutual authentication is not required but where connection reuse
   is beneficial.  This document enables connection reuse for SIP over
   TCP and SCTP transports.  This document uses the same SIP extension
   for connection reuse as in [I-D.ietf-sip-connect-reuse] (the Via
   "alias" parameter), expect that the security considerations in this
   document are different.

   This document assumes that the SIP entities that make use of the
   mechanism described here are in a Trust Domain [RFC3324] or they have
   mutually authenticated themselves through some other means.
   Therefore, unlike [I-D.ietf-sip-connect-reuse], this document does
   not mandate TLS mutual authentication as a prerequisite for
   connection reuse.

   In the interest of avoiding duplication, this document only describes
   its differences from the SIP over TLS connection reuse document
   [I-D.ietf-sip-connect-reuse].  It frequently refers to the sections
   of [I-D.ietf-sip-connect-reuse] wherever there is commonality between
   the two documents.

   Section 3 of [I-D.ietf-sip-connect-reuse] describes the uni-
   directional nature of connections for SIP requests in the current SIP
   specification and how their reuse is possible.  That discussion also
   applies to SIP over TCP and SCTP transports and therefore this
   document.


4.  Benefits of TCP, SCTP Connection Reuse

   Section 4 of [I-D.ietf-sip-connect-reuse] describes the benefits of
   TLS connection reuse.  Many of the benefits of TLS connection reuse
   also apply to TCP and SCTP connection reuse.  Each new TCP connection
   requires a 3-way handshake.  Each new SCTP association requires a
   4-way handshake.  These handshakes contribute to latency, post-dial
   delay, media clipping etc.  Section 4 of [I-D.ietf-sip-connect-reuse]
   describes scenarios such as call flows involving frequent mid-dialog
   messages where connection reuse proves highly advantageous.

   Connections consume resources on both hosts that terminate a
   connection.  Connections require state management and periodic
   maintenance and therefore consume computing resources on both ends.
   This presents scalability and performance problems.  Therefore, any
   technique that allows SIP entities to conserve and reuse connections
   is beneficial.




Jain, et al.             Expires March 12, 2010                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft           Connection Reuse in SIP          September 2009


5.  Overview of operation

   Section 5 of [I-D.ietf-sip-connect-reuse] provides a tutorial on the
   operation of SIP over TLS connection reuse.  Almost all of the
   discussion in that section including concepts such as the Via "alias"
   parameter, the columns in the alias table, the way RFC 3263 rules are
   applied are also applicable to SIP over TCP and SCTP connection
   reuse.  The mention of TLS in the alias table and Via header example
   should be replaced with TCP or SCTP.  In addition, any steps
   pertaining to X.509 certificate exchange should be ignored.


6.  Requirements

   Section 6 of [I-D.ietf-sip-connect-reuse] lists various requirements
   behind its proposed SIP over TLS connection reuse solution.  All of
   those requirements apply to SIP over TCP and SCTP connection reuse as
   well.  This document imposes an additional requirement:

   1.  The SIP entities that utilize the connection sharing mechanism
   MUST be members of a Trust Domain, T, and must comply to its Spec(T),
   as defined in section 2.3 of RFC 3324 [RFC3324].


7.  Formal Syntax

   Section 7 of [I-D.ietf-sip-connect-reuse] presents the formal syntax
   of the Via header "alias" parameter.  The SIP over TCP and SCTP
   connection reuse mechanism uses the same parameter and the same
   formal definition.


8.  Normative Behavior

   This section is largely a duplication of section 8 of
   [I-D.ietf-sip-connect-reuse] except that all the normative text
   surrounding TLS and X.509 certificate exchange has not been carried
   over.  Given that this section contains normative text, the authors
   felt that repetition of text from section 8 of
   [I-D.ietf-sip-connect-reuse] is necessary.  The repetition is not
   verbatim, however.  The text has been modified to reflect SIP over
   TCP and SCTP connection reuse.

8.1.  Client Behavior

   Clients SHOULD keep connections up as long as they are needed.
   Connection reuse works best when the client and the server maintain
   their connections for long periods of time.  Clients, therefore,



Jain, et al.             Expires March 12, 2010                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft           Connection Reuse in SIP          September 2009


   SHOULD NOT automatically drop connections on completion of a
   transaction or termination of a dialog.

   The proposed mechanism uses the Via header field parameter specified
   in [I-D.ietf-sip-connect-reuse].  The "alias" header field parameter
   is included in a Via header field value to indicate that the client
   wants to create a transport layer alias.  The client places its
   advertised address in the Via header field value (in the "sent-by"
   production).

   If the client places an "alias" header field parameter in the topmost
   Via header of the request, the client MUST keep the connection open
   for as long as the resources on the host operating system allow it
   to, and that the client MUST accept requests over this connection --
   in addition to the default listening port -- from its downstream
   peer.  And furthermore, the client SHOULD reuse the connection when
   subsequent requests in the same or different transactions are
   destined to the same resolved address.

   Whether or not to allow an aliased connection ultimately depends on
   the recipient of the request; i.e., the client does not get any
   confirmation that its downstream peer created the alias, or indeed
   that it even supports this specification.  Thus, clients MUST NOT
   assume that the acceptance of a request by a server automatically
   enables connection aliasing.  Clients MUST continue receiving
   requests on their default port.

   The client MUST also populate the destination IP address, port, and
   transport of the server in the alias table; these fields are
   retrieved from executing RFC3263 server resolution process on the
   next hop URI.  And finally, the client MUST populate the alias
   descriptor field with the connection handle (or identifier) used to
   connect to the server.

   Once the alias table has been updated with a resolved address, and
   the client wants to send a new request in the direction of the
   server, the client reuses the connection only if all of the following
   conditions hold:

   1.  The client uses the RFC3263 resolution on a URI and arrives at a
   resolved address contained in the alias table, and

   2.  The URI used for RFC3263 server resolution matches one of the
   identities stored in the alias table row corresponding to that
   resolved address.

   Clients MUST be prepared for the case that the connection no longer
   exists when they are ready to send a subsequent request over it.  In



Jain, et al.             Expires March 12, 2010                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft           Connection Reuse in SIP          September 2009


   such a case, a new connection MUST be opened to the resolved address
   and the alias table updated accordingly.

   This behavior has an adverse side effect when a CANCEL request or an
   ACK request for a non-2xx response is sent downstream.  Normally,
   these would be sent over the same connection that the INVITE request
   was sent over.  However, if between the sending of the INVITE request
   and subsequent sending of the CANCEL request or ACK request to a non-
   2xx response, the connection was reclaimed, then the client SHOULD
   open a new connection to the resolved address and send the CANCEL
   request or ACK request there instead.  The client MAY insert the
   newly opened connection into the alias table.

8.2.  Server Behavior

   Servers SHOULD keep connections up unless they need to reclaim
   resources.  Connection reuse works best when the client and the
   server maintain their connections for long periods of time.  Servers,
   therefore, SHOULD NOT automatically drop connections on completion of
   a transaction or termination of a dialog.

   When a server receives a request over TCP and SCTP whose topmost Via
   header field contains an "alias" header field parameter, it signifies
   that the upstream client will leave the connection open beyond the
   transaction and dialog lifetime, and that subsequent transactions and
   dialogs that are destined to a resolved address that matches the
   identifiers in the advertised address in the topmost Via header field
   can reuse this connection.

   Whether or not to use in the reverse direction a connection marked
   with the "alias" Via header field parameter ultimately depends on the
   policies of the server.  It can choose to honor it, and thereby send
   subsequent requests over the aliased connection.  If the server
   chooses not to honor an aliased connection, the server MUST allow the
   request to proceed as though the "alias" header field parameter was
   not present in the topmost Via header.

   This assures interoperability with [RFC3261] server behavior.
   Clients can include the "alias" header field parameter without fear
   that the server will reject the SIP request because of its presence.

   Servers MUST be prepared to deal with the case that the aliased
   connection no longer exists when they are ready to send a subsequent
   request over it.  This can happen if the peer ran out of operating
   system resources and had to close the connection.  In such a case,
   the server MUST open a new connection to the resolved address and the
   alias table updated accordingly.




Jain, et al.             Expires March 12, 2010                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft           Connection Reuse in SIP          September 2009


   If the sent-by production of the Via header field contains a port,
   the server MUST use it as a destination port.  Otherwise the default
   port is the destination port.

   The server also populates the destination IP address, port and
   transport in the alias table from the topmost Via header field (using
   the ";received" parameter for the destination IP address).  If the
   port number is omitted, a default port number of 5060 is to be used.
   And finally, the server populates the alias descriptor field with the
   connection handle (or identifier) used to accept the connection from
   the client (see Section 5 for the contents of the alias table.)

   Once the alias table has been updated, and the server wants to send a
   request in the direction of the client, it reuses the connection only
   if all of the following conditions hold:

   1.  The server, which acts as a client for this transaction, uses the
   RFC3263 resolution process on a URI and arrives at a resolved address
   contained in the alias table, and

   2.  The URI used for RFC3263 server resolution matches one of the
   identities stored in the alias table row corresponding to that
   resolved address.

8.3.  Closing a TCP or SCTP connection

   Either the client or the server may terminate a TCP or SCTP
   connection.  Before closing a TCP or SCTP connection, the initiator
   of the closure MUST either wait for any outstanding SIP transactions
   to complete, or explicitly abandon them.

   After one side has gracefully initiated connection termination (e.g.
   by sending FIN message in TCP or SHUTDOWN message in SCTP), it MUST
   discard any TCP or SCTP messages until it has received an
   acknowledgement of the same from its peer.  The receiver of the
   connection termination message MUST NOT start any new SIP
   transactions after the receipt of that message.


9.  Security Considerations

   This specification assumes that the entities that make use of the SIP
   connection reuse mechanism described here are members of a Trust
   Domain, T, and they comply with its Spec(T), as defined in section
   2.3 of RFC 3324 [RFC3324].  Connection reuse outside of a Trust
   Domain or between different Trust Domains is specified in SIP over
   TLS connection reuse specification [I-D.ietf-sip-connect-reuse].




Jain, et al.             Expires March 12, 2010                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft           Connection Reuse in SIP          September 2009


10.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no IANA actions.


11.  References

11.1.  Normative References

   [I-D.ietf-sip-connect-reuse]
              Gurbani, V., Mahy, R., and B. Tate, "Connection Reuse in
              the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)",
              draft-ietf-sip-connect-reuse-14 (work in progress),
              August 2009.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC3261]  Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., Camarillo, G., Johnston,
              A., Peterson, J., Sparks, R., Handley, M., and E.
              Schooler, "SIP: Session Initiation Protocol", RFC 3261,
              June 2002.

11.2.  Informational References

   [RFC3324]  Watson, M., "Short Term Requirements for Network Asserted
              Identity", RFC 3324, November 2002.


Authors' Addresses

   Rajnish Jain (editor)
   IPC Systems
   777 Commerce Drive
   Fairfield, CT  06825
   USA

   Email: rajnish.jain@ipc.com













Jain, et al.             Expires March 12, 2010                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft           Connection Reuse in SIP          September 2009


   Vijay Gurbani
   Bell Laboratories, Alcatel-Lucent
   2000 Lucent Lane
   Rm 6G-440
   Naperville, IL  60566
   USA

   Email: vkg@lucent.com


   Hadriel Kaplan
   AcmePacket
   71 Third Ave.
   Burlington, MA  01803
   USA

   Email: hkaplan@acmepacket.com


































Jain, et al.             Expires March 12, 2010                [Page 11]


