


Network Working Group                                    Pierre Francois
Internet-Draft                                            IMDEA Networks
Intended status: Standards Track                       Clarence Filsfils
Expires: January 2, 2014                                  Ahmed Bashandy
                                                         Stefano Previdi
                                                     Cisco Systems, Inc.
                                                          Bruno Decraene
                                                                  Orange
                                                            July 1, 2013


                      Segment Routing Fast Reroute
                        draft-francois-sr-frr-00

Abstract

   This document presents a Fast Reroute approach aimed at providing
   link protection of nodal and adjacency segments to the Segment
   Routing framework.  This FRR behavior builds on proven IP-FRR
   concepts being LFAs, remote LFAs (RLFA), and remote LFAs with
   directed forwarding (DLFA).  We describe their implementation using
   SR segments.  We then analyze the benefits brought by Segment Routing
   to the scalability of such IP-FRR approaches.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 2, 2014.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents



Pierre Francois, et al.  Expires January 2, 2014                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                   SR FRR                        July 2013


   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Protection lists . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     2.1.  LFA based protection list  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     2.2.  RLFA based protection list . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     2.3.  DLFA based protection list . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   3.  Protecting segments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     3.1.  The active segment is a node segment . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     3.2.  The active segment is an adjacency segment . . . . . . . .  6
       3.2.1.  Protecting [Adjacency, Adjacency] segment lists  . . .  6
       3.2.2.  Protecting [Adjacency, Nodal] segment lists  . . . . .  6
   4.  SR FRR benefits in LDP environments  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     4.1.  Eliminating Directed LDP Sessions  . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     4.2.  Guaranteed FRR coverage  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   5.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11

























Pierre Francois, et al.  Expires January 2, 2014                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                   SR FRR                        July 2013


1.  Introduction

   Segment Routing aims at supporting services with tight SLA guarantees
   [1].  Acknowledging this fact, this document provides local repair
   mechanisms capable of restoring end-to-end connectivity in case of a
   sudden failure of a link.  The FRR behavior builds on proven IP-FRR
   concepts; we leverage LFAs, remote LFAs (RLFA), and remote LFAs with
   directed forwarding (DLFA)[2].

   In the SR context, not all flows are being routed along the shortest
   paths defined by the IGP, but also along explicit paths containing
   Adjacency Segments.  We thus accommodate the IP-FRR behavior for SR
   Adjacency Segments.

   Through the document, we will observe that performing FRR with SR has
   the following benefits:

      - The simplicity properties of LFA FRR [3] are preserved.
      - The capacity planning properties are preserved [3].  Unlike SDH
      and other FRR solutions, the repaired packet does not go back to
      the next-hop or next-next-hop but uses shortest-path forwarding
      from a much closer release point.
      - The RLFA operation is simplified: dynamically established
      directed LDP sessions to the repair nodes are no longer required.
      - The scalable support for DLFA provides guaranteed coverage for
      symmetric networks, i.e. networks configured with symmetric link
      metrics: the repair tunnel in a symmetric network can be encoded
      efficiently with only two segments.  We will observe that only one
      segment is needed in most cases.

   A future version of this document will analyze the protection upon
   node failure.





                                 L         ____
                            S----------F--{____}--D
                           _|_       ___________ /
                          {___}--R--{___________}



                         Figure 1: Link Protection

   We use Figure 1 to illustrate the three objectives that have to be
   met when implementing SR FRR.



Pierre Francois, et al.  Expires January 2, 2014                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                   SR FRR                        July 2013


   First, the protecting router S needs to find a detour path around the
   protected link.  Intuitively, the Point of Local Repair (PLR) needs
   to find a node R (a repair node) that is capable of safely forwarding
   the traffic affected by the failure of the protected link L. We
   leverage the algorithms defined in the IP-FRR framework to achieve
   this first goal, as explained in Section 2.

   Second, S must ensure proper forwarding behavior once the packet
   reaches the repair node R. We define the segment operations to be
   applied by the protecting node to ensure consistency with the
   forwarding state of the repair node in Section 3.

   We will observe, in Section 4, that the MPLS instantiation of SR
   improves the scalability and operation of the FRR solution by not
   requiring multi-hop LDP sessions to distant repair nodes.


2.  Protection lists

   The protection list is the list of segments encoding a detour path
   from the protecting node S to the repair node R, avoiding the
   protected link L. In this section, we define how to encode the LFA,
   RLFA, and DLFA repair paths with protection lists.  These protection
   lists contain at most two segments.

2.1.  LFA based protection list

   According to the LFA FRR approach, if a path to a destination D from
   a neighbor N of S does not contain S (i.e.  N is a loop-free
   alternate of S for the failure of link S-F), then S can pre-install a
   repair forwarding information, in order to deviate the packet to N
   upon the failure of S-F.

   In the case of LFA applicability, the SR protection list is thus
   empty.  All what a protecting router S needs to do is to send the
   protected packet as is to its LFA neighbor N.

2.2.  RLFA based protection list

   If there is no such LFA neighbor, then S may be able to create a
   virtual LFA by using a tunnel to carry the packet to a point in the
   network that is not a direct neighbor of S, and from which the packet
   will be delivered to the destination without looping back to S. The
   Remote LFA proposal [4] calls such a tunnel a repair tunnel.  The
   tail-end of this tunnel (R in figure 1) is called a "remote LFA" or a
   "PQ node".  We refer to the RLFA document for the definitions of the
   P and Q sets.




Pierre Francois, et al.  Expires January 2, 2014                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                   SR FRR                        July 2013


   In the case of RLFA applicability for the protection of a segment,
   the protection list is made of a nodal segment to the PQ node.  It
   thus matches [nodal(PQ), ...]

2.3.  DLFA based protection list

   There are some cases where there is no remote LFA coverage for some
   links/destinations, due to topological properties in the neighborhood
   of the protecting node.  If there is no such RLFA PQ node, we propose
   to use a Directed LFA (DLFA) repair tunnel to a Q node that is
   adjacent to the P space [5].

   In the case of applicability of RLFA with directed forwarding (DLFA),
   the protection list is made of a nodal segment to the P node followed
   by an Adjacency segment to the Q node.  It thus matches [nodal(P),
   Adj(P-->Q), ...]

   In networks with symmetric IGP metrics (the metric of a link AB is
   the same as the metric of the reverse link BA), we can prove that
   either the P and the Q sets intersect or there is at least one P node
   that is adjacent to a Q node.  Thanks to the DLFA extension, we thus
   have a guaranteed LFA-based FRR technique for any network with
   symmetric IGP metrics.

   Future versions of the document will describe the solutions
   leveraging SR capabilities to provide guaranteed FRR applicability in
   any IGP topology.


3.  Protecting segments

   In this section, we explain how a protecting router S processes the
   active segment of a packet upon the failure of the primary adjacency
   along which the packet should be forwarded.  The behavior depends on
   the type of active segment to be protected.

3.1.  The active segment is a node segment

   The definition of the protection of a nodal segment is a direct
   translation of IP-FRR behaviors into the SR terminology.  That is,
   traffic for nodal segment D will be rerouted to a safe node R whose
   shortest paths for D do not contain the failed component.

   As nodal segments semantics are known by all nodes of the domain, no
   specific signaling needs to be done to let R correctly process the
   detoured packet.  A packet whose active segment matches
   [nodal(D),...], arriving at a protecting node S will leave S with a
   segment list matching [PS(R), nodal(D),...].  The actual value used



Pierre Francois, et al.  Expires January 2, 2014                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                   SR FRR                        July 2013


   to encode nodal(D) is set by S based on the SRSB obtained from the
   IGP [1].

   PS(R) is the computed Protection list to reach R, as discussed in
   section 2, and depends on the available type of protection: per-
   prefix LFA, Remote LFA or Directed LFA.  The packet will follow the
   detour path defined by PS(R), and will finally reach R. When reaching
   R, the active segment of the packet is nodal(D), and the packet
   resumes its course along the original segment list.

3.2.  The active segment is an adjacency segment

   The operator may forbid protection of an adjacency segment by policy
   (?-Flag in [ISIS]/[OSPF]).  For example, this is useful when the
   operator prefers an end-to-end protection mechanism triggered by the
   source of a multi-hop transport conduit.

   We define hereafter the FRR behavior applied by S for any packet
   received with an active segment L for which protection was enabled.
   We distinguish the case where this active segment is followed by
   another adjacency segment from the case where it is followed by a
   nodal segment.

3.2.1.  Protecting [Adjacency, Adjacency] segment lists

   If the next segment in the list is an Adjacency Segment, then the
   packet has to be conveyed to F.

   To do so, S applies a "NEXT" operation on Adj(L) and then two
   consecutive "PUSH" operations: first it pushes a nodal Segment for F,
   and then it pushes a protection list allowing to reach F while
   bypassing L.

   Upon failure of L, a packet reaching S with a segment list matching
   [adj(L),adj(M),...] will thus leave S with a segment list matching
   [PS(F),nodal(F),adj(M)].

   The protection list PS(F) will define the course of the packet from S
   to F, and F will resume the the course of the original segment list,
   receiving it with an active segment list matching [nodal(F),
   adj(M),...].

3.2.2.  Protecting [Adjacency, Nodal] segment lists

   If the next segment in the stack is a nodal segment, say for node T,
   the packet segment list matches [adj(L),nodal(T),...].

   A first solution would consist in steering the packet back to F while



Pierre Francois, et al.  Expires January 2, 2014                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                   SR FRR                        July 2013


   avoiding L, similarly to the previous case.  To do so, S applies a
   "NEXT" operation on Adj(L) and then two consecutive "PUSH"
   operations: first it pushes a nodal Segment for F, and then it pushes
   a protection list allowing to reach F while bypassing L.

   Upon failure of L, a packet reaching S with a segment list matching
   [adj(L),nodal(T),...] will thus leave S with a segment list matching
   [PS(F),nodal(F),nodal(T)].

   Another solution is to not steer the packet back via F. In this case,
   S just needs to apply a "NEXT" operation on the Adjacency segment
   related to L, and push a protection segment list redirecting the
   traffic to a node R, capable of whose path to nodal segment T is not
   affected by the failure.

   Upon failure of L, packets reaching S with a segment list matching
   [adj(L), nodal(T), ...], would leave S with a segment list matching
   [PS(R),nodal(T), ...].


4.  SR FRR benefits in LDP environments

   In this section, we describe the operational and scaling benefits of
   SR when used to implement RLFA and DLFA protection for LDP-based
   transport.  We will also observe that a partial SR deployment,
   limited to the network region where the SR benefits are most desired,
   already provides the mentioned scaling benefits.


                                      X
                                      |
                               Y--A---B---E--Z
                                  |   |    \
                                  D---C--F--G
                                          30



          Figure 2: Leveraging SR benefits for LDP-based traffic

   In Figure 2, let us assume:
      - All link costs are 10 except FG which is 30.
      - All routers are LDP capable.
      - X, Y and Z are PEs participating to an important service S.
      - The operator requires 50msec link-based FRR for service S.
      - A, B, C, D, E, F and G are SR capable.





Pierre Francois, et al.  Expires January 2, 2014                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                   SR FRR                        July 2013


      - X, Y, Z are not SR capable.  As part of a staged migration from
      LDP to SR, the operator deploys SR first in a sub-part of the
      network and then everywhere.

   The operator would like to resolve the following issues:
      - to protect the link BA along the shortest-path of the important
      flow XY, B requires an RLFA repair tunnel to D and hence a
      directed LDP session from B to D. The operator does not like these
      dynamically established multi-hop LDP sessions and would seek to
      eliminate them.
      - there is no LFA/RLFA solution to protect the link BE along the
      shortest path of the important flow XZ.  The operator wants a
      guaranteed link-based FRR solution.

   The operator can meet these objectives by deploying SR only on A, B,
   C, D, E and F:
      - The operator configures A, B, C, D, E, F and G with SRGB [100,
      200] and respective node segments 101, 102, 103, 104, 105, 106 and
      107.
      - The operator configures D as an SR Mapping Server with the
      following policy mapping: (X, 201), (Y, 202), (Z, 203}.
      - Each SR node automatically advertises local adjacency segment
      for its IGP adjacencies.  Specifically, F advertises adjacency
      segment 9001 for its adjacency FG.

   A, B, C, D, E, F and G keep their LDP capability and hence the flows
   XY and XZ are transported over end-to-end LDP LSP's.

   For example, LDP at B installs the following MPLS dataplane entries:
      - Incoming label: local LDB label bound by B for FEC Y
         o Outgoing label: LDP label bound by A for FEC Y
         o Outgoing nhop: A
      - Incoming label: local LDB label bound by B for FEC Z
         o Outgoing label: LDP label bound by E for FEC Z
         o Outgoing nhop: E

   The novelty comes from how the backup chains are computed for these
   LDP-based entries.  While LDP labels are used for the primary nhop
   and outgoing labels, SR information is used for the FRR construction.
   In steady state, the traffic is transported over LDP LSP.  In
   transient FRR state, the traffic is backed up thanks to the SR
   capabilities.

   This helps meet the requirements of the operator:
      - Eliminate directed LDP session
      - Guaranteed FRR coverage





Pierre Francois, et al.  Expires January 2, 2014                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                   SR FRR                        July 2013


      - Keep the traffic over LDP LSP in steady state
      - Partial SR deployment only where needed

4.1.  Eliminating Directed LDP Sessions

   B's MPLS entry to Y becomes:
      - Incoming label: local LDB label bound by B for FEC Y
         o Outgoing label: LDP label bound by A for FEC Y
         - Backup outgoing label: SR node segment for Y {202}
         o Outgoing nhop: A
         - Backup nhop: repair tunnel: node segment to D {104} with
         outgoing nhop: C

   In steady-state, X sends its Y-destined traffic to B with a top label
   which is the LDP label bound by B for FEC Y. B swaps that top label
   for the LDP label bound by A for FEC Y and forwards to A. A pops the
   LDP label and forwards to Y.

   Upon failure of the link BA, B swaps the incoming top-label with the
   node segment for Y (202) and sends the packet onto a repair tunnel to
   D (node segment 104).  Thus, B sends the packet to C with the label
   stack {104, 202}.  C pops the node segment 104 and forwards to D. D
   swaps 202 for 202 and forwards to A. A's nhop to Y is not SR capable
   and hence A swaps the incoming node segment 202 to the LDP label
   announced by its next-hop (in this case, implicit null).

   After IGP convergence, B's MPLS entry to Y will become:
      Incoming label: local LDB label bound by B for FEC Y
         Outgoing label: LDP label bound by C for FEC Y
         Outgoing nhop: C

   And the traffic XY travels again over the LDP LSP.

   The operator has eliminated its first problem: dynamically
   established directed LDP sessions are no longer required and the
   steady-state traffic is still transported over LDP.  The SR
   deployment is confined to the area where these benefits were
   required.

4.2.  Guaranteed FRR coverage

   B's MPLS entry to Z becomes:
      - Incoming label: local LDB label bound by B for FEC Z
         - Outgoing label: LDP label bound by E for FEC Z
         o Backup outgoing label: SR node segment for Z {203}
         - Outgoing nhop: E





Pierre Francois, et al.  Expires January 2, 2014                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft                   SR FRR                        July 2013


         o Backup nhop: repair tunnel to G: {106, 9001}
            - G is reachable from B via the combination of a node
            segment to F {106} and an adjacency segment FG {9001}
            - Note that {106, 107} would have equally work.  Indeed, in
            many case, P's shortest path to Q is over the link PQ.  The
            adjacency segment from P to Q is required only in very rare
            topologies where the shortest-path from P to Q is not via
            the link PQ.

   In steady-state, X sends its Z-destined traffic to B with a top label
   which is the LDP label bound by B for FEC Z. B swaps that top label
   for the LDP label bound by E for FEC Z and forwards to E. E pops the
   LDP label and forwards to Z.

   Upon failure of the link BE, B swaps the incoming top-label with the
   node segment for Z (203) and sends the packet onto a repair tunnel to
   G (node segment 106 followed by adjacency segment 9001).  Thus, B
   sends the packet to C with the label stack {106, 9001, 203}.  C pops
   the node segment 106 and forwards to F. F pops the adjacency segment
   9001 and forwards to G. G swaps 203 for 203 and forwards to E. E's
   nhop to Z is not SR capable and hence E swaps the incoming node
   segment 203 for the LDP label announced by its next-hop (in this
   case, implicit null).

   After IGP convergence, B's MPLS entry to Z will become:
      - Incoming label: local LDB label bound by B for FEC Z
         o Outgoing label: LDP label bound by C for FEC Z
         o Outgoing nhop: C

   And the traffic XZ travels again over the LDP LSP.

   The operator has eliminated its second problem: guaranteed FRR
   coverage is provided.  The steady-state traffic is still transported
   over LDP.  The SR deployment is confined to the area where these
   benefits are required.


5.  References

   [1]  Filsfils, C., Previdi, S., Bashandy, A., Decraene, B.,
        Litkowski, S., Horneffer, M., Milojevic, I., Shakir, R., Ytti,
        S., Henderickx, W., Tantsura, J., and E. Crabbe, "Segment
        Routing Architecture", draft-filsfils-rtgwg-segment-routing-00
        (work in progress), June 2013.

   [2]  Shand, M. and S. Bryant, "IP Fast Reroute Framework", RFC 5714,
        January 2010.




Pierre Francois, et al.  Expires January 2, 2014               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft                   SR FRR                        July 2013


   [3]  Filsfils, C., Francois, P., Shand, M., Decraene, B., Uttaro, J.,
        Leymann, N., and M. Horneffer, "Loop-Free Alternate (LFA)
        Applicability in Service Provider (SP) Networks", RFC 6571,
        June 2012.

   [4]  Bryant, S., Filsfils, C., Previdi, S., Shand, M., and S. Ning,
        "Remote LFA FRR", draft-ietf-rtgwg-remote-lfa-02 (work in
        progress), May 2013.

   [5]  Bryant, S., Filsfils, C., Previdi, S., and M. Shand, "IP Fast
        Reroute using tunnels", draft-bryant-ipfrr-tunnels-03 (work in
        progress), November 2007.


Authors' Addresses

   Pierre Francois
   IMDEA Networks
   Leganes
   ES

   Email: pierre.francois@imdea.org


   Clarence Filsfils
   Cisco Systems, Inc.
   Brussels
   BE

   Email: cfilsfil@cisco.com


   Ahmed Bashandy
   Cisco Systems, Inc.
   San Jose
   US

   Email: bashandy@cisco.com


   Stefano Previdi
   Cisco Systems, Inc.
   Rome
   IT

   Email: sprevidi@cisco.com





Pierre Francois, et al.  Expires January 2, 2014               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft                   SR FRR                        July 2013


   Bruno Decraene
   Orange
   Issy-les-Moulineaux
   FR

   Email: bruno.decraene@orange.com













































Pierre Francois, et al.  Expires January 2, 2014               [Page 12]

