


Network Working Group                                         A. Kirkham
Internet-Draft                                             Cisco Systems
Obsoletes:  None                                           April 5, 2010
(if approved)
Intended status:  Informational
Expires:  October 7, 2010


           Issues with Private IP Addressing in the Internet
                  draft-kirkham-private-ip-sp-cores-00

Abstract

   The purpose of this document is to provide a discussion of the
   potential problems of using private, RFC1918, or non-globally-
   routable addressing within the core of an SP network.  The discussion
   focuses on link addresses and to a small extent loopback addresses.
   While many of the issues are well recognised within the ISP
   community, there appears to be no document that collectively
   describes the issues.

Legal

   This documents and the information contained therein are provided on
   an "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE
   REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE
   IETF TRUST AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL
   WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY
   WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION THEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE
   ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS
   FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on October 7, 2010.



Kirkham                  Expires October 7, 2010                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft             private-ip-sp-cores                April 2010


Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Conservation of Address Space  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   3.  Breaks Traceroute  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   4.  Breaks Path MTU Discovery  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   5.  Unexpected interactions with some NAT implementations  . . . .  6
   6.  Issues with edge anti-spoofing techniques  . . . . . . . . . .  7
   7.  Peering using loopbacks  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   8.  DNS Interaction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   9.  Operational and Troubleshooting issues . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   10. Security Arguments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   11. Issues with core network security  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   12. Alternate approaches to core network security  . . . . . . . . 10
   13. Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   14. Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   Appendix A.  Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11

















Kirkham                  Expires October 7, 2010                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft             private-ip-sp-cores                April 2010


1.  Introduction

   In the mid to late 90's, some Internet Service Providers (ISPs)
   adopted the practice of utilising private IP (i.e.  RFC1918)
   addresses for the infrastructure links and in some cases the loopback
   interfaces within their networks.  The reasons for this approach
   centered on conservation of address space (i.e. scarcity of routeable
   IPv4 address space), and security of the core network (also known as
   core hiding).

   However, a number of technical and operational issues occurred as a
   result of using non-routable IP addresses, and as a result, virtually
   all these ISPs moved away from the practice.  Tier 1 ISPs are
   considered the benchmark of the industry and today there is no known
   tier 1 ISP that utilises the practice of private addressing within
   their core network.

   The following sections will discuss the various issues (and potential
   issues) associated with deploying private IP (i.e.  RFC1918)
   addresses within ISP core networks.

   Note:  The practice of ISPs using 'stolen' address space has many of
   the same issues as that of using private IP address space within core
   networks.  The term "stolen IP address space" refers to the practice
   of an ISP using address space for its own infrastructure/core network
   addressing that has been officially allocated by IANA (or an RIR) to
   another provider but that that provider is not currently using or
   advertising within the Internet.  Stolen addressing is not discussed
   further in this document.  It is simply noted as an associated issue.


2.  Conservation of Address Space

   One of the original intents for the use of private IP addressing
   within an ISP core was the conservation of routeable IP address
   space.  When an ISP is allocated a block of routeable IP addresses
   (from IANA or an RIR), this address block was traditionally split in
   order to dedicate some portion for infrastructure use (i.e. for the
   core network), and the other portion for customer (subscriber) or
   other address pool use.  Typically, the number of infrastructure
   addresses needed is relatively small in comparison to the total
   address count.  So unless the ISP was only granted a small routable
   block, dedicating some portion to infrastructure links and loopback
   addresses (/32) is rarely a large enough issue to outweigh the
   problems that are potentially caused when the private address space
   is used as being discussed.

   Additionally, specifications and equipment capability improvements



Kirkham                  Expires October 7, 2010                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft             private-ip-sp-cores                April 2010


   now allow for the use of /31s [RFC3021] for link addresses in place
   of the original /30s - further minimises the impact of dedicating
   routeable addresses to infrastructure links by only using two (2) ip
   address per point to point link versus four (4) respectively.

   The use of private or RFC1918 addressing as a conservation technique
   within an Internet Service Provider (ISP) core can cause a number of
   technical and operational issues.  The main issues are described
   next.


3.  Breaks Traceroute

   The single biggest issue with the use of private (RFC1918) addressing
   within an Internet core is the fact that it can disrupt the operation
   of traceroute in some situations.  This section provides some
   examples of the issues that can occur.

   Firstly, the example below shows a traceroute across a network that
   uses privately numbered links.  In this example the string of " * * *
   " in hop number 12 indicates that private addresses for which there
   is no route are being attempted in the traceroute.  For example:

   10   120 ms   131 ms   120 ms  xxx.xxx.67.97
   11   130 ms   130 ms   131 ms  xxx.xxx.21.1
   12     *        *        *     Request timed out.
   13   130 ms   130 ms   140 ms  xxx.xxx.21.185

   Of more relevance is the situation where the traceroute crosses an AS
   boundary and one of the networks has utilised private addressing.
   The following simple network is used for illustrative purposes.


              AS100                 EBGP                AS200
                    IBGP Mesh <--------------->  IBGP Mesh
  Pool -                                                       Pool -
1.1.2.0/24                                                   2.1.2.0/24
                                 2.1.1.8/30

    10.1.1.0/30  10.1.1.4/30   .9          .10  2.1.1.4/30  2.1.1.0/30
    .1       .2  .5       .6    ------------    .6      .5  .2      .1
  R1-----------R2-----------R3--|          |--R4----------R5----------R6

10.1.1.1    10.1.1.2     10.1.1.3           2.1.1.3    2.1.1.2   2.1.1.1

   Using this example, performing the traceroute from AS200 to AS100, we
   can see the private addresses of the infrastructure links in AS100
   are returned.



Kirkham                  Expires October 7, 2010                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft             private-ip-sp-cores                April 2010


   R6#traceroute 1.1.2.1
   Type escape sequence to abort.
   Tracing the route to 1.1.2.1

     1 2.1.1.2 40 msec 20 msec 32 msec
     2 2.1.1.6 16 msec 20 msec 20 msec
     3 2.1.1.9 20 msec 20 msec 32 msec
     4 10.1.1.5 20 msec 20 msec 20 msec
     5 10.1.1.1 20 msec 20 msec *
   R6#

   While the previous example may not present a major problem, a
   potentially more severe case exists if the source IP address of the
   traceroute is within a privately numbered part of the network (AS100)
   and the destination is outside of the ISPs AS (AS200).  In this
   situation the traceroute will fail completely beyond the AS boundary.

   R1# traceroute 2.1.2.1
   Type escape sequence to abort.
   Tracing the route to 2.1.2.1

     1 10.1.1.2 20 msec 20 msec 20 msec
     2 10.1.1.6 52 msec 24 msec 40 msec
     3  *  *  *
     4  *  *  *
     5  *  *  *
     6  *  *  *
   R1#

   In a complex topology, with multiple paths and exit points from the
   AS, the provider will loose their ability to trace paths through the
   network to other ASs.  Such a situation could be a severe
   troubleshooting impediment.

   It should be noted that some solutions to this problem have been
   proposed.  They may utilise extensions to ICMP to allow the return of
   some "single public address" on the device, along with an interface
   identifier, possibly the SNMP ID of the interface.  However at the
   time of writing, such a solution was not available.


4.  Breaks Path MTU Discovery

   The Path MTU Discovery (PMTUD) process was designed to allow hosts to
   make an accurate assessment of the maximum size packets that can be
   sent across a path without fragmentation.  Path MTU Discovery is
   supported for TCP (and other protocols that support PMTUD such as GRE
   and IPsec) and works as follows:



Kirkham                  Expires October 7, 2010                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft             private-ip-sp-cores                April 2010


   o When a router attempts to forward an IP datagram with the Do Not
   Fragment (DF) bit set out a link that has a lower MTU than the size
   of the packet, the router MUST drop the packet and return an Internet
   Control Message Protocol (ICMP) 'destination unreachable -
   fragmentation needed and DF set (type 3, code 4)' message to the
   source of the IP datagram.  This message includes the MTU of that
   next-hop network.  As a result, the source station which receives the
   ICMP message, will lower the send Maximum Segment Size (MSS).

   It is obviously desirable that packets be sent between two
   communicating hosts without fragmentation as this process imposes
   extra load on the fragmenting router (process of fragmentation),
   intermediate routers (forwarding additional packets), as well as the
   receiving host (reassembly of the fragmented packets).  Additionally,
   many applications, including some web servers, set the DF (do not
   fragment) bit causing undesirable interactions if the path MTU is
   insufficient.  Other TCP implementations may set an MTU size of 576
   bytes if PMTUD is unavailable.  In addition, IPsec and other
   tunneling protocols will often require MTUs greater than 1500 bytes
   and often rely on PMTUD.  While it is uncommon these days for SP
   networks not to support a path MTUs in excess of 1500 bytes (with
   4470 being common), the situation of 1500 byte path MTUs may still
   exist in some networks.

   The issue is as follows:

   o When an ICMP Type 3 Code 4 message is issued from an infrastructure
   link that uses a private (RFC1918) address, it must be routed back to
   the originating host.  As the originating host will typically be a
   globally routable IP address, its source address is used as the
   destination address of the returned ICMP Type 3 packet.  At this
   point there are normally no problems.

   o As the returned packet will have an RFC1918 source address,
   problems can occur when the returned packet passes through an anti-
   spoofing security control (such as Unicast RPF (uRPF)), other anti-
   spoofing ACLs, or virtually any perimeter firewall.  These devices
   will typically drop packets with an RFC1918 source address, breaking
   the successful operation of PMTUD.

   As a result, the potential for application level issues is created.


5.  Unexpected interactions with some NAT implementations

   Private addressing is legitimately used within many enterprise or
   corporate networks for internal network addressing.  When users on
   the inside of the network require Internet access, they will



Kirkham                  Expires October 7, 2010                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft             private-ip-sp-cores                April 2010


   typically connect through a perimeter router or firewall that
   provides Network Address Translation (NAT) services.  Typical NAT
   deployments assume that the internal private address ranges will not
   exist outside of the internal environment.

   However unpredictable interactions could occur if traffic such as
   traceroute and PMTUD was launched from the NAT IPv4 'inside address'
   and it passed over the same address range in the public IP core.

   The discussion may be further complicated with the transition to
   IPv6.  Current discussions around the use of NAT444 and LSN (Large
   Scale NAT) would make use of a double NAT process.  Within this
   scheme, another private address block (at the time of writing) is
   being requested for ISP NAT 444 so that ISP private backbone space
   would not conflict with customer private backbone space.  Again,
   unpredictable interactions could occur if these address ranges
   conflicted with the ranges assigned in an Internet core.


6.  Issues with edge anti-spoofing techniques

   Denial of service attacks and distributed denial of attacks often
   make use of spoofed source IP addresses in an attempt to obfuscate
   the source of an attack.  RFC2827 (Network Ingress Filtering)
   strongly recommends that providers of Internet connectivity implement
   filtering to prevent packets using source addresses outside of their
   legitimately assigned and advertised prefix ranges.  Such filtering
   should also prevent packets with private source addresses from
   egressing the AS.

   Best security practices for ISPs also strongly recommend that packets
   with illegitimate source addresses should be dropped at the AS
   perimeter.  Illegitimate source addresses include private IP
   (RFC1918) addresses, addresses within the providers assigned prefix
   ranges, bogons (legitimate but unassigned IP addresses).
   Additionally, packets with private IP destinations addresses should
   also dropped at the AS perimeter.

   If such filtering is properly deployed, then traffic either sourced
   from, or destined for privately addressed portions of the network
   should be dropped.  Hence the negative consequences on traceroute,
   PMTUD and regular ping type traffic.


7.  Peering using loopbacks

   Although not a common technique, some ISPs use loopback addresses of
   border routers (ASBRs) for peering, in particular where multiple



Kirkham                  Expires October 7, 2010                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft             private-ip-sp-cores                April 2010


   connections or exchange points exist between the two ISPs.  Such a
   technique can be used as the foundation of fine grained traffic
   engineering and load balancing through the combination of IGP metrics
   and multi-hop BGP (as opposed to the more common technique of local
   preference).  When private or non-globally reachable addresses are
   used as loopback addresses, this technique is not possible.
   Additionally, private or non-globally reachable addresses, mandates
   the use of next-hop-self which can provide far less control than the
   technique above.


8.  DNS Interaction

   Many ISPs utilise their DNS to perform both forward and reverse
   resolution for the infrastructure devices and infrastructure
   addresses.  With a privately numbered core, the ISP itself will still
   have the capability to perform name resolution of their own
   infrastructure.  However others outside of the autonomous system will
   not have this capability.  At best, they will get a number of
   unidentified RFC1918 IP addresses returned from a traceroute.

   Such a situation can lead to complaints from parties or customers
   outside of the ISP.


9.  Operational and Troubleshooting issues

   Previous sections of the document have noted issues relating to
   network operations and troubleshooting.  In particular when private
   IP addressing within an ISP core is used, the ability to easily
   troubleshoot across the AS boundary is severely limited.  For less
   experienced personnel or first tier operations staff this may be an
   operational impediment.

   For users outside of the AS, the loss of the ability to use a
   traceroute for troubleshooting is very often a serious issue.  As
   soon as many of these people see a row of "* * *" in a traceroute
   they often incorrectly assume that a large part of the network is
   down or inaccessible (e.g. behind a firewall).  Operational
   experience in many large providers has shown that significant
   confusion results.  This translates directly into difficult (and
   potentially long and emotional) conversations with these users.


10.  Security Arguments

   One of the arguments often put forward for the use of private
   addressing within an ISP is an improvement in the network security.



Kirkham                  Expires October 7, 2010                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft             private-ip-sp-cores                April 2010


   It has been argued that if private addressing is used within the
   core, the network infrastructure becomes unreachable from outside the
   providers autonomous system, hence protecting the infrastructure.
   There is an element of legitimacy to this argument.  Certainly if the
   core is privately numbered and unreachable, it potentially provides a
   level of isolation in addition to what can be achieved with other
   techniques such as infrastructure ACLs on their own.  This is
   especially true in the event of an ACL misconfiguration, something
   that does commonly occur as the result of human error.


11.  Issues with core network security

   There are a number of flaws to the argument of using private
   addressing for security.

      o Private addressing may not protect against attacks originating
      from hosts within the AS or subscribers directly attached to the
      providers AS.  Depending on the routing design, subscribers may be
      able to route traffic to the core infrastructure devices.

      o Private addressing may not protect against attacks originating
      from hosts within the AS or subscribers directly attached to the
      providers AS.  Depending on the routing design, subscribers may be
      able to route traffic to the core infrastructure devices.

      Even if anti-spoofing is deployed at the AS boundary, the border
      routers will potentially carry routing information for the
      privately addressed network infrastructure.  This can mean that
      packets with spoofed addresses, corresponding to the private
      infrastructure addressing, may be considered legitimate by the
      anti-spoofing feature and forwarded.  To avoid this situation, the
      anti-spoofing algorithm would need to consider the ingress
      interface of the spoofed trraffic as part of its forward/drop
      decision process.  However, such an approach can be problematic in
      an environment where asymmetric traffic paths exist.

      o Additionally, distributed denial of service attacks which make
      use of spoofed source addresses typically produce large amounts of
      backscatter traffic.  Backscatter traffic is returned from hosts,
      etc when the received packet contained a spoofed source address.
      That traffic, or an ICMP destination unreachable messages are sent
      to an incorrect party as it was assumed to be the legitimate
      source address, which it wasn't.

   If the core network is privately numbered, then that backscatter
   traffic may be received by infrastructure devices.  As backscatter
   traffic is very common on the Internet, the amount of backscatter



Kirkham                  Expires October 7, 2010                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft             private-ip-sp-cores                April 2010


   traffic received by the control and management planes of the network
   infrastructure devices could be significant.  Figures in the order of
   hundreds of MBits/s have occurred in some networks.  Without suitable
   protection, the network infrastructure devices could be negatively
   impacted in such a situation, in particular if the spoofed address
   range corresponded with the private address range used to number the
   core.  Again, a publicly numbered core does not protect from this
   issue.


12.  Alternate approaches to core network security

   Today, hardware-based ACLs, which have minimal to no performance
   impact, are now widespread.  Applying an ACL at the AS perimeter to
   prevent access to the network core may be a far simpler approach and
   provide comparable protection to using private addressing, Such a
   technique is known as an infrastructure ACL (iACL).

   In concept, iACLs provide filtering at the edge network which allows
   traffic to cross the network core, but not to terminate on
   infrastructure addresses within the core.  Proper iACL deployment
   will normally allow required network management traffic to be passed,
   such that traceroutes and PMTUD can still operate successfully.  For
   an iACL deployment to be practical, the core network needs to have
   been addressed with a relatively small number of contiguous address
   blocks.

   The other approach to preventing external access to the core is IS-IS
   core hiding.  This technique makes use of a fundamental property of
   the IS-IS protocol which allows link addresses to be removed from the
   routing table while still allowing loopback addresses to be resolved
   as next hops for BGP.  The technique prevents parties outside the AS
   from being able to route to infrastructure addresses, while still
   allowing traceroutes to operate successfully.  IS-IS core hiding does
   not have the same practical requirement for the core to be addressed
   from a small number of contiguous address blocks as with iACLs.

   These techniques may not be suitable for every network, however,
   there are many circumstances where they can be used successfully
   without the associated issues of privately addressing the core.


13.  Security Considerations

   None






Kirkham                  Expires October 7, 2010               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft             private-ip-sp-cores                April 2010


14.  Normative References

   [NANOG]    Various, "Various Nanog mail archives".

   [RFC1918]  Rekhter , Y., Moskowitz, R., Karrenberg, D., Jan de Groot,
              G., and E. Lear , "RFC1918 Address Allocation for Private
              Internets, BCP 5", Febuary  1996.

   [RFC2728]  Ferguson, P. and D. Senie , "RFC 2827 Network Ingress
              Filtering, BCP 38", May 2000.


Appendix A.  Acknowledgments

   The author would like to thank the following people for their input
   and review - Dan Wing (Cisco Systems), Roland Dobbins (Arbor
   Networks), Philip Smith (Cisco Systems), Barry Greene (Juniper
   Networks), Anton Ivanov (kot-begemot.co.uk), Ryan Mcdowell (Cisco
   Systems), Russ White (Cisco Systems), Gregg Schudel (Cisco Systems).


Author's Address

   Anthony Kirkham
   Cisco Systems
   Level 12
   300 Adeliade St
   Brisbane, Queensland  4000
   Australia

   Phone:  +61 7 32388203
   Email:  tkirkham@cisco.com



















Kirkham                  Expires October 7, 2010               [Page 11]


