


Network Working Group                                        S. Burleigh
Internet-Draft                                Jet Propulsion Laboratory,
Intended status: Experimental                   California Institute of
Expires: July 2, 2010                                         Technology
                                                       December 29, 2009


    Delay-Tolerant Networking LTP Convergence Layer (LTPCL) Adapter
                     draft-burleigh-dtnrg-ltpcl-00

Abstract

   This document describes the procedures by which the Licklider
   Transmission Protocol (LTP) is used as a "convergence-layer" protocol
   to convey Delay-Tolerant Networking (DTN) "bundles" between DTN
   nodes.

Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on July 2, 2010.

Copyright Notice




Burleigh                  Expires July 2, 2010                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                    LTPCL                    December 2009


   Copyright (c) 2009 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Specification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
     2.1.  LTP Engine Configuration  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
     2.2.  Bundle Transmission . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
     2.3.  Bundle Reception  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   3.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   4.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   5.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7


























Burleigh                  Expires July 2, 2010                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                    LTPCL                    December 2009


1.  Introduction

   This document describes the procedures by which the Licklider
   Transmission Protocol (LTP)) [RFC5326] is used as a "convergence-
   layer" protocol to convey Delay-Tolerant Networking (DTN) Bundle
   Protocol (BP) [RFC5050] "bundles" between DTN nodes.

   BP is designed to enable end-to-end forwarding of a unit of user
   data, encapsulated in a bundle, from one DTN node to another,
   possibly indirectly through the agency of other DTN nodes that relay
   the bundle among themselves toward the destination node.  Conveyance
   of a bundle directly from one node to a second node -- either a relay
   node or the final destination -- is accomplished by the sending
   node's invocation of the transmission services of some underlying
   "convergence-layer" protocol stack.

   A virtually limitless variety of convergence-layer stacks may be
   utilized in support of BP for this purpose, each one achieving inter-
   node bundle flow in a way that is suited to the particular
   communications infrastructure to which both the sending and receiving
   nodes have access.

   Convergence-layer stacks are typically characterized by the highest-
   layer standard protocol in the stack, i.e., the protocol that is
   immediately below BP, which is commonly called the "convergence-layer
   protocol."  To assure interoperability among nodes that utilize a
   common convergence-layer protocol, it is necessary to agree on the
   procedures by which bundles are encapsulated in the protocol data
   units of the convergence-layer protocol and reconstructed from those
   protocol data units upon reception; these procedures are performed by
   a "convergence-layer adapter" that conforms to a standardized
   convergence-layer adapter specification.  (Note that convergence-
   layer adapter standardization is necessary for BP node interoperation
   but is in itself not sufficient: agreement on the configuration of
   protocols at all layers below the convergence-layer protocol is also
   necessary.  Mechanisms for achieving this agreement are beyond the
   scope of this document.)

   This document, the LTP convergence-layer adapter specification,
   defines standard procedures for encapsulating bundles in LTP segments
   and reconstructing bundles from received LTP segments.


2.  Specification

   In general, LTP operates as follows: an LTP "sender" engine generates
   one or more data "segments" from a "block" of client service data and
   conducts a segment transmission "session" that ultimately enables



Burleigh                  Expires July 2, 2010                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                    LTPCL                    December 2009


   reconstruction of the client service data block, from received
   segments, at the "receiver" engine.

   Each block comprises a "red-part" of zero or more octets, to which
   reliable transmission procedures must be applied, immediately
   followed by a "green-part" of zero or more octets, to which only
   "best efforts" transmission procedures must be applied.  The length
   of the red-part of a block is termed the block's "red length."  The
   length of the green-part of a block is termed the block's "green
   length."  The length of a block is the sum of its red length and
   green length.  Each LTP data segment encapsulates part (or all) of
   the red-part of a block or part (or all) of the green-part of a
   block, but never both.  LTP data segments that encapsulate red-part
   data are termed "red segments."  LTP data segments that encapsulate
   green-part data are termed "green segments."

   The LTP specification implicitly mandates the reassembly of the red-
   part of a block into a contiguous byte array from received red
   segments, but it does not mandate the reassembly of the green-part
   from received green segments.  That is, any required reassembly of
   "green" service data is the responsibility of the client service.
   For this reason, the service data in each green LTP data segment must
   be self-identifying so that the client service can either ingest the
   service data immediately or else use it in the reassembly of larger
   client service data objects that it can ingest.

   Specific procedures for invoking LTP to send bundles are as follows.

2.1.  LTP Engine Configuration

   If the BP node that utilizes a given LTP engine is a member of one or
   more endpoints identified by CBHE-conformant endpoint IDs, then the
   engine number of that LTP engine MUST be identical to the node number
   that is common to those endpoint IDs.

   Otherwise, the LTP engine number MAY be interpreted as the node
   number that identifies this node, in any context where some such
   identifying node number may be useful.

2.2.  Bundle Transmission

   The client service data block that the LTP convergence-layer adapter
   (LTPCLA) passes to the LTP sender engine for transmission MUST
   comprise ONLY one or more complete "conformant" bundles.
   ("Conformant" bundles are bundles that conform to the Bundle Protocol
   specification [RFC5050].)  The total length of the block MUST be
   equal to the sum of the lengths of all bundles in the block.




Burleigh                  Expires July 2, 2010                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                    LTPCL                    December 2009


   Reliable transmission MAY be intended for none, some, or all of the
   bundles in a client service data block passed to the LTP sender
   engine by LTPCLA.  Within each block, all bundles for which reliable
   transmission is intended -- termed "red" bundles for the purposes of
   this specification -- MUST occupy the block's red-part; all bundles
   for which best-efforts transmission is intended -- termed "green"
   bundles -- MUST occupy the block's green-part.  The "red length"
   passed by LTPCLA to LTP with each block MUST be the sum of the
   lengths of all red bundles in the block.

   An LTP sender engine MAY impose an upper limit on red length.
   Mechanisms by which LTPCLA may determine maximum red length are an
   implementation matter.

   LTPCLA MAY request that the sending LTP engine segment the red-part
   of the block on bundle boundaries, i.e., it may request that the the
   first octet of each red bundle in the block occupy the first service
   data octet of a red segment.  Note that a single red bundle MAY
   occupy the service data of multiple red segments.

   The requirement that green segment service data be self-identifying
   to the client service -- in this case, the Bundle Protocol -- implies
   that the service data of each green segment must be a single complete
   bundle, even if possibly a BP "fragment."  Each green bundle in the
   block MUST therefore be small enough to fit inside the service data
   of a single LTP data segment, and LTPCLA MUST require that the
   sending LTP engine encapsulate each green bundle within the service
   data of a single LTP data segment.

   Mechanisms by which LTPCLA may determine the maximum green bundle
   size for a given LTP sender engine are an implementation matter.

   The client service ID number passed by LTPCLA to LTP with each block
   MUST be 1, signifying that the client service is the Bundle Protocol.

   Upon reception of a transmission-session cancellation notice from the
   LTP receiver engine, LTPCLA MAY initiate the custody transfer failure
   procedures of the BP node once for each bundle in the block for which
   custody transfer was requested.  This mechanism enables custodial
   bundles to be reforwarded by the BP node in the event that the LTPCLA
   procedures fail to convey them to the receiver engine's BP node.

   Procedures to be performed by LTPCLA upon reception of transmission-
   session start notices, initial-transmission completion notices, and
   transmission-session completion notices are an implementation matter.






Burleigh                  Expires July 2, 2010                  [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                    LTPCL                    December 2009


2.3.  Bundle Reception

   Upon reception of a red-part reception notice from the LTP receiver
   engine, LTPCLA MUST initiate the bundle reception procedures of the
   BP node once for each bundle in the continuous sequence of conformant
   bundles beginning at the first octet of the red-part reception
   notice's client service data (the reassembled red-part of the block).
   LTPCLA MUST discard all client service data following the last octet
   of the last bundle in the continuous sequence of conformant bundles
   beginning at the first octet.

   Note that the total length of a conformant bundle is the sum of the
   lengths of all BP blocks (not to be confused with LTP blocks) in that
   bundle, and the length of each BP block can be determined by
   inspection of the initial octets of the block.  Inability to
   determine the length of a BP block signifies that the immediately
   prior complete bundle, if any, was the last bundle in the continuous
   sequence of conformant bundles beginning at the first octet of the
   red-part reception notice's client service data, and all subsequent
   data must be discarded.

   Upon reception of a green-part segment arrival notice from the LTP
   receiver engine, LTPCLA MUST initiate the bundle reception procedures
   of the BP node exactly once, for the single conformant bundle (if
   any) beginning at the first octet of the green-part segment arrival
   notice's client service data.  LTPCLA MUST discard all client service
   data following the last octet of the conformant bundle beginning at
   the first octet (if any).

   Procedures to be performed by LTPCLA upon reception of reception-
   session start notices and reception-session cancellation notices are
   an implementation matter.


3.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no IANA considerations.


4.  Security Considerations

   LTPCLA introduces no new security considerations beyond those
   discussed in the DTN Bundle Protocol and Licklider Transmission
   Protocol specifications.







Burleigh                  Expires July 2, 2010                  [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                    LTPCL                    December 2009


5.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC3986]  Berners-Lee, T., Fielding, R., and L. Masinter, "Uniform
              Resource Identifier (URI): Generic Syntax", STD 66,
              RFC 3986, January 2005.

   [RFC5050]  Scott, K. and S. Burleigh, "Bundle Protocol
              Specification", RFC 5050, November 2007.

   [RFC5326]  Ramadas, M., Burleigh, S., and S. Farrell, "Licklider
              Transmission Protocol - Specification", RFC 5326,
              September 2008.


Author's Address

   Scott Burleigh
   Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology
   4800 Oak Grove Drive, m/s 301-490
   Pasadena, CA  91109
   USA

   Phone: +1 818 393 3353
   Email: Scott.C.Burleigh@jpl.nasa.gov
























Burleigh                  Expires July 2, 2010                  [Page 7]


