INTERNET-DRAFT                       Dr. Humayun Bakht 
Expires: 11th May 2011             Independent Researcher(MANET) 		                      
Category: Standards Track          humayunbakht@yahoo.co.uk                               
draft-bakht-maoddp-00.txt                  
                                                   
                                            
                               
          Mobile Ad-hoc On-Demand Data Delivery Protocol (MAODDP) 
    
Status of This Memo 
    
This document is a submission by the Dr. Humayun Bakht.  Comments should be submitted to the humayunbakht@yahoo.co.uk. 
    
   Distribution of this memo is unlimited. 

Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.
    
    
Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
     The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at: 
          http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 
     The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at: 
          http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
Abstract 
    
Routing in mobile ad-hoc network is achieved through the mutual cooperation of mobile devices that form routes in between two mobile nodes. It is one of the challenging issues in mobile ad-hoc network [1]. The current protocols for an ad-hoc network can generally be categorized into two groups i.e. pro-active and re-active[15,23]. Pro-active protocols by continuously evaluating the known and
attempting to discover new routes, try to maintain the most up-to-date view of the network[2]. This allows them to efficiently forward packets as the route is known in advanced [14]. In contrast reactive protocols determine the route only when require [3, 5, 6].

Mobile Ad-hoc On Demand Data Delivery protocol (MAODDP) support both unicast and multicast routing. MAODDP establishes route on demand and delivers the data at the same time one after the other [22]. It is designed to minimize reaction to topological changes. In order to ensure the freshness of route MAODDP uses combination of sequence numbers and broadcast ID. MAODDP is loop-free, self-starting, and can scales to different size of networks. MAODDP offers quick adaptation to the dynamic link conditions and determines routes to the destinations.
    
   Category: Standards Track                    Expires: May 2010 
    Bakht                         		  [Page 1] 


INTERNET-DRAFT MAODDP           			  10/11/2010

    
Table of Contents 
    
Status of This Memo
Abstract	1
1.   Conventions used in this document	2
2.   Introduction	2
3.   Mobile Ad-hoc On-Demand Data Delivery Protocol	3
3.1. Broadcasting Joining Message	3
3.2. Broadcasting Route Query and Data Delivery Packet (RQDD)	3
3.3. Forwarding Route Query and Data Delivery Packet (RQDD)	3
3.4. Creating Reverse Routes	3
3.5. Broadcasting and Forwarding Acknowledge Message (ACK)	4
3.6. Managing Sequence Numbers	4
3.7. Error Detection and Broadcasting Error Messages	4
3.8. Power Saving Mode	4
3.9. Multicast Joining Request	4
3.10. Multicasting	4
3.11. Security	5
4.  Acknowledgements	5
5.  Copyright	5
6.  References	6

 1.   Conventions used in this document 
    
  The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement Levels" [KEYWORDS]. 
    
2.   Introduction 
    
Routing in Mobile Ad-hoc Network (MANET) is an interesting and challenging issue. Much effort has been going on to develop a routing mechanisms which can full-fill the specific routing need of MANET. The absence of fixed infrastructure and dynamic nature of MANET requires a dynamic and highly adaptable solution too. Existing literature reports schemes which can be classified into one of two types i.e. tables driven and on-demand routing protocols. Mobile Ad-hoc on-Demand Data Delivery Protocol (MAODDP) adopts an intermediate approach in between the two types mentioned above. MAODDP propose a solution capable of meeting other routing associated issues in MANET.  
    
This document is a specification of mobile ad-hoc on-demand data delivery protocol. It defines different functions and details various features of the protocol.


Category: Standards Track                    Expires: May 2010 
    Bakht                         		  [Page 2] 






INTERNET-DRAFT MAODDP           			  10/11/2010

  
3.   Mobile Ad-hoc On-Demand Data Delivery Protocol 
Mobile Ad-hoc On Demand Data Delivery Protocol adopts an intermediate approach in between tables driven and existing on-demand routing protocols [4]. 

The key feature of MAODDP is the route establishment of the route and data delivery one after the other. Definition and explanation of MAODDP functions are as follows.
3.1. Broadcasting Joining Message
Joining message is broadcasted in one of two situations. If number of mobile nodes want to form an ad-hoc network they broadcast joining message which serve as an initial point of contact for the other nodes in the network. In the other possibility, if a mobile node wants to join an established ad-hoc network, it broadcasts join message which indicates joining of new node in the network.

3.2. Broadcasting Route Query and Data Delivery Packet (RQDD)
A node floods RQDD packet which contain both route query information and data when it wants to deliver data packet to a destination for which it has no route information available.
3.3. Forwarding Route Query and Data Delivery Packet (RQDD)
Whenever a RQDD reaches to a node, it takes following steps in sequence. Legitimacy of RQDD: if the same packet has arrived before. To find out the freshness of received RQDD, receiving node check the sequence number and the broadcast ID of RQDD against the information stored inside routing table. If sequence number and broadcast ID matches with the one stored inside receiver routing table, nodes take no further action and simply discard the packet. Updating routing information: A node updates routing information if it finds no previous information about the received RQDD inside its routing table or if the RQDD contains the latest information about the source and the destination node. Forwarding RQDD: Receiving node takes one of the following actions, If the destination node is its next hop neighbour or it has no information about the destination, it forwards RQDD to destination or the next hop neighbour. The other alternative is, if the node has fresh enough route to the destination, it forwards the RQDD using the available route.
3.4. Creating Reverse Routes
All the nodes through which RQDD passes before its reaches to destination form a reverse route from destination node to the source of RQDD.

  

 Category: Standards Track                    Expires: May 2010 
    Bakht                         		  [Page 3] 





INTERNET-DRAFT MAODDP           			  10/11/2010


3.5. Broadcasting and Forwarding Acknowledge Message (ACK)
Destination nodes broadcast an ACK message when it receives RQDD from a source node. This ACK message is forwarded to the source node using the reverse route.

3.6. Managing Sequence Numbers
Each node is responsible for maintaining its own sequence number to ensure loop free routing.

3.7. Error Detection and Broadcasting Error Messages
In MAODDP, error detection occurs in one of the two conditions. When a node detects a link breakage for the next hop or neighbouring node in an active route or it receives route error message (RER) from one of the neighbour informing a route failure, inactive nodes in one or more active routes. Broadcast of these route error messages are limited to the neighbouring nodes or to the mobile nodes using an establish route for data transfer.

3.8. Power Saving Mode
MAODDP is adaptable to existing power saving mechanisms [19] besides its own power saving scheme. Nodes are allowed to switch in between one of two states i.e. soft or sleep and/or active state. A node can switch into sleep mode if it does not hear from other node within a time limit known as Listening Time (LT). Similarly, after a specific time interval known as Active Time (AT) a node can switch back to an active state. In practice, the time between the two modes are kept as minimum as possible to reduce loss of any incoming packet.

3.9. Multicast Joining Request
If a node wishes to join a multicast tree for which it is not a member. It can invoke multicast joining request by broadcasting a Multicast Joining query (MJR). On the other hand, if a node wants to share some information with a node part of some other multicast tree it can broadcast multicast route query and data delivery (MRQDD).

3.10. Multicasting
MAODDP has been implemented in a manner which allows integration of multicast operations of other schemes within the protocol structure. MAODDP multicast operation depends on the combination of flooding and formation of the multicast tree structure It is known that flooding is suitable for high data traffic and offers lowest control overheads while tree based routing reduces data traffic in the network but requires many control data exchanges. 


   Category: Standards Track                    Expires: May 2010 
    Bakht                         		  [Page 4] 






INTERNET-DRAFT MAODDP           			  10/11/2010


MAODDP focus on maintaining only those routes that are active. Expired or invalid route entries automatically deleted from the route table. For multicast operations multicast tree is maintained for the life of the multicast group.

3.11. Security
MAODDP deal security at an intermediate level. However, implementation of the protocol allows for other security mechanisms e.g. [17] to integrate within the protocol structure. MAODDP security
mechanism uses trusted certificate server C, whose public keys known to all valid nodes. Two or more mobile nodes collectively can act as a trusted server. Keys are priority generated and are exchanged through mutual relationship between C and each node. Each node obtains a certificate with exactly a single key from the trusted certificate server on joining the network. The certificate details different aspect of connecting node such as node addresses, a public key and a time stamp T1 and T2. T1 defines the certificate issue time and T2 stands for the expiry time of the certificate. These certificates are authenticated and signed by the server C. The goal of communication between source and the destination is to make sure that data is reached safely at the destination. MAODDP allocated public key to all the mobile nodes at the joining of the network. Public key contains a certificate and expiry time. For each RQDD the receiver node extracts the public key from the certificate C to validate the signature and to make sure that the certificate is not expired and is still valid. The same procedure is repeated in forwarding ACKs from the destination to the source node.




4.  Acknowledgements 
    
The author work on this specification would be incomplete without the assistance of project supervisors who has assisted me from the beginning till the end of this research project.  
      
5.  Copyright  
    
Copyright (C) The Internet Society 1998. All Rights Reserved. This 
document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are included on all such copies and derivative works. However, this document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than English. The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns. 

Category: Standards Track                    Expires: May 2010 
    Bakht                         		  [Page 5] 

INTERNET-DRAFT MAODDP           			  10/11/2010


This document and the information contained herein is provided on an "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  
6.  References 
    
[1]. G. Holland and N.Vaidya. Analysis of TCP Performance over Mobile Ad Hoc Networks. In Proceedings of the ACM/IEEE International Conference on Mobile Computing and Networking (MobiCom). 1999.

[2]. S.Kannan, John E Mellor, and D.D.Kouvatsos, Investigation of routing in DSDV. 4th Annual Post-Graduate Symposium on the Convergence of Telecommunications, Networking and Broadcasting, Liverpool UK, 2003.
[3]. Charles E. Perkins and Elizabeth M. Royer, Ad-hoc On-Demand Distance Vector Routing. Proceedings of the 2nd IEEE Workshop on Mobile Computing Systems and Applications, February 1999: p. pp. 90-100.
[4]. H.Bakht, M.Merabti, and R.Askwith, Mobile Ad-hoc On Demand Data Delivery Protocol. 3rd
Annual Post- Graduate Symposium on the Convergence of Telecommunications, Networking and Broadcasting, 2002.
[5]. H.Bakht. A Study of Routing Protocols for Mobile Ad-hoc Networks. in 1st International Computer Engineering Conference. December 2004. Cairo , Egypt.
[6]. H.Bakht, M.Merabti, and R.Askwith. Centralized Frame for Routing in Mobile Ad-hoc
Networks. in In Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Communication
(ICCC). September, 2004. Beijing, China.
[7]. D. B. Johnson and D.A. Maltz, Dynamic Source Routing in Ad hoc Wireless Networks. Mobile Computing, 1996. 353.
[8]. C. E. Perkins and E. M. Royer, Ad-hoc On- Demand Distance Vector Routing. 2nd IEEE
Workshop on Mobile Computing Systems and Applications, February 1999: p. 90-100.
[9]. A. Aaron and J. WengA. Aaron and J. Weng, Performance Comparison of Ad- Hoc Routing
Protocols for Networks with Node Energy Constraints. June ,2001, EE 360 Class Project,
Stanford University.
[10]. I. D. Aron and S. K.S.Gupta, On the Scalability of On-Demand Routing Protocols for Mobile Ad-hoc Networks: An Analytical Study. Journal of Interconnection Networks, January ,2001.
[11]. J. Broch, et al., A Performance Comparsion of Multi-Hop Wireless Ad- Hoc Network Routing Protocols. In Proceedings of the Fourth Annual ACM/IEEE International Conference on Mobile Computing and Networking (MobiCom), 1998.


Category: Standards Track                    Expires: May 2010 
    Bakht                         		  [Page 6] 



INTERNET-DRAFT MAODDP           			  10/11/2010

[12]. M.Asim and A.J. PullinM.Asim and A.J. Pullin, Comparison analysis of MAODDP with some other prominent Wireless ad hoc routing protocols, in IBITE Computing. 2005, Liverpool
Hope University: Liverpool.
[13]. C. E. Perkins. Performance Comparsion of two On-Demand Routing Protocols for Ad Hoc Networks. in IEEE Conference on Computer Communications (INFOCOM). March 2000.
[14]. E. Royer and C.Toh, A Review of Current Routing Protocols for Ad-Hoc Mobile Wireless Networks. IEEE Personal Communications Magazine, April 1999: p. 46-55.
[15]. S. Sesay, et al., Simulation Comparsion of Four Wireless Ad hoc Routing Protocols. Information Technology, 2004. 3(3): p. 219-226.
[16]. C.K. Toh, S.J.Lee, and M.Gerla, A simulation study of table driven and ondemand routing protocols for mobile ad hoc networks. IEEE Network, 1999. 13: p. 48-54.
[17]. W. Wang, Y. Lu, and B. Bhargava. On Security Study of Two Distance Vector RoutingProtocols for Mobile Ad Hoc Networks. in IEEE International Conference on Pervasive Computing and Communications. March 2003. Dallas-Fort Worth, Texas,USA.
[18]. H.Bakht. A comparison based overview of destination distance sequence vector routing(DSDV) and mobile ad hoc on demand data delivery protocol "(MAODDP)",. In International Workshop on Wireless Ad-hoc Networks. May, 2005. London, United Kingdom.
[19]. D. Kim, et al., Routing Mechanisms for Mobile Ad Hoc Networks based on the EnergyDrain Rate. IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing, April-June 2003. 2(2): p. 161-173.
 [20] .M Saleemand, MA Sheikh. An Empirical Analysis of Ad hoc Routing Protocols for Hybrid Wireless Sensor Networks. International Conference on Electrical Engineering, ICEE 07, 2007.
[21]. R.L. Gilaberte and L.P. Herrero. Routing Protocols in Mobile Ad-Hoc Networks. Communication Systems and Networks - 2005.
[22]C.K. Toh, S.J.Lee, and M.Gerla, A Simulation Study of Table Driven and on- Demand Routing Protocols for Mobile Ad hoc Networks. IEEE Network, 1999. 13: p. 48-54.


Category: Standards Track                    Expires: May 2010 
    Bakht                         		  [Page 7] 

   Email: humayunbakht@yahoo.co.uk 
    

