


Network Working Group                                             D. Jen
Internet-Draft                                                  L. Zhang
Intended status: Informational                                      UCLA
Expires: April 22, 2010                                 October 19, 2009


                           Understand Mapping
                        draft-jen-mapping-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 22, 2010.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2009 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents in effect on the date of
   publication of this document (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info).
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.

Abstract

   This draft discusses the different requirements that mapping to
   support mobility has versus mapping to support routing scalability.
   In mobility solutions, packets are forwarded to the location where



Jen & Zhang              Expires April 22, 2010                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft             Understand Mapping               October 2009


   mapping information is stored so that they can be encapsulated to the
   final destination.  In routing scalability solutions, mapping
   information needs to be available at packet entry points to the
   network.  Attempts to use one mapping system for both purposes can
   lead to high overhead in either mapping information distribution or
   otherwise mapping information discovery, as well as stale mapping
   information being used for data forwarding.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Mapping for Routing Scalability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   3.  Mapping for Mobility Support  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   4.  Differences in Mapping Requirements: Mobility Support vs
       Scalable Routing  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   5.  Concluding Remarks: Separating Mobility Support from
       Scalable Routing  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   6.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7































Jen & Zhang              Expires April 22, 2010                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft             Understand Mapping               October 2009


1.  Introduction

   Since early 2007, the IRTF has recharted the Routing Research Group
   (RRG) to develop a scalable routing architecture.  Over the last two
   years a number of proposed solutions have been presented to the RRG.
   Although the final recommendation is still being worked on, the
   general direction taken by most RRG proposals is based on the map &
   encap approach [RFC1955].  This has led many people to ask the same
   recurring question: since mapping is needed to solve the routing
   scalability problem, and since mobility solutions typically involve a
   binding/mapping function between an identifier and a mobile's current
   IP address, can the same mapping solution for routing scalability be
   used to support mobility?

   We believe that some basic differences exist between the requirements
   for the mapping needed for mobility support and that for routing
   scalability.  This draft is an attempt to articulate the basic
   differences.


2.  Mapping for Routing Scalability

   Mapping for routing scalability is meant to reduce the information
   storage requirements at routers.  Scaling the routing system requires
   an effective way to remove some number of entries in today's routing
   sytem from some routers, without losing reachability to any
   destinations.  Once this is done, not all routers have routing
   information for all destinations anymore.  Thus packets are mapped
   and then either encapsulated or translated before being forwarded
   over a network of routers that do not have the specific routing
   information for the packet destinations.

   Since part of the current routing information is replaced by mapping
   information, the mapping information must be stored in some
   locations.  The number and placement of these locations differ vastly
   from one RRG proposal to another.  They range from the distribution
   of a full mapping database to all entry points to the network (thus
   only reducing the routing table size of internal routers), to keeping
   the mapping information at distributed locations and building a
   search tree to find individual pieces.

   NERD represents one extreme point of the mapping system design by
   distributing the full mapping table to all network entry points.
   NERD assumes a central database to collect all the mapping
   information and updates, from which all the ITRs (ingress tunnel
   router) fetch the full mapping table and updates periodically.  This
   design enables ITRs to encapsulate incoming packets directly to ETRs.
   A few other schemes such as IVIP and APT can be viewed as variations



Jen & Zhang              Expires April 22, 2010                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft             Understand Mapping               October 2009


   of NERD in terms of mapping information distribution.  APT assumes
   that a small number of nodes in every AS (collectively) hold the full
   mapping table, while ITRs query for mapping entries and cache the
   results(which prevents suboptimal paths and overload of the mapping
   holders).  Although such variations reduce the number of nodes that
   hold the full mapping table, all mapping entry changes still must be
   pushed out to many nodes.

   LISP ALT may be viewed as representing the other extreme point on the
   design spectrum.  Instead of distributing mapping information out,
   ALT builds a hierarchical search tree for non-globally-routable IP
   addresses (the "EID space" in LISP terminology), so that each ITR can
   find the mapping for a given destination address by walking up and
   down the tree.  ALT avoids the cost of any nodes holding a full
   table, by paying the cost of delay in finding the mapping
   information.  In addition, because the hierarchical search tree is
   shared by all ITRs for all destinations, the tree itself, especially
   nodes at the top, can become overloaded.  ALT lets ITRs cache the
   mapping information to avoid the lookup delay and reduce the load on
   the search tree.


3.  Mapping for Mobility Support

   The basic question for mobility support is how to reach a moving
   receiver.  Whoever sends packets to a moving receiver must be able to
   identify the receiver via a piece of stable information (stable in
   the sense that it does not change as the receiver moves).  However,
   if the sender's knowledge about the receiver does not change while
   the receiver moves, some means must exist to bind that unchanging
   identifier of the receiver with its dynamically changing location.
   Locations in the Internet are represented by IP addresses.

   The above leads to the following intuitive observations: mobility
   support essentially involves three basic concepts: a stable
   identifier for a moving receiver, an IP address of the receiver's
   current location, and a mapping in between.  Different mobility
   support designs are simply different ways of choosing receiver
   identifiers and different approaches to providing mappings between
   the identifiers and the receivers' current IP addresses.

   One example of a mobility support scheme is Mobile IP [RFC3344].  It
   uses a home agent IP address as the moving host's identifier.  This
   address plays a dual role of being both an identifier and also an IP
   address to send packets to.  MIP requires that a home agent be able
   to keep track of the current location of the moving host and to
   intercept packets sent to the mobile's home address.  Mobility means
   potentially constant movement of mobile nodes, hence constant changes



Jen & Zhang              Expires April 22, 2010                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft             Understand Mapping               October 2009


   to the mapping between mobile identifers and their current locations.
   Individual home agents keep track of dynamic mapping changes for the
   mobile nodes under their care.  All packets to mobile nodes are sent
   to corresponding home agents, thus home agents do not need to
   propagate the dynamic mapping changes anywhere.  All senders wishing
   to communicate with the same mobile node obtains its home agent
   address via DNS lookup, and they send data directly to that IP
   address.  If a single node wants to serve as a home agent for a large
   number of mobiles, it will receive all the traffic for all the mobile
   nodes.


4.  Differences in Mapping Requirements: Mobility Support vs Scalable
    Routing

   A fundamental difference between the two mapping systems is as
   follows.  In scalable routing solutions, generally speaking some
   information is deliberately removed from nodes to relieve their
   routing storage and associated update processing requirements.
   Destinations are subtracted from routing tables.  Subsequently, nodes
   do not know how to route to all IP addresses.  Mapping is required to
   map the many unroutable destinations to routable addresses for
   encapsulation (or translation) and delivery.  In mobility support
   solutions such as MIP, however, mapping and encapsulation serve an
   entirely different purpose.  Unlike in scalable routing schemes,
   mobility solutions assume that all IP addresses are reachable in the
   global Internet (it is up to the routing system to assure that).
   Rather, new reachability information is to the tables of home agents
   in the form of mappings.  Home agents map mobile node identifiers to
   their most recent IP addresses.  Since mobility is made transparent
   to a correspondent, it always sends packets to the mobile node's home
   address, the packets are then intercepted by the home agent and
   encapsulated to reach the mobile node.  The home agent keeps the
   mapping information, but does not need to distribute it anywhere,
   because all packets going to the mobile are sent to the home subnet
   that the home agent sits on.  The encapsulation simply preserves the
   original packet as sent by the correspondent.

   From the observations above, one can see that a number of issues
   arise if one tries to add mobility support to the same mapping system
   used for routing scalability.  Recall that movement leads to mapping
   changes.  As more and more portable devices are becoming Internet-
   capable, the number of mobile nodes will likely grow larger and
   larger over time, which would lead to more and more overall mapping
   changes (even if the movement frequency of a single node remains
   steady).  If one tries to push the changes out to all the nodes that
   hold full mapping tables as needed in NERD, IVIP, and APT, this
   simply does not scale well enough to support networks with large



Jen & Zhang              Expires April 22, 2010                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft             Understand Mapping               October 2009


   numbers of mobile nodes and subnets.  On the other hand, if one uses
   the distributed mapping nodes themselves as "home agent" equivalents,
   so that mapping changes can simply be kept at "home agents" without
   being propagated anywhere, such as the case in ALT, this also comes
   with its own issues.  In mobility schemes such as MIP, packets to the
   mobile node go directly to the home address and get redirected by the
   home agent.  However, in the scalable routing context, ITR routers do
   not know the ETRs (=home agent) which hold the mapping information;
   packets have to walk up and down the search tree to reach ETRs.  This
   would overload the search tree with packets.  This problem is exactly
   why caching was introduced into scalability schemes in the first
   place.  However, caching here conflicts with mobility support.  Once
   a entry router caches the current address of a mobile nodes, it has
   no way to know when the mobile moves again, resulting in stale cache
   entries being used for packet forwarding.  So far there has been no
   good solution to this problem.  Using short TTLs for caching simply
   lead us back to an overload of the mapping system.

   Having each mobile node keep track of its current correspondents and
   directly informing them of movement can help with the stale cache
   problem for existing communications, but does not help new senders
   who rely on ITRs having the correct mapping information to contact
   mobiles.  Even for the ongoing communication, when both ends are
   mobiles and move at the same time, one falls back to the mapping
   system to get reconnected again.  A fundamental problem with stale
   mapping information at ITRs is a failure in packet delivery that end
   hosts have no way to get around.  Caching is mandatory for mapping in
   scalable routing solutions, yet caching makes the mapping system no
   longer support mobility very well anymore.


5.  Concluding Remarks: Separating Mobility Support from Scalable
    Routing

   It is very tempting to believe that the same mapping service can
   provide both mobility and scalability, since so many mobility and
   scalability solutions all involve some type of mapping.  However,
   attempts to inject mobility mappings into the scalability mapping
   system have revealed that the two do not fit together very well.  We
   hope this draft clarifies the reasons that mobility mappings and
   scalability mappings do not mix.  It is still very possible that a
   mobility solution can co-exist with a scalability solution, but one
   must be careful not to try to bundle both solutions into one mapping
   system.







Jen & Zhang              Expires April 22, 2010                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft             Understand Mapping               October 2009


6.  References

   [RFC1955]  Hinden, R., "New Scheme for Internet Routing and
              Addressing (ENCAPS) for IPNG", RFC 1955, 1996.


Authors' Addresses

   Dan Jen
   UCLA
   4805 Boelter Hall, UCLA
   Los Angeles, CA  90095
   US

   Email: jenster@cs.ucla.edu


   Lixia Zhang
   UCLA
   3713 Boelter Hall, UCLA
   Los Angeles, CA  90095
   US

   Email: lixia@cs.ucla.edu



























Jen & Zhang              Expires April 22, 2010                 [Page 7]


