CDNI                                                        R. Krishnan
Internet Draft                                   Brocade Communications
Intended status: Informational                                    M. Li
Expires: March 2013                                       B. Khasnabish
                                                         ZTE Corporation
                                                      September 7, 2012




   Best practices and Requirements for delivering Long Tail personalized
   content delivery over CDN Interconnections

                  draft-krishnan-cdni-long-tail-01.txt

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79. This document may not be modified,
   and derivative works of it may not be created, and it may not be
   published except as an Internet-Draft.

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79. This document may not be modified,
   and derivative works of it may not be created, except to publish it
   as an RFC and to translate it into languages other than English.

   This document may contain material from IETF Documents or IETF
   Contributions published or made publicly available before November
   10, 2008. The person(s) controlling the copyright in some of this
   material may not have granted the IETF Trust the right to allow
   modifications of such material outside the IETF Standards Process.
   Without obtaining an adequate license from the person(s) controlling
   the copyright in such materials, this document may not be modified
   outside the IETF Standards Process, and derivative works of it may
   not be created outside the IETF Standards Process, except to format
   it for publication as an RFC or to translate it into languages other
   than English.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.





Krishnan                Expires March 7, 2013                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft    Long tail content delivery over CDNI   September 2012


   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html

   This Internet-Draft will expire on March 7, 2009.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2012 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors. All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document. Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document. Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document. Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.

Abstract

   The content desire of users is evolving from most popular to long
   tail personalized content. This document discusses the best practices
   and requirements for delivering long tail personalized content in CDN
   Interconnection scenarios.

Table of Contents


   1. Introduction...................................................3
   2. Conventions used in this document..............................3


Krishnan                Expires March 7, 2013                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft    Long tail content delivery over CDNI   September 2012


   3. No Caching in CDNs.............................................3
   4. Benefits of HTTP Adaptive Streaming............................4
   5. Other techniques for delivering long tail personalized content.5
   6. Acknowledgements...............................................5
   7. References.....................................................5
      7.1. Normative References......................................5
      7.2. Informative References....................................6

                1. Introduction

   The content desire of users is evolving from most popular to long
   tail personalized content. Typically, the CDNI interface between CDNs
   is a long-haul backbone network where bandwidth is premium. Popular
   content is typically shared by many users and is very amenable to
   caching. A single copy of the content is delivered across CDNI to the
   content cache; the content is delivered to multiple users from the
   content cache. Thus, popular content delivery can be scaled to a
   number of users. On the other hand, long tail personalized content is
   typically not shared by many users and not amenable to caching. Also,
   there is heavy asymmetric usage of the network between peak and quiet
   hours. These create unique bandwidth challenge across CDNI. This
   document discusses the best practices and requirements for delivering
   long tail personalized content in CDN Interconnection scenarios.

                2. Conventions used in this document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].

   This document reuses the terminology defined in:

      [I-D.ietf-cdni-problem-statement-06],

      [I-D.ietf-cdni-requirements-03],

      [I-D.ietf-cdni-framework-00], and

      [I-D.ietf-cdni-use-cases-08].

                3. No Caching in CDNs

   Long tail personalized content is typically not shared by many users
   and not amenable to caching. Avoiding caching in the CDNs has the
   following benefits 1) Better cache utilization 2) Avoid unnecessary
   HTTP redirection.



Krishnan                Expires March 7, 2013                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft    Long tail content delivery over CDNI   September 2012


   Each CDN has a local monitoring server which monitors the end user
   content usage in the CDN. By monitoring the content usage, each CDN
   determines whether or not the content should be cached locally in the
   CDN. Through the CDNI interface, each dCDN propagates this
   information to the uCDN(s). Thus, the uCDN(s) determine the dCDNs in
   which the content should be cached/not cached. This results in the
   following CDNI metadata interface requirement and request routing
   interface changes. These are described below.

   Metadata interface requirement

     The CDNI Metadata Distribution interface shall provide indication
     by the downstream CDN (dCDN) to the upstream CDN (uCDN) whether
     the content should be cached or not cached in the dCDN. This
     information should be on a per URL basis. The default behavior
     would be to cache the content in the dCDN

   Referring to the example in Fig. 2, Section 3 [I-D.ietf-cdni-
   framework]; it shows Operator A as the uCDN and Operator B as the
   dCDN, where the former has a relationship with a content provider and
   the latter being the best CDN to deliver content to the end-user.
   Referring to the HTTP example in Fig. 3, Section 3.2 [I-D.ietf-cdni-
   framework];

   Request routing interface changes

     Step 2: A Request Router for Operator A processes the HTTP
     request. The HTTP URL metadata is looked up in a metadata
     database. For long tail personalized content, the metadata
     database lookup result indicates that the content should not be
     cached by the dCDN. The Request Router for Operator A recognizes
     that the end-user is best served by the uCDN without any caching
     the in dCDN and returns a 302 redirect message with the URL of
     Operator A delivery node. The end-user proceeds to retrieve the
     data from Operator A delivery node.

   Logging and Auditing requirements

      Work in progress

                4. Benefits of HTTP Adaptive Streaming

   As discussed before, long tail personalized content is not amenable
   to caching. Also, there is heavy asymmetric usage of the network
   between peak and quiet hours, where the peak hour load is much higher
   than the quiet hour load. These create unique bandwidth challenges
   across CDNI.  HTTP Adaptive Streaming (HAS), which can adapt to


Krishnan                Expires March 7, 2013                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft    Long tail content delivery over CDNI   September 2012


   network congestion, is ideally suited for delivering long tail
   personalized content across interconnected CDNs.

                5. Other techniques for delivering long tail
                   personalized content


   So far, what has been discussed is streaming delivery of long tail
   personalized content.

   Caching in the end user device is another technique which can be used
   to address the bandwidth challenges created by streaming delivery of
   long tail personalized content over CDNI. This introduces a new model
   for long tail personalized content delivery. The various components
   of this model can be defined as 1)End user chooses the content to
   watch 2) The content is downloaded in the background and cached in
   the end user device 3)End user is notified of content availability.
   This model is typically applicable for long form content where the
   overhead in managing a background download is justifiable.

   Caching in the end user device can have potential DRM issues which
   can be addressed using the following techniques 1) The content can be
   accessed by the end user only for playback 2) The content has a time
   expiry after which it destructs itself 3) In the case of end user
   device loss, the content destructs itself.

                6. Acknowledgements

   The authors would like to thank Francois Le Faucheur, Kevin Ma and
   Jin Weiyi for their input.



                7. References

7.1. Normative References

   [1]   Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
         Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [2]   Crocker, D. and Overell, P.(Editors), "Augmented BNF for Syntax
         Specifications: ABNF", RFC 2234, Internet Mail Consortium and
         Demon Internet Ltd., November 1997.

   [RFC2119] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
             Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.



Krishnan                Expires March 7, 2013                  [Page 5]

Internet-Draft    Long tail content delivery over CDNI   September 2012


   [RFC2234] Crocker, D. and Overell, P.(Editors), "Augmented BNF for
             Syntax Specifications: ABNF", RFC 2234, Internet Mail
             Consortium and Demon Internet Ltd., November 1997.

7.2. Informative References

   [I-D.ietf-cdni-framework]L. Peterson et al., "Framework for CDN
   Interconnection", April 2012.

   [I-D.ietf-cdni-problem-statement]B. Niven-Jenkins et al., "Content
   Distribution Network Interconnection (CDNI) Problem
   Statement", May 2012.

   [I-D.ietf-cdni-requirements]K. Leung et al., "Content Distribution
   Network Interconnection (CDNI) Requirements", December 2011.

   [I-D.ietf-cdni-use-cases]Bertrand, G. et al., "Use Cases for Content
   Delivery Network Interconnection", June 2012.

Authors' Addresses

   Ram Krishnan

   Brocade Communications

   San Jose, 95134, USA



   Phone: +001-408-406-7890

   Email: ramk@brocade.com



   Mian Li

   ZTE Corporation

   Nanjing,   210012

   China



   Phone:



Krishnan                Expires March 7, 2013                  [Page 6]

Internet-Draft    Long tail content delivery over CDNI   September 2012


   Email: li.mian@zte.com.cn



   Bhumip Khasnabish

   ZTE Corporation

   New Jersey, 07960, USA



   Phone: +001-781-752-8003

   Email: bhumip.khasnabish@zteusa.com


































Krishnan                Expires March 7, 2013                  [Page 7]

