


IETF Nomcom                                                  S. Krishnan
Internet-Draft                                                J. Halpern
Intended status: Standards Track                                Ericsson
Expires: December 6, 2012                                   June 4, 2012


           Requirements for IETF Nominations Committee tools
                     draft-krishnan-nomcom-tools-01

Abstract

   This document defines the requirements for a set of tools for use by
   the IETF Nominations Committee.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 6, 2012.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2012 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.






Krishnan & Halpern      Expires December 6, 2012                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                Nomcom tools                     June 2012


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Meta requirement  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   3.  Authentication  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   4.  Security and Access Control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   5.  Nominations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   6.  Acceptances and Declines  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   7.  Questionnaires  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   8.  Feedback Collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   9.  Security considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   10. Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   11. Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   Appendix A.  Example for key generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8




































Krishnan & Halpern      Expires December 6, 2012                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                Nomcom tools                     June 2012


1.  Introduction

   The IETF Nominations Committee (Nomcom) is a body that selects
   candidates for the open IESG, IAB and IAOC positions.  There is a
   need for a set of tools to aid the Nomcom to operate efficiently.
   This document lays out a few requirements for such a tool


2.  Meta requirement

   There is an existing tool for supporting Nomcom work.  The set of
   requirements specified in this document are mainly enhancement
   requirements or behavior changes to the existing tool.  Unless
   otherwise stated all of the current functions of the existing Nomcom
   tool need to be supported in the new tool as well.

   o  META-001: The tool MUST provide all the functionality that is
      provided by the current Nomcom tool except in the cases where one
      of the requirements specified in this document overrides the
      current behavior.  The current Nomcom tool can be found at the
      following URLs; https://www.ietf.org/group/nomcom/2011/private/
      that displays the Nomcom private parts of the tool and
      https://www.ietf.org/group/nomcom/2011/ that displays the
      community member accessible parts of the tool.


3.  Authentication

   All access to the Nomcom tools needs to be authenticated.  The users
   of the tools may have different privileges based on their role.  The
   tool needs to support at least three levels of access:Community
   member, Nomcom member, Nomcom chair.

   o  AUTH-001: The tool MUST allow the members of the community to
      login with their existing datatracker.ietf.org credentials.
   o  AUTH-002: The tool MUST allow the members of the community to
      create a new login with an automated system.  The system MUST
      verify that e-mail address used for creating the login.
   o  AUTH-003: The tool MUST allow the secretariat to input an email
      address to be provided the Nomcom chair role and a list of email
      addresses to be provided the Nomcom member role.


4.  Security and Access Control

   All communication between the community and the Nomcom and amongst
   the members of the Nomcom needs to be stored in an encrypted form.
   This information can only be accessed by the members of the Nomcom.



Krishnan & Halpern      Expires December 6, 2012                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                Nomcom tools                     June 2012


   o  SEC-000: The security procedures for the tool MUST be structured
      so that even system administrators do not have routine or
      accidental visibility to the confidential feedback or discussion.
   o  SEC-001: The tool MUST allow the Nomcom chair to input a public
      key ("Nomcom public key").  This key is generated by the Nomcom
      chair independent of the tool using the procedure described in
      Appendix A.
   o  SEC-002: All communication sent to the Nomcom mailing list MUST be
      encrypted with the Nomcom public key before being committed to
      persistent storage.
   o  SEC-003: All community feedback entered using the Nomcom tool MUST
      be encrypted with the Nomcom public key before being committed to
      persistent storage.
   o  SEC-004: After logging in, the tool MUST allow the Nomcom members
      to input a private key ("Nomcom private key") that corresponds to
      the Nomcom public key.  This key MUST be used to decrypt the
      feedback/communications that the member is trying to access.  Once
      entered, this key should be stored using an encrypted cookie.
      This entry should be flushed after the user logs out.
   o  SEC-005: The data accumulated by the tool MUST be stored in a
      fashion that prevents accidental exposure of the data to people
      who administer the server(s) on which the data is stored.


5.  Nominations

   After the Nomcom is consituted, the Nomcom chair issues a call for
   nominations for the open positions.  There are two broad ways in
   which nominees are introduced into the system.  The predominant way
   is that the nominations can be entered into the system directly by
   members of the community.  The secondary way is that the nominees are
   entered in by the members of the Nomcom.  In both of the cases an
   email address for the nominee needs to be entered into the tool.

   o  NOM-001: The tool MUST allow the members of the community to enter
      nominations into the Public Nomcom tool.
   o  NOM-002: The tool MUST allow the members of the Nomcom to enter
      nominations into the Private Nomcom tool.  The tool MUST allow the
      Nomcom member to optionally enter information about the originator
      of the nomination.  The tool MUST record the identity of the
      originator of the nomination for audit purposes.
   o  NOM-003: The tool MUST allow the Nomcom chair to specify the
      information that is required for the nominations.  This
      information will be entered by the Nomcom chair as freeform text,
      and will be presented to the individual performing the nomination.
   o  NOM-004: The tool MUST email the nominee after the nomination
      mentioning the position(s) that they have been nominated for.
      This email MUST NOT disclose to the nominee the identity of the



Krishnan & Halpern      Expires December 6, 2012                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                Nomcom tools                     June 2012


      person who performed the nomination.
   o  NOM-005: The tool MUST allow the content of this email to be
      customized by the Nomcom chair.
   o  NOM-006: The tool MUST automatically attach the questionnaires for
      the positions for which the nominee has been nominated to this
      email.
   o  NOM-007: The tool MUST be able to identify duplicate nominations
      of the same person with the same email address and consolidate
      them to point to the same nominee.
   o  NOM-008: In case the same person has been nominated multiple times
      using different email addresses the tool MUST allow the Nomcom
      chair to mark duplicate nominations of the same person and
      consolidate them to point to the same nominee.
   o  NOM-009: The tool MUST allow setting of a communication email
      address for a nominee that is different that the email address
      with which they were nominated.
   o  NOM-010: The tool MUST be able to use the datatracker address book
      system as the basis for requirements NOM-007, NOM-008, and NOM-009
      but MUST allow the Nomcom chair to perform manual overrides.
   o  NOM-011: The tool MUST keep track of the accept and decline status
      for the nominees.


6.  Acceptances and Declines

   After receiving the nomination mail, the nominees usually respond to
   indicate either their acceptance of the nomination or their
   unwillingness to do so.

   o  AD-001: The tool MUST allow the nominees to indicate their
      acceptance or decline of their nomination.  This is preferably
      done by providing distinct hyperlinks in the email that the
      nominees receive.
   o  AD-002: The tool MUST allow the Nomcom chair to point to responses
      from the nominees and flag them as Acceptances or declines.
   o  AD-003: The tool MUST allow the Nomcom chair to manually flag
      nominees as accepting or declining without the need for any
      nominee action.
   o  AD-004: The tool MUST allow to view a list of all nominees along
      with their accepance or decline status.
   o  AD-005: The tool MUST allow the reporting of accepance or decline
      status both per nominee as well as per open position.
   o  AD-006: The tool MUST be configurable to send reminder mails to
      all nominees who have not responded, either on specified dates or
      at specified intervals.  The contents of the reminder mails MUST
      be customizable by the Nomcom chair.





Krishnan & Halpern      Expires December 6, 2012                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                Nomcom tools                     June 2012


   o  AD-006: The tool MUST be able to generate a summary report
      containing statistics (total/accept/decline/no response)
      concerning nominations by position.


7.  Questionnaires

   The nominees fill in a questionnaire for each of the positions for
   which they accept a nomination.

   o  QR-001: The tool MUST allow the Nomcom chair to enter a different
      questionnaire for each of the open positions.
   o  QR-002: The tool MUST allow the Nomcom chair to point to responses
      from the nominees and flag them as Questionnaires.
   o  QR-003: The tool MUST allow the Nomcom members to directly access
      the filled in questionnaires of the nominees.
   o  QR-004: The tool MUST keep track of the questionnaire receipt
      status for the nominees.  The filled in questionnaires are
      received as emails to the Nomcom mailing list.
   o  QR-005: Like all other correspondance on the Nomcom mailing list,
      the questionnaires MUST be encrypted by the Nomcom public key
      before being stored.
   o  QR-006: The Nomcom chair MUST be able to flag an email as the
      filled in questionnaire for a nominee corresponding to a specific
      open position.
   o  QR-007: Once flagged, the questionnaire provided by the nominee
      for a specific position MUST be directly accessible without
      needing to look through all the other feedback received for that
      nominee.


8.  Feedback Collection

   Community feedback is very important in the Nomcom process.
   Community feedback about the nominees is the primary mechanism by
   which the Nomcom members evaluate the nominees.

   o  FB-001: The tool MUST allow the members of the community to enter
      feedback about any of the accepting nominees into the Public
      Nomcom tool.
   o  FB-002: The tool MUST allow the members of the Nomcom to enter
      feedback about any of the accepting nominees into the Private
      Nomcom tool.  The tool MUST allow the Nomcom member to optionally
      enter information about the originator of the feedback.
   o  FB-003: The tool MUST allow the Nomcom members to view the
      feedback entered for each nominee.  If the submitter of the
      feedback did not wish to be anonymous, the identity of the
      submitter should also be visible along with the feedback.



Krishnan & Halpern      Expires December 6, 2012                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                Nomcom tools                     June 2012


   o  FB-004: The Nomcom members MUST be able to enter their interview
      comments as feedback for the nominee being interviewed.
   o  FB-005: All email received on the Nomcom mailing list MUST be
      archived.  This includes all correspondance among the Nomcom
      members, feedback received over email as well as filled in
      questionnaires.
   o  FB-006: The tool MUST allow the Nomcom chair to manually move any
      of the archived mails into the feedback section of one or more
      nominees for one or more open positions.  This is required because
      a single email may contain feedback concerning more than one
      nominee or more than one open position.


9.  Security considerations

   The tool must authenticate all users and must allow classifying
   logins into 3 roles.  Nomcom chair, Nomcom member and community
   member.  All communications to/from the Nomcom and among the members
   of the Nomcom must be stored in an encrypted form.


10.  Acknowledgements

   The authors would like to thank Russ Housley for his valuable
   comments for improving this document.


11.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC3777]  Galvin, J., "IAB and IESG Selection, Confirmation, and
              Recall Process: Operation of the Nominating and Recall
              Committees", BCP 10, RFC 3777, June 2004.


Appendix A.  Example for key generation

   The Nomcom chair generates a public/private key pait to be used to
   encrypt Nomcom correspondence and feedback.  As an example, the
   Nomcom chair can use openssl to generate the key pair using the
   following commands

   $ openssl genrsa 2048 | tee private.key # Generate a new private key

   $ openssl rsa -pubout -in private.key # Output public key that
   matches private key



Krishnan & Halpern      Expires December 6, 2012                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                Nomcom tools                     June 2012


   $ openssl req -new -x509 -key private.key -days 500 -subj
   "/CN=Nomcom12/emailAddress=nomcom12@ietf.org" | tee public.cert #
   Create a certificate from the private key

   The certificate can then be provided to the tool in order to extract
   the public key.


Authors' Addresses

   Suresh Krishnan
   Ericsson
   8400 Blvd Decarie
   Town of Mount Royal, Quebec
   Canada

   Email: suresh.krishnan@ericsson.com


   Joel Halpern
   Ericsson

   Email: joel.halpern@ericsson.com




























Krishnan & Halpern      Expires December 6, 2012                [Page 8]

