


Network Working Group                                         D. Crocker
Internet-Draft                               Brandenburg InternetWorking
Intended status: Experimental                               M. Kucherawy
Expires: August 27, 2011                                       Cloudmark
                                                       February 23, 2011


          MIME Content Authentication using DOSETA (MIMEAUTH)
                    draft-crocker-doseta-mimeauth-00

Abstract

   MIME is a method of packaging and labeling aggregations of data; it
   is used both for email and the Web. Many usage scenarios would
   benefit by having an objective method of assessing the validity of
   MIME data, based on an authenticated identity.  MIMEAUTH leverages
   technology developed for DKIM to provide such a method.  Its use can
   be extended to cover specific header-fields of a containing email
   message or World Wide Web HTTP content.  Existing authentication
   mechanisms have achieved only limited success due to challenges with
   administration and use.  MIMEAUTH has very low administration and use
   overhead, through self-certifying keys in the DNS and a labeling
   method that can be transparent to end-users.  For relayed and
   mediated sequences, MIMEAUTH can be implemented within a service and
   therefore can be transparent to end-system software.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 27, 2011.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.




Crocker & Kucherawy      Expires August 27, 2011                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                 RFC4871bis                  February 2011


   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.1.  Signing Identity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     1.2.  Terminology and Definitions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     1.3.  Open Issues  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.  Signing and Verifying Protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   3.  Extensions to DOSETA Template  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.1.  Signature Data Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.2.  Email Signed Header Fields . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   4.  Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     4.1.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     4.2.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   5.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     5.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     5.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   Appendix A.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10






















Crocker & Kucherawy      Expires August 27, 2011                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                 RFC4871bis                  February 2011


1.  Introduction

   MIME is a core data-packaging mechanism for Internet applications; it
   is used both for email and the Web. Many usage scenarios would
   benefit by having an objective method of assessing the validity of
   MIME data, based on an authenticated identity.  Existing
   authentication mechanisms have achieved only limited use.  MIMEAUTH
   is based on DOSETA [I-D.DOSETA] to provide such a method.  Its use
   can be extended to cover specific header-fields of a containing email
   message or World Wide Web HTTP content.  MIMEAUTH has very low
   administration and use overhead, through self-certifying keys in the
   DNS and a labeling method that can be transparent to end-users.  For
   relayed and mediated sequences, MIMEAUTH can be implemented within a
   service and therefore can be transparent to end-system software.

   The approach taken by MIMEAUTH differs from previous approaches to
   message authentication, such as Secure/Multipurpose Internet Mail
   Extensions (S/MIME) [RFC1847] and OpenPGP [RFC4880], in that:

   o  the signature is written as an associated attribute in a header
      field, rather than being integrated into the data itself, so that
      neither human recipients nor existing MUA (Mail User Agent)
      software is confused by signature-related content appearing in the
      data;

   o  there is no dependency on having public and private key pairs
      being issued by well-known, trusted certificate authorities;

   o  there is no dependency on the deployment of any new Internet
      protocols or services for public key distribution or revocation;

   o  authentication is distinct from encryption;

   MIMEAUTH:

   o  is compatible with the existing email and Web infrastructure and
      is transparent to it, to the fullest extent possible;

   o  requires minimal new infrastructure;

   o  can be implemented independently of clients in order to reduce
      deployment time;

   o  can be deployed incrementally;

   o  allows delegation of signing to third parties.





Crocker & Kucherawy      Expires August 27, 2011                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                 RFC4871bis                  February 2011


1.1.  Signing Identity

   MIMEAUTH separates specification of the identity of the MIMEAUTH
   signer from the purported author of the content.  Verifiers can use
   the signing information to decide how they want to process the data.
   In particular, the authentication identity specified by a MIMEAUTH
   signature is not required to match any other identifier the content
   or the header.  However when the identity does match other, specific
   identities, specific semantics are assigned.

1.2.  Terminology and Definitions

   This specification incorporates the terminology defined in
   [I-D.DOSETA].

   Syntax descriptions use Augmented BNF (ABNF) [RFC5234].

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].

   Additional terminology:



      Internal IDentfier (IID):   An optional textual literal token that
         can be included with a signature and can be part of
         communications back to the signer, as a reference to the
         signature.  For DOSETA processing, the domain name portion of
         the IID has only basic domain name semantics; any possible
         owner-specific semantics are outside the scope of DOSETA.  That
         is, for MIMEAUTH, the entire string is an undifferentiated
         literal.  It is specified in Section 3.1 .

1.3.  Open Issues

   Still to be resolved:

   o  Precise semantics of a signature.  Does it merely declare
      "responsibility" by the signer, or "validity" of the content, or
      something else?

   o  Should there be a flag that differentiates among different
      possible semantics, such as defaulting to "responsibility" but
      able to flag assertion of validity?  How dangerous would such a
      flag be?





Crocker & Kucherawy      Expires August 27, 2011                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                 RFC4871bis                  February 2011


      NOTE:   A variety of assurances can be made about an email From:
         field, such as validity of the domain portion, validity of the
         entire email address, and validity of the <display-name>
         string.  This, of course, is separate from whether to trust
         /any/ assurances being made...


2.  Signing and Verifying Protocol

   MIMEAUTH uses the DOSETA "Generic Header/Content Signing Service
   Template" [I-D.DOSETA] as its base.

   The DOSETA Template specifies features labeled TEMPLATE that need to
   be tailored to a specific signing service.  For MIMEAUTH, the
   tailored features are:



      Signature Association:   The DOSETA-Signature data are stored in a
         MIME Content-Authentication: header field that is part of the
         MIME object being authenticated.  This contains all of the
         signature and key-fetching data, per [I-D.DOSETA].

      Semantics Signaling:   The presence of a MIME
         Content-Authentication: header field signals the use of
         MIMEAUTH.

      Semantics:   A MIMEAUTH signature means that the owner of the DDI
         is taking direct responsibility for the signed content and for
         the content of any referenced header fields, if present.
         Hence, the payload, or output, of MIMEAUTH is:

         +  The DDI domain name, specifically the "d" parameter in the
            MIME Content-Authentication: header field

         +  A list of referenced header fields

         +  An indication that the signature verified

         NOTE:   The semantics of this signature are much stronger than
            the semantics of a DKIM signature and pertain to the
            content, not merely the signing domain.  [RFC4871]

      Header/Content Mapping:   MIMEAUTH maps the DOSETA header
         processing to the cited header fields that are associated with
         the MIME object.  DOSETA Content maps to the MIME body, per
         [RFC2045].  The Content-type: header field is always covered by
         the signature.



Crocker & Kucherawy      Expires August 27, 2011                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                 RFC4871bis                  February 2011


         When a MIMEAUTH signature lists additional header fields in the
         "h" parameter, MIMEAUTH is asserting that these also have valid
         data.  By including other common header fields that are
         associated with MIME usage, the scope of a MIMEAUTH signature
         can apply to a containing protocol data unit, such as an email
         message or a Web payload.  Therefore, when the authentication
         semantic is intended to assert validity of both the MIME data
         and the context in which it occurs, a minimum set of additional
         header fields SHOULD be included in the DOSETA "h" parameter.
         This is discussed further in Section 3.2.


3.  Extensions to DOSETA Template

   This section contains specifications that are added to the basic
   DOSETA H/C Signing Template.

3.1.  Signature Data Structure

   These are MIMEAUTH-specific tags:



      i=   This specifies an Internal Identifier (IID) token that can be
         used when referring to the signed data, back to the signer.
         Within the MIMEAUTH protocol, the string has no value except as
         a literal token.  Any conventions for the string that are
         imposed by the signer are unknown to other MIMEAUTH
         participants.

         The syntax is the form of a standard email address where the
         <local-part> MAY be omitted.

         Internationalized domain names MUST be converted using the
         steps listed in Section 4 of [RFC5890] using the "ToASCII"
         function.





            ABNF:
   sig-i-tag       = %x69 [FWS] "=" [FWS]
                     [ local-part ] "@" domain-name







Crocker & Kucherawy      Expires August 27, 2011                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                 RFC4871bis                  February 2011


      z=    Copied header fields (DOSETA-quoted-printable, but see
         description; OPTIONAL, default is null).  A vertical-bar-
         separated list of selected header fields present when the
         message was signed, including both the field name and value.
         It is not required to include all header fields present at the
         time of signing.  This field need not contain the same header
         fields listed in the "h=" tag.  The header field text itself
         MUST encode the vertical bar ("|", %x7C) character.  That is,
         vertical bars in the "z=" text are meta-characters, and any
         actual vertical bar characters in a copied header field MUST be
         encoded.  Note that all whitespace MUST be encoded, including
         whitespace between the colon and the header field value.  After
         encoding, FWS MAY be added at arbitrary locations in order to
         avoid excessively long lines; such whitespace is NOT part of
         the value of the header field, and MUST be removed before
         decoding.

         Copied header field values are for diagnostic use.

         Header fields with characters requiring conversion SHOULD be
         converted as described in MIME Part Three [RFC2047].





            ABNF:

   sig-z-tag      = %x7A [FWS] "=" [FWS]
                    sig-z-tag-copy
                    *( "|" [FWS] sig-z-tag-copy )
   sig-z-tag-copy = hdr-name [FWS] ":"
                    qp-hdr-value

3.2.  Email Signed Header Fields

   Some header fields have semantics that are relevant to end users and
   often are presented to them.  If MIMEAUTH is used to sign an email
   message, it is useful to cover such header fields, in addition to the
   MIME content.  This section provides a generic recommendation
   intended to apply to the general case of signing a message; specific
   senders might wish to modify these guidelines as required by their
   unique situations.  Verifiers MUST be capable of verifying signatures
   even if one or more of the recommended header fields is not signed or
   if one or more of the dis-recommended header fields is signed.  Note
   that verifiers do have the option of ignoring signatures that do not
   cover a sufficient portion of the header or content, just as they
   might ignore signatures from an identity they do not trust.



Crocker & Kucherawy      Expires August 27, 2011                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                 RFC4871bis                  February 2011


   The signer is encouraged to consider carefully which fields are
   important to the interpretation of the content and which ones are
   not.  As an example, note what fields are typically displayed to
   recipients.  The following header fields are listed as a default set
   and SHOULD be included in the signature, if they are present in the
   message being signed:

   o  From, Reply-To, Resent-From

   o  Subject

   o  Date, Message-ID, Resent-Date, Resent-Message-ID

   o  To, Cc, Resent-To, Resent-Cc

   o  Content-Type, Content-ID, Content- Description )

   o  List-Id, List-Help, List-Unsubscribe, List-Subscribe, List-Post,
      List-Owner, List-Archive

   The following header fields SHOULD NOT be included in the signature:

   o  Return-Path

   o  Received

   o  Comments, Keywords

   o  Bcc, Resent-Bcc

   o  Content-Signature (MUST NOT include)

   Optional header fields (those not mentioned above) normally SHOULD
   NOT be included in the signature, due to the possibility of having
   additional header fields, of the same name, that are added or
   reordered legitimately, prior to verification.  There are likely to
   be reasonable exceptions to this rule, given the wide variety of
   application-specific header fields that might be applied to a
   message, some of which are unlikely to be duplicated, modified, or
   reordered.


4.  Considerations

4.1.  Security Considerations






Crocker & Kucherawy      Expires August 27, 2011                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                 RFC4871bis                  February 2011


4.2.  IANA Considerations

   MIMEAUTH uses registries assigned to DOSETA [I-D.DOSETA].  This
   section specifies additions to these registries.

4.2.1.  Content-Authentication Tag Specifications

   These values are added to the registry that is now defined in
   [I-D.DOSETA]:

                  +------+------------------------------+
                  | TYPE | REFERENCE                    |
                  +------+------------------------------+
                  |   i  | (this document, Section 3.1) |
                  |   z  | (this document, Section 3.1) |
                  +------+------------------------------+

            Table 1: Content-Authentication Tag Initial Values

4.2.2.  Content-Authentication Header Field

   IANA has added MIME Content-Authentication: to the "Permanent Message
   Header Fields" registry (see [RFC3864]) for the "mail" protocol,
   using this document as the reference.


5.  References

5.1.  Normative References

   [I-D.DOSETA]
              Crocker, D., Ed. and M. Kucherawy, Ed., "DomainKeys
              Security Tagging (DOSETA)",
              I-D draft-ietf-crocker-doseta-base, 2011.

   [RFC2045]  Freed, N. and N. Borenstein, "Multipurpose Internet Mail
              Extensions (MIME) Part One: Format of Internet Message
              Bodies", RFC 2045, November 1996.

   [RFC2047]  Moore, K., "MIME (Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions)
              Part Three: Message Header Extensions for Non-ASCII
              Content", RFC 2047, November 1996.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC5234]  Crocker, D., Ed. and P. Overell, "Augmented BNF for Syntax
              Specifications: ABNF", RFC 4234, January 2008.



Crocker & Kucherawy      Expires August 27, 2011                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft                 RFC4871bis                  February 2011


   [RFC5890]  Klensin, J., "Internationalizing Domain Names in
              Applications (IDNA): Definitions and Document Framework",
              RFC 5890, August 2010.

5.2.  Informative References

   [RFC1847]  Galvin, J., Murphy, S., Crocker, S., and N. Freed,
              "Security Multiparts for MIME: Multipart/Signed and
              Multipart/Encrypted", RFC 1847, October 1995.

   [RFC3864]  Klyne, G., Nottingham, M., and J. Mogul, "Registration
              Procedures for Message Header Fields", BCP 90, RFC 3864,
              September 2004.

   [RFC4871]  Allman, E., Callas, J., Delany, M., Libbey, M., Fenton,
              J., and M. Thomas, "DomainKeys Identified Mail (DKIM)
              Signatures", RFC 4871, May 2007.

   [RFC4880]  Callas, J., Donnerhacke, L., Finney, H., and R. Thayer,
              "OpenPGP Message Format", RFC 4880, November 2007.


Appendix A.  Acknowledgements


Authors' Addresses

   D. Crocker
   Brandenburg InternetWorking
   675 Spruce Dr.
   Sunnyvale
   USA

   Phone: +1.408.246.8253
   Email: dcrocker@bbiw.net
   URI:   http://bbiw.net


   M. Kucherawy
   Cloudmark
   128 King St., 2nd Floor
   San Francisco, CA  94107
   USA

   Email: msk@cloudmark.com






Crocker & Kucherawy      Expires August 27, 2011               [Page 10]

