

Network Working Group                                         S. Dawkins
Internet-Draft                                                Huawei USA
Expires: May 13, 2011                                         D. Crocker
                                             Brandenburg InternetWorking
                                                               E. Burger
                                                   Georgetown University
                                                          P. Saint-Andre
                                                                   Cisco
                                                        November 9, 2010


                     Two-Stage IETF Standardization
                     draft-crocker-ietf-twostage-00

Abstract

   RFC 2026 specifies a three-stage Standards Track.  As currently
   practiced, IETF standards track documents typically attain only the
   first stage.  This proposal discusses the problems caused by the
   disparity between documented procedures and actual practice, and
   proposes a simplified, two-step standard track, which will streamline
   the IETF standardization process, with distinct benefits for each
   stage.  Clarification of the criteria for handling documents re-
   submitted as Proposed Standard is also provided.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on May 13, 2011.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal



Dawkins, et al.           Expires May 13, 2011                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                  Two Stage                  November 2010


   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Proposed Changes  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
     2.1.  Standards Levels  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
     2.2.  Status Review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
     2.3.  Downward References Permitted . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   3.  Two IETF Standards Levels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
     3.1.  Proposed Standard (PS)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
     3.2.  Resubmission of a PS Document for PS  . . . . . . . . . . . 6
     3.3.  [Full] Internet Standard (IS) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   4.  Differences from HousleyTwoLevel  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   5.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   6.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
     6.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
     6.2.  Informative . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
























Dawkins, et al.           Expires May 13, 2011                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                  Two Stage                  November 2010


1.  Introduction

   Officially, the IETF uses a three-stage standards track, roughly
   defined in terms of completed specification, initial implementation,
   and successful deployment and use.[RFC2026] In practice the Internet
   has been running primarily on entry level (Proposed Standard)
   specifications for many years.  Furthermore, the periodic IESG review
   of "immature" standards that is called for in section 6.2 of
   [TwoStage] seldom happens.  This can cause confusion for implementers
   who fear that a Proposed Standard is unstable and subject to change.
   This also fails to distinguish established protocols from those that
   are newer.  More generally, a standards organization ought to have
   meaningful labels and it ought to use them.  The proposed change
   recommended here will streamline the formal IETF standardization
   process, remove confusion, improve transparency and clarify the
   benefits for each stage.

   Current IETF standards labeling has a number of harmful properties:
   o  Our documented process isn't what we use in practice.  This
      disparity creates opportunities for miscommunication, which in
      turn can produce mistrust.  At the least, a new implementor or
      product planner has poor guidance from the IETF, concerning what
      is and is not viable.
   o  Consumers of IETF specifications have learned to disregard our
      formal process.  For example RFC 2026 recommends in clear language
      that Draft Standard, not Proposed Standard, is the proper maturity
      level for justifying widespread deployment.  Any vendor that waits
      for this status is left far behind in the marketplace - in most
      cases, "infinitely far behind".
   o  We are almost assured that the IETF inventory of standards
      contains specifications which do not reflect the corresponding
      protocols in use on the Internet today, because the protocols
      require modifications based on implementation or deployment
      experience, or simply because "standard" protocols may not be used
      at all.

   This proposal is derived from [TwoStage].  The current proposal's
   core recommendation has basic differences from [HousleyTwoLevel], but
   incorporates a number of useful recommendations from it.

   If adopted, this proposal will require specific changes to [RFC2026].
   These are TBD.


2.  Proposed Changes

   This proposal specifies a discrete set of changes, and each is
   separately motivated.  Some are drawn from [HousleyTwoLevel].



Dawkins, et al.           Expires May 13, 2011                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                  Two Stage                  November 2010


2.1.  Standards Levels

   The core changes that are proposed in labeling are quite simple:
   o  Retain the Proposed Standard
   o  Clarify the handling of documents that are already at Proposed
      Standard, undergo revision, and are then re-submitted for Proposed
      Standard.
   o  Drop Draft Standard
   o  Retain (full) Internet Standard

   This proposal differs significantly from [HousleyTwoLevel], which
   retains Proposed and Draft, while dropping the existing (full)
   Internet Standard.  Although that proposal seeks to reduce barriers
   for achieving these levels, there is nothing in the proposal to
   effect such changes.

   In contrast, the current proposal eliminates a technically-oriented
   status level (Draft) that has proved problematic to achieve and is
   deemed a specific example of a more general requirement: the ability
   to make revisions to a document already at Proposed Standard.

   There are different theories about the reasons it is problematic to
   achieve Draft Status, but objectively it requires specific technical
   work and significant effort, including Implementation Reports, to
   document it.  Although it is generally deemed advisable to find ways
   for achieving Proposed Standard more quickly and more easily, the
   current proposal defers that task.  Instead it seeks to create a
   clear distinction, with fundamentally different criteria:

      Proposed Standard:   The IETF community achieves rough consensus
         -- on the technical adequacy of a specification.
      (Full) Internet Standard:   The Internet community achieves rough
         consensus -- on using the running code of a specification.

   A surprising aspect of the current proposal is its elimination of a
   milestone reflecting basic interoperability demonstration, including
   interoperability reports.  Interoperability testing is fundamental to
   the success of Internet standardization:
   o  It verifies the clarity of the specification, because independent,
      compatible implementations are made to work
   o  It demonstrates that the associated Intellectual Property Rights
      rules can be applied acceptably.

   In fact the underlying interoperability requirement has not been
   eliminated by the current proposal.  Arguably it has been made more
   stringent!





Dawkins, et al.           Expires May 13, 2011                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                  Two Stage                  November 2010


      Achieving widespread use -- not just implementation or deployment,
      but actual use -- is the ultimate test of interoperability.  If
      the Internet community finds a specification useful, it will
      already have done the necessary testing.
      Note that "useful" is a more stringent requirement than
      "implementation" or "deployment".  Writing code and distributing
      it are necessary, but not sufficient, activities.  The core
      requirement is that the mechanism gain extensive use; use means
      that it demonstrates value to users.
   What is being changed, then, is not the underlying requirement but
   rather the timing and manner by which it is reported: It is no longer
   an independent step.  It is folded into a formal step that relies
   solely on the far more essential reports of community adoption.

   Another concern with elimination of Draft Standard is the handling of
   improvements to specifications that are not yet ready for full
   Internet Standard.  The presence of Draft Standard has afforded
   authors a mechanism for resolving this need.  Note, however, that it
   can resolve only one turn of the revision crank and that it only
   permits changes that entail clarification or removal; it does not
   cover semantic or syntactic additions or replacements to the
   specification; these require re-issuance at Proposed Standard.  There
   is a long-standing concern that such re-submission will invite a
   fresh set of review and approval negotiations for the entire work,
   often with a new set of IETF management bringing their a new set of
   criteria to the negotiation.

   To provide a more general means of handling a document that modifies,
   adds or removes syntactic or semantic detail, this proposal clarifies
   rules for the handling of documents that are already at Proposed
   Standard and are submitted for re-publication at that level.  The
   critical requirement for this is that the review and approval process
   must be limited to consideration of the changes, only.  It cannot be
   taken as an opportunity to reconsider the portions that were
   previously approved by the IETF.

2.2.  Status Review

   This change is taken from [HousleyTwoLevel].

   Section 6.2 of [RFC2026] calls for an IESG review of standards track
   documents that have not yet attained full Internet Standards status.
   That requirement is hereby dropped.

   For specifications that have not achieved significant levels of
   actual use, there remains the option to have them declared Historic.





Dawkins, et al.           Expires May 13, 2011                  [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                  Two Stage                  November 2010


2.3.  Downward References Permitted

   This change is taken from [HousleyTwoLevel].

   Internet Standards are allowed to make normative references to
   Proposed Standards.  The rules that make references to documents at
   lower maturity levels are a major cause of stagnation in the
   advancement of documents.  This change allows an Internet Standard to
   freely reference features in any standards track RFC.  The intent of
   this change is to enable expeditious promotion of Proposed Standards
   to Internet Standards.

   Downward references to Internet-Draft documents continue to be
   prohibited.


3.  Two IETF Standards Levels

   The premise of IETF standardization is a pragmatic sequence of
   diligent specification, serious review, and then publication for
   community testing and adoption.  Long cycles of specification or
   review limit the ability of the community to benefit from the work
   and to gain experience that permits iterating improvements based on
   observed need.

3.1.  Proposed Standard (PS)

   Proposed Standard is an established construct and practice in the
   IETF.  Any attempt to change its criteria or handling should be a
   separate effort.  The current proposal is to retain Proposed Standard
   in its current form.  Implementations are sometimes offered or even
   required, prior to gaining PS status.  No changes are required by
   this proposal.

3.2.  Resubmission of a PS Document for PS

   Experience with a specification often leads to revision efforts that
   clarify, modify, enhance or remove features.  A document that is
   already assigned PS status can be revised and submitted for
   republication at that level.  Review and approval of such documents
   is limited to the changes.  Reconsideration of the portions that were
   previously approved for PS status is prohibited.

3.3.  [Full] Internet Standard (IS)

   This is the existing final standards status, based on attainment of
   significant community acceptance, as demonstrated by use, as well as
   product implementation and deployment.  In other words, it must have



Dawkins, et al.           Expires May 13, 2011                  [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                  Two Stage                  November 2010


   demonstrated that it is useful in the real world.  Advancement should
   merely require documenting this basic fact.  Acceptable changes to
   the specification are for clarity and improved readability, and may
   include dropping unused features.  No other changes or enhancements
   to specification syntax or semantics are permitted.

   There are two incentives for seeking Internet Standard:
   o  It provides the IETF community with an explicit mark of success
      for a specific piece of its work.
   o  It can facilitate wider adoption.  Over the full course of a
      standard's adoption, there often is a point at which the success
      of a standard is real, and even definitive, but this success might
      not yet be adequately perceived by the entire community.  Having
      an IS label will remove any question of stability and utility of a
      specification.  This signal can help to overcome organizational
      hesitance about using the specification.


4.  Differences from HousleyTwoLevel

   The core differences between the current proposal and
   draft-housley-two-maturity-levels are that the current proposal:
   o  Drops Draft Standard, while [HousleyTwoLevel] drops (full) IS.
      The core requirements for these two different levels are quite
      different.  Draft is a second technical evaluation.  Internet
      Standard is a mark of extensive, production-level use.
   o  Drops Implementation Reports, while [HousleyTwoLevel] retains
      them.
   o  Clarifies the handling of revised documents that are re-submitted
      for Proposed Standard.


5.  Security Considerations

   This document contains to text with security issues, except perhaps
   the security of the IETF standards process.


6.  References

6.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2026]  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision
              3", RFC 2026, October 1996.







Dawkins, et al.           Expires May 13, 2011                  [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                  Two Stage                  November 2010


6.2.  Informative

   [AltTrack]
              Bradner, S., "An Idea for an Alternate IETF Standards
              Track", I-D draft-bradner-ietf-stds-trk-00, July 2003.

   [HousleyTwoLevel]
              Housley, R., "Reducing the Standards Track to Two Maturity
              Levels", I-D draft-housley-two-maturity-levels-02.txt,
              September 2010.

   [TwoStage]
              Dawkins, S., "Two Stage Standardization Approach",
              I-D draft-dawkins-pstmt-twostage-00, September 1998.


Authors' Addresses

   Spencer Dawkins
   Huawei Technologies (USA)

   Phone: +1 214 755 3870
   Email: spencer@wonderhamster.org


   Dave Crocker
   Brandenburg InternetWorking

   Email: dcrocker@bbiw.net


   Eric W. Burger
   Georgetown University

   Email: eburger@standardstrack.com
   URI:   http://www.standardstrack.com


   Peter Saint-Andre
   Cisco
   1899 Wyknoop Street, Suite 600
   Denver, CO  80202
   USA

   Phone: +1-303-308-3282
   Email: psaintan@cisco.com





Dawkins, et al.           Expires May 13, 2011                  [Page 8]
