


Network Working Group                                        W. Krecicki
Internet-Draft                                                Webstorage
Intended status: Standards Track                           June 11, 2010
Expires: December 13, 2010


        Internet Message Access Protocol (IMAP) - MOVE extension
                    draft-krecicki-imap-move-01.txt

Abstract

   The MOVE extension of the Internet Message Access Protocol [IMAP4]
   provides a feature intended to reduce the amount of time and
   resources used by usual complicated methods of moving messages
   between mailboxes by providing the capability of directly moving
   messages.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 13, 2010.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.



Krecicki                Expires December 13, 2010               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                  imap-move                      June 2010


1.  Conventions Used in this Document

   In examples, "C:" and "S:" indicate lines sent by the client and
   server respectively.

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to
   be interpreted as described in [KEYWORDS].


2.  Introduction and Overview

   Most of IMAP clients are moving messages between mailboxes by use of
   sequence of COPY, STORE +FLAGS (\Deleted) and EXPUNGE commands.
   This, though functionally equivalent to moving messages, is a lot
   more complicated on the server side than simple move.  When moving
   large amounts of messages this can create unnecessary loads and
   delays on server side.  It also prohibits user from moving a message
   which is larger than the remnant of his quota

   The MOVE extension allows simple single-command moving of messages
   between mailboxes without creating additional unnecessary server-side
   loads and without requiring user consideration about his quota limits
   when simply moving message and not changing the overall amount of
   data stored in his account.  MOVE command can be implemented as an
   atomic operation which is impossible with three-commands sequence
   currently used.

   The MOVE extension is present in any IMAP server implementation which
   returns "MOVE" as one of the supported capabilities to the CAPABILITY
   command.

   The MOVE extension defines one additional command which MUST be
   supported by server that returns supports MOVE extension.


3.  Additional commands

   The following command definition is an extension to [IMAP4] section
   6.4.

3.1.  MOVE command









Krecicki                Expires December 13, 2010               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                  imap-move                      June 2010


       Arguments:  sequence set
                   mailbox name

       Data:       untagged responses: EXPUNGE

       Result:     OK - move completed
                   NO - move error: can't move those messages or to that
                        mailbox
                   BAD - command unknown or arguments invalid

   The MOVE command moves messages from the currently selected mailbox
   to the end of the specified mailbox.  Messages that are moved are
   expunged from selected mailbox.  Any messages that are not included
   in the sequence set or do not exists are unaffected.  All flags
   (including \Deleted) and message internal date are persistent through
   move.

   If the server does not support the MOVE capability, the client should
   fall back to using the regular COPY, STORE, EXPUNGE sequence.

   Additionally if MOVE command can be directly preceeded by UID
   command, the sequence set argument is then treated as unique
   identifiers sequence instead of message sequence numbers as defined
   in [IMAP4] paragraph 6.4.8.

   Command EXPUNGE untagged responses reports that the specified message
   sequence number has been permanently removed from selected mailbox
   (and moved to specified mailbox) as defined in [IMAP4] paragraph
   7.4.1.

   The MOVE command SHOULD be atomic and server SHOULD keep both
   mailboxes in consistent state at all times, at no time SHOULD the
   moved messages be visible by any concurrent session in both source
   and destination mailboxes or in none of these mailboxes.  The server
   MUST assure that after succesful operation all the moved messages are
   in the destination mailbox and no moved messages are in the source
   mailbox.  The server SHOULD assure that after unsuccesful operation
   no messages are moved to the destination folder and all messages
   remain in source folder.  In case of unsuccesful operation the server
   MUST assure that no messages that were being moved are expunged from
   source mailbox without being moved to destination mailbox.










Krecicki                Expires December 13, 2010               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                  imap-move                      June 2010


       Example:    C: A003 MOVE 3000:3002 Trash
                   S: * 3002 EXPUNGE
                   S: * 3001 EXPUNGE
                   S: * 3000 EXPUNGE
                   S: A003 OK MOVE completed
                   C: A004 UID MOVE 4000:* Trash
                   S: * 3010 EXPUNGE
                   S: * 3009 EXPUNGE
                   S: * 3008 EXPUNGE
                   S: A004 OK MOVE completed


4.  Response Codes

   If the server supports both the UIDPLUS and MOVE extensions it SHOULD
   return COPYUID response code as a part of tagged OK response to a
   MOVE command, as defined in [UIDPLUS] paragraph 4.3.


5.  Formal Syntax

   Formal syntax is defined using ABNF [ABNF], extending the ABNF rules
   defined in [IMAP4].  The IMAP4 ABNF should be imported first before
   attempting to validate these rules.


       capability      =/ "MOVE"

       command-select  =/ move

       move            = "MOVE" SP sequence-set SP mailbox

       uid             =/ "UID" SP move



6.  IANA Considerations

   This document constitutes registration of the MOVE capability in the
   imap4-capabilities.


7.  References

   [ABNF]     Crocker, D., Ed. and P. Overell, "Augmented BNF for Syntax
              Specifications: ABNF", RFC 2234, November 1997.

   [IMAP4]    Crispin, M., "INTERNET MESSAGE ACCESS PROTOCOL - VERSION



Krecicki                Expires December 13, 2010               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                  imap-move                      June 2010


              4rev1", RFC 3501, March 2003.

   [UIDPLUS]  Crispin, M., "Internet Message Access Protocol (IMAP) -
              UIDPLUS extension", RFC 4315, December 2005.

   [KEYWORDS]
              Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.


Author's Address

   Witold Krecicki
   Webstorage sp. z o.o.
   Jutrzenki 177
   Warszawa  02-231
   Poland

   Email: witold.krecicki@firma.o2.pl
































Krecicki                Expires December 13, 2010               [Page 5]

