


Network Working Group                                      E. Maler, Ed.
Internet-Draft                                               XMLgrrl.com
Intended status: Standards Track                             T. Hardjono
Expires: July 29, 2013                                               MIT
                                                        January 25, 2013


     Binding Obligations on User-Managed Access (UMA) Participants
                     draft-maler-oauth-umatrust-00

Abstract

   User-Managed Access (UMA) is a profile of OAuth 2.0.  UMA defines how
   resource owners can control protected-resource access by clients
   operated by arbitrary requesting parties, where the resources reside
   on any number of resource servers, and where a centralized
   authorization server governs access based on resource owner policy.
   This document provides a contractual framework that defines the
   minimum obligations of parties that operate and use UMA-conforming
   software programs and services.  The goal of this framework is to
   support end-to-end legal enforceability of the terms and conditions
   of access sharing relationships between authorizing and requesting
   sides that use UMA.  The audience for this document includes
   technologists, legal professionals, and operators of UMA-conforming
   services.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on July 29, 2013.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.




Maler & Hardjono          Expires July 29, 2013                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft           UMA Binding Obligations            January 2013


   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     1.1.  Sample Use Cases for Sharing Access to Resources . . . . .  4
     1.2.  How to Use the Contractual Framework . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     1.3.  Obligations Not in the Scope of the Contractual
           Framework  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   2.  Binding Obligations on UMA Participants  . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     2.1.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
       2.1.1.  Terms  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
       2.1.2.  Abbreviations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     2.2.  Obligations of the Requesting Party  . . . . . . . . . . . 11
       2.2.1.  Requesting Party-Authorizing Party: Adhere-to-Terms  . 11
       2.2.2.  Requesting Party-Authorizing Party:
               Make-Factual-Representations . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
       2.2.3.  Requesting Party-Authorization Server Operator:
               Supply-Truthful-Claims . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
       2.2.4.  Requesting Party-Resource Server Operator:
               Is-Legitimate-Bearer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     2.3.  Obligations of the Resource Server Operator  . . . . . . . 13
       2.3.1.  Resource Server Operator-Authorizing Party:
               Delegate-Protection  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
       2.3.2.  Resource Server Operator-Authorization Server
               Operator: Register-Accurately-and-Timely . . . . . . . 13
       2.3.3.  Resource Server Operator-Authorization Server
               Operator: Respect-Permissions  . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
       2.3.4.  Resource Server Operator-Requesting Party:
               Give-Accurate-Access . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
     2.4.  Obligations of the Authorization Server Operator . . . . . 15
       2.4.1.  Authorization Server Operator-Authorizing Party:
               Follow-Policies-Accurately-and-Timely  . . . . . . . . 15
       2.4.2.  Authorization Server Operator-Resource Server
               Operator: Follow-Policies-Accurately-and-Timely  . . . 15
       2.4.3.  Authorization Server Operator-Requesting Party:
               Request-Limited-Claims . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
     2.5.  Obligations of the Authorizing Party . . . . . . . . . . . 16
       2.5.1.  Authorizing Party-Requesting Party: Adhere-to-Terms  . 16



Maler & Hardjono          Expires July 29, 2013                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft           UMA Binding Obligations            January 2013


       2.5.2.  Authorizing Party-Authorization Server Operator:
               Introduce-Resource-Server  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
       2.5.3.  Authorizing Party-Resource Server Operator:
               Introduce-Authorization-Server . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   3.  Acknowledgments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
   4.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
     4.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
     4.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
   Appendix A.  Document History  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18









































Maler & Hardjono          Expires July 29, 2013                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft           UMA Binding Obligations            January 2013


1.  Introduction

   User-Managed Access (UMA) [UMAcore] is a profile of OAuth 2.0.  UMA
   defines how resource owners can control protected-resource access by
   clients operated by arbitrary requesting parties, where the resources
   reside on any number of resource servers, and where a centralized
   authorization server governs access based on resource owner policy.
   This document provides a contractual framework that defines the
   minimum obligations of parties that operate and use UMA-conforming
   software programs and services.  The goal of this framework is to
   support end-to-end legal enforceability of the terms and conditions
   of access sharing relationships between authorizing and requesting
   sides that use UMA.  The audience for this document includes
   technologists, legal professionals, and operators of UMA-conforming
   services.

   Capitalized terms and abbreviations used in this document are defined
   in Section 2.1 because they form a normative part of the framework
   defined in Section 2.  Readers are strongly encouraged to review
   these definitions before reading the rest of the introduction.

1.1.  Sample Use Cases for Sharing Access to Resources

   UMA makes possible a loosely coupled end-to-end access sharing
   relationship between an Authorizing Party and a Requesting Party,
   with its primary goals being to constrain access according to the
   Authorizing Party's access policies and to encourage the Requesting
   Party to adhere to any obligations it consented to in the
   authorization process by raising the consequences for doing
   otherwise.  Following are sample use cases that explore the potential
   differences in these obligations beyond the basic level represented
   in the contractual framework.

   Person-to-self sharing  Here, Alice is both the Authorizing Party and
      the Requesting Party.  This use case describes most types of
      today's OAuth-mediated access, for example, when Alice introduces
      the Klout service to her Twitter account.  She uses both services
      herself, and wants them to communicate together on her behalf.
      With UMA, Alice can potentially manage the entire set of such
      access connections from a single place rather than from Twitter
      and other online "home bases" separately.  In this circumstance,
      it's unlikely Alice will want to impose stringent contract terms
      on herself.

   Person-to-person sharing  Here, Alice is an Authorizing Party and Bob
      is a Requesting Party.  Today, many Web 2.0 sites offer some level
      of selective sharing between people, but methods, strengths, and
      interfaces are inconsistent between sites and people are unable to



Maler & Hardjono          Expires July 29, 2013                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft           UMA Binding Obligations            January 2013


      reuse policies across sites.  Alice can share Flickr photos with
      Bob by adding him to her Flickr friends list or family list or by
      mailing him a special link to a photo album, or Alice can add Bob
      as a friend on Facebook.  With UMA, Alice can craft authorization
      policies that let Bob "qualify in" to get access to her photo
      album and even to other resources she manages at other sites,
      without her having to be present during this process.

   Mediated person-to-organization sharing  Here, Alice is an
      Authorizing Party, the DentalCare company is a Requesting Party,
      and the company's office assistant Carl is a Requesting Party
      Agent.  Alice wants to give her dentist's office, DentalCare,
      temporary access to her calendar to make it easier to schedule a
      series of root canal appointments.  Carl might be the actual
      person acting on behalf of the dental practice who actually asks
      for and views Alice's calendar.  With UMA, Alice can require Carl
      to prove he is acting on behalf of DentalCare -- for example,
      demonstrating control of an email address in the dentalcare.com
      domain -- before seeing her calendar.

   Autonomous person-to-organization sharing  Here, Alice is an
      Authorizing Party and the Valley Vehicles car dealership is a
      Requesting Party.  Alice has crafted a "personal request for
      proposals" because she's in the market for a new car, and she's
      willing to let car dealerships in her region of the country see
      her request and make offers to her.  With UMA, Valley Vehicles and
      other dealerships might use Web crawler services to go out and
      collect requests for proposals, without human helpers, and these
      services might have to prove in automated fashion that they
      legitimately represent the right kind of business.  Alice can also
      ensure each dealership agrees to her terms before seeing her
      request for proposals.

1.2.  How to Use the Contractual Framework

   The contractual framework in Section 2 is the normative portion of
   this document.  It is intended to apply to all Subjects that take
   part in software interactions using services that are declared to be
   UMA-conforming.  It defines the minimum set of obligations that these
   Subjects accept.  The Subjects can adopt additional obligations, and
   can further refine or constrain the obligations listed here, but
   cannot make these minimum obligations less strict.

   Each clause takes the following form:

   "[_Clause ID_].  When [_protocol interaction takes place_], the
   [_obligated Subject_] gains an obligation to the [_expecting
   Subject_] to [_behave towards it in a particular way_]."



Maler & Hardjono          Expires July 29, 2013                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft           UMA Binding Obligations            January 2013


   The clause ID has the following internal structure:

   "[_obligated_]-[_expecting_]-[_keyword_]"

   It uses abbreviations for the obligated and expecting Subjects as
   follows: RqP for Requesting Party, RSO for Resource Server Operator,
   ASO for Authorization Server Operator, and AzP for Authorizing Party.
   Clauses are generally followed by non-normative explanatory comments,
   which are labeled with "Comments:", and occasionally open issues,
   which are labeled with "Issues:".  The latter are meant to be
   resolved and removed before final publication.

   Specific obligations come as a result of precise protocol
   interactions, so that at a moment in time, any one Subject may not
   yet have taken on all of the obligations defined in the contractual
   framework as belonging to that Subject.  By analogy, if Alice were to
   visit a website that imposes terms of service on the site's users,
   but it requires users to consent actively by clicking on an "I Agree"
   button, Alice would take on terms-of-service obligations only after
   she clicks on the button.

   Following are the key UMA interactions that result in obligations,
   with specific cross-references into the [UMAcore] specification.  A
   non-normative visual correlation of interactions to binding
   obligations can be found at [UMAFAQ-swim].  (Lowercase versions of
   names are references to constructs in the technical specification
   versus this document.)

   o  An authorization server issues a protection API token (PAT) to a
      resource server: Section 1.3.1.

   o  An authorization server issues an authorization API token (AAT) to
      a client: Section 1.3.1.

   o  An authorization server issues a requesting party token (RPT) to a
      client: Section 3.4.1.

   o  An authorization server responds positively to a client's
      authorization request: Section 3.4.2.

   o  A resource server determines the status of an RPT: Section 3.3.

   o  A resource server registers a client-requested permission: Section
      3.2.

   o  A requesting party supplies claims to an authorization server:
      Section 3.5.




Maler & Hardjono          Expires July 29, 2013                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft           UMA Binding Obligations            January 2013


   o  A resource server responds to a client's request for access:
      Sections 3.1.1 and 3.1.2.

   o  A client successfully receives access: Section 3.1.2.

1.3.  Obligations Not in the Scope of the Contractual Framework

   Of the Subject types defined and discussed in this document, some --
   Requesting Party Agents and Client Operators -- have no UMA-dictated
   obligations, though they might have obligations as part of
   contractual agreements with other UMA-related Subjects, for example,
   pairwise contracts or membership in trust frameworks.  Additionally,
   pairs or groups of Subjects that do have obligations imposed by the
   contractual framework might have additional obligations among
   themselves beyond those in the framework.  Following are some typical
   examples:

   o  When a Resource Owner registers for an account at a Resource
      Server, the Authorizing Party might gain an obligation to the
      Resource Server Operator to adhere to the Resource Server
      Operator's terms of service.

   o  When a Client registers with an Authorization Server for OAuth
      client credentials (for example, through an explicit approval
      process or through a passive "API-wrap" process), the Client
      Operator might gain an obligation to the Authorization Server
      Operator (apart from any particular Requesting Party's usage of
      that Client) to adhere to the Authorization Server Operator's
      terms of service for API clients.

   o  When a Subject becomes a Requesting Party Agent for a Requesting
      Party (for example, through an employment agreement), the
      Requesting Party Agent might gain an obligation to adhere to any
      agent agreements in place in the Subject's UMA-related
      interactions performed on behalf of the Requesting Party.

   o  When a Requesting Party contracts with a Client Operator to engage
      in UMA-related interactions on the Requesting Party's behalf, the
      Client Operator might gain an obligation to adhere to the terms of
      that contract.  For example, a car dealership may contract out to
      use a cloud service that crawls the Web looking for personal RFPs
      that meet the dealership's criteria, and want to impose
      confidentiality requirements.

   o  When a Client accesses a protected resource at a Resource Server,
      the Resource Server Operator might gain an obligation to the
      Client Operator to be trustworthy as a source of the expected
      data.  For example, in a scenario where the Requesting Party is



Maler & Hardjono          Expires July 29, 2013                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft           UMA Binding Obligations            January 2013


      also the Authorizing Party and is trying to fill in an online loan
      application through an online financial service (the Client),
      where the Resource Server Operator provides credit risk data about
      the Authorizing User, the Client Operator will want to
      authenticate the Resource Server service in some fashion.


2.  Binding Obligations on UMA Participants

   This section constitutes a normative framework that defines the
   minimum obligations gained by parties that operate and use software
   programs and services that the operators declare to be UMA-
   conforming.  The framework consists of clauses, where each subsection
   with content is a clause.

2.1.  Terminology

2.1.1.  Terms

   This framework uses the following terms.  Where terms are used
   without capitalization and are not otherwise defined in the
   [UMAcore], they are used in their normal sense.

   Individual
         A natural person (that is, a human being) with the capacity to
         take on contractual duties and obligations as a participant in
         an UMA interaction.

   Non-Person Entity (NPE)
         A legal person (such as a corporation) with the capacity to
         take on contractual duties and obligations as a participant in
         an UMA interaction.

   Subject
         An Individual or NPE.  Subjects play various roles in achieving
         and seeking user-managed access, and the same Subject might
         serve in multiple contractual roles.

   Conformance
         Claimed adherence of a running software program or service to
         the requirements of one or more of the roles "authorization
         server", "resource server", or "client", as defined in
         [UMAcore].  Software components play various roles in
         participating in the technical interactions necessary to
         achieve and seek user-managed access, and the same software
         component might serve in multiple technical roles.





Maler & Hardjono          Expires July 29, 2013                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft           UMA Binding Obligations            January 2013


   Authorizing Party
         A Subject that fills the "resource owner" role as defined in
         [UMAcore], using and configuring software services that
         variously fill the "authorization server" and "resource server"
         roles.  This Subject is the "user" in "User-Managed Access";
         UMA's first priority is to enable Individuals to serve in the
         Authorizing Party role, though NPEs can serve in this role as
         well.

   Authorization Server
         A software service that fills the "authorization server" role
         as defined in [UMAcore].

   Authorization Server Operator
         A Subject responsible for running and operating an
         Authorization Server.

   Resource Server
         A software service that fills the "resource server" role as
         defined in [UMAcore].

   Resource Server Operator
         A Subject responsible for running and operating a Resource
         Server.

   Client
         A software application or service that fills the "client" role
         as defined in [UMAcore].

   Client Operator
         A Subject responsible for running and operating a Client.

   Requesting Party
         A Subject that uses a Client to seek access to a protected
         resource.  This Subject may be an Individual or an NPE.  The
         Requesting Party and the Authorizing Party may be the same
         Subject or different Subjects.

   Requesting Party Agent
         A Subject using a Client to seek access to a protected resource
         on behalf of a Requesting Party.  Typically this Subject is an
         Individual acting on behalf of an NPE.

   Comments: The [UETA] defines two terms that are particularly relevant
   to understanding the interactions among UMA participants:

   o  "'Automated transaction' means a transaction conducted or
      performed, in whole or in part, by electronic means or electronic



Maler & Hardjono          Expires July 29, 2013                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft           UMA Binding Obligations            January 2013


      records, in which the acts or records of one or both parties are
      not reviewed by an individual in the ordinary course in forming a
      contract, performing under an existing contract, or fulfilling an
      obligation required by the transaction."

   o  "'Electronic agent' means a computer program or an electronic or
      other automated means used independently to initiate an action or
      respond to electronic records or performances in whole or in part,
      without review or action by an individual."

   Where a Client is used by a human Requesting Party or a human
   Requesting Party Agent, at times human-computer interaction (HCI)
   will be required, but otherwise the access-attempt transaction is
   likely to be fully automatic from the perspective of the "requesting
   side".  Furthermore, where the Authorizing Party and the Requesting
   Party are the same natural person, or where the Authorizing Party has
   set a policy that requires real-time approval through some out-of-
   band method, this person can expect to engage in HCI.  Otherwise the
   access-attempt transaction is likely to be fully automatic from the
   perspective of the "authorizing side" because the access attempt is
   made without any requirement for the Authorizing Party to be present
   at run time.

   The National Strategy for Trusted Identities in Cyberspace [NSTIC]
   defines some terms similar to those defined here:

   o  "An individual is a person engaged in an online transaction.
      Individuals are the first priority of the Strategy."

   o  "A non-person entity (NPE) may also require authentication in the
      Identity Ecosystem.  NPEs can be organizations, hardware,
      networks, software, or services and are treated much like
      individuals within the Identity Ecosystem.  NPEs may engage in or
      support a transaction."

   o  "The subject of a transaction may be an individual or an NPE."

   UMA shares with NSTIC a priority to enable and empower individual
   people in the context of their online interactions.  Note that this
   framework uses the terms Individual, NPE, and Subject exclusively for
   parties that have the capacity to take on contractual obligations,
   distinguishing them "from hardware, networks, software, or services",
   which do not have this capacity.

2.1.2.  Abbreviations

   This framework uses the following abbreviations.




Maler & Hardjono          Expires July 29, 2013                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft           UMA Binding Obligations            January 2013


   UMA  User-Managed Access, the interoperability protocol defined by in
      [UMAcore] and the other specifications it includes normatively by
      reference.

   API  Application programming interface.

   PAT  Protection API token, as defined iin [UMAcore].

   AAT  Authorization API token, as defined in [UMAcore].

   RPT  Requesting party token, as defined in [UMAcore].

   Comments: Tokens are critical to managing authorization and auditing
   of resource access.  Section 1.3 is recommended reading for
   understanding what the various tokens represent and how they are
   issued and used.  The RPT, in particular, has a definition that can
   vary depending on the RPT profile in use; thus, any obligations in
   this framework that depend on an RPT profile specify it by name.

2.2.  Obligations of the Requesting Party

2.2.1.  Requesting Party-Authorizing Party: Adhere-to-Terms

   When the Client successfully gains access from a Resource Server to a
   protected resource by wielding a valid "bearer" RPT associated with
   at least one currently valid permission for the type of access
   sought, the Requesting Party using that Client gains an obligation to
   the Authorizing Party to adhere to any terms it agreed to in order to
   gain the permission.

   Comments: This key obligation enables the end-to-end access
   authorization agreement that UMA exists to forge.  At a previous
   stage, the Requesting Party asked for a relevant permission from the
   Authorization Server and might have had to provide claims of a
   promissory nature.  Accepting access to the protected resource binds
   the Requesting Party to any terms it agreed to using the claims
   mechanism, for example, agreeing only to read the resource rather
   than modifying it, or forbearing from selling the resource data to
   someone else.

   Issues: Note that the obligation goes into effect the first time a
   Client gains access under the power of a "currently valid
   permission".  If there was more than one valid permission attached to
   different sets of promises, if a secure record was not kept by the
   Resource Server and/or Authorization Server of which permission was
   used for granting access, ambiguity is introduced.  Defining and
   using RPT profiles other than the "bearer" profile might lessen the
   potential ambiguity.



Maler & Hardjono          Expires July 29, 2013                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft           UMA Binding Obligations            January 2013


2.2.2.  Requesting Party-Authorizing Party: Make-Factual-Representations

   When the Requesting Party provides, or facilitates the sourcing of,
   claims to an Authorization Server in a claims-gathering flow, the
   Requesting Party gains an obligation to the Authorizing Party to
   stand behind any factual representations it makes in order to gain
   the permission, to the best of its knowledge at the time it makes
   them.

   Comments: This obligation is gained during the providing of actual
   claims, rather than at the time of AAT issuance or protected resource
   access, because factual claims might age and expire.  Where the
   Requesting Party supplies or sources claims in a manner that can be
   verified by the Authorization Server, the risk imposed by this need
   for "trust" can be reduced.  Note that UMA defines an optional OpenID
   Connect claim profile that provides one way to collect trusted claims
   from third-party claim providers.

2.2.3.  Requesting Party-Authorization Server Operator: Supply-Truthful-
        Claims

   When the Authorization Server issues an AAT to a Client and for as
   long as the AAT is valid, the Requesting Party using that Client
   gains an obligation to the Authorization Server Operator to supply or
   facilitate access to truthful claims required for access
   authorization at this AM, when it chooses to supply them, to the best
   of its knowledge at the time it supplies them.

   Comments: At a later stage, the Requesting Party might be asked to
   provide claims to support authorization processes at this
   Authorization Server for accessing _all_ resources protected by this
   Authorization Server, managed by any Authorizing Parties, at any
   Resource Servers.  The Requesting Party's responsibility to act in
   good faith in interacting with this Authorization Server begins now
   because factual claims it supplies could be reused for more than one
   access-sharing relationship.  This obligation can be removed through
   AAT revocation.

2.2.4.  Requesting Party-Resource Server Operator: Is-Legitimate-Bearer

   When the Authorization Server issues an RPT to a Client and for as
   long as the RPT is valid, the Requesting Party using that Client
   gains an obligation to the Resource Server Operator to represent the
   legitimate bearer of the RPT or its authorized representative, and
   not to allow others to impersonate the Requesting Party.

   Comments: In the case where the "bearer" RPT profile or any other
   bearer-style RPT profile is used, the token may not be bound in any



Maler & Hardjono          Expires July 29, 2013                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft           UMA Binding Obligations            January 2013


   technically confirmable way to the specific client and requesting
   party it applies to.  Defining and using different UMA token profiles
   can mitigate the risk of failure or malice on the Requesting Party's
   part.  The "authorized representative" phrase is intended to clear
   the way for token-chaining profiles or similar.

2.3.  Obligations of the Resource Server Operator

2.3.1.  Resource Server Operator-Authorizing Party: Delegate-Protection

   When the Authorization Server issues a PAT to a Resource Server and
   as long as the PAT is valid, the Resource Server Operator gains an
   obligation to the Authorizing Party to delegate protection services
   to the Authorization Server Operator for the set of protectable
   resources for which it represents this capability to the Authorizing
   Party, and to respect the authorization data that the Authorization
   Server has associated with an RPT when the Resource Server
   subsequently allows or disallows access by the Client that presented
   that RPT.

   Comments: Once the Authorization Server Operator becomes the
   Authorizing Party's authorization proxy, it begins relying on the
   Resource Server Operator in other, more specific ways.  The Resource
   Server has the opportunity to inspect AM-issued permissions or take
   other actions that delegate protection responsibility to the
   Authorization Server at a later stage, but its responsibility for
   respecting them begins now.  The specific protection services made
   available to the Resource Server by the Authorization Server differ
   depending on the RPT profile in use.  This obligation can be removed
   through PAT revocation.

2.3.2.  Resource Server Operator-Authorization Server Operator:
        Register-Accurately-and-Timely

   When the Authorization Server issues a PAT to the Resource Server and
   as long as the PAT is valid, the Resource Server Operator gains an
   obligation to the Authorization Server Operator to register resource
   set descriptions accurately and timely according to the Authorizing
   Party's expressed instructions for protection.

   Comments: At a later stage, the Resource Server has the opportunity
   to register resource sets, but its responsibility for performing this
   task begins now.  The Resource Server Operator may have contracted
   with the Authorizing Party for service-level agreements to respond
   specifically to timeliness needs and so on.  This obligation can be
   removed through PAT revocation.





Maler & Hardjono          Expires July 29, 2013                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft           UMA Binding Obligations            January 2013


2.3.3.  Resource Server Operator-Authorization Server Operator: Respect-
        Permissions

   When the Resource Server successfully introspects a "bearer" RPT, the
   Resource Server Operator gains an obligation to the Authorization
   Server Operator to respect the permissions that the Authorization
   Server has associated with the RPT when the Resource Server
   subsequently allows or disallows access by the Client that presented
   that RPT.

   Comments: The Resource Server Operator, as a Subject that is
   otherwise potentially not obligated to the Authorization Server
   Operator, carries a great deal of responsibility here not to allow
   access where the Authorization Server has not granted permission and
   to make every effort to grant access where the Authorization Server
   has granted permission.  Its interpretation of scopes and permissions
   is not directly auditable by the Authorization Server.  Further,
   issues can arise from the skew between permission validity periods
   and actual access.  Defining and using different RPT profiles can
   mitigate the risk of failure or malice on the Resource Server
   Operator's part.

2.3.4.  Resource Server Operator-Requesting Party: Give-Accurate-Access

   When the Resource Server responds in any fashion to a Client's access
   request, the Resource Server Operator gains an obligation to the
   Requesting Party to give accurate access to the protected resource
   according to whether the Requesting Party has permission to do so.

   Comments: The Resource Server Operator, as a Subject that is
   otherwise potentially not obligated to the Authorization Server
   Operator, carries a great deal of responsibility here to make every
   effort to grant access where the Authorization Server has associated
   authorization data to guide access.  Its interpretation of scopes and
   permissions, particularly in the case where the RPT presented by the
   Client uses the "bearer" RPT profile, is not entirely auditable by
   the requester or Authorization Server.  Further, issues can arise
   from the skew between permission validity periods and actual access.
   Defining and using different RPT profiles can mitigate the risk of
   failure on the Resource Server Operator's part.

   Issues: The relying party traditionally always has the right of
   refusal.  The resource server may have additional authorization
   context available only to it that suggests it should not grant
   access, for example.  Should this obligation be struck?






Maler & Hardjono          Expires July 29, 2013                [Page 14]

Internet-Draft           UMA Binding Obligations            January 2013


2.4.  Obligations of the Authorization Server Operator

2.4.1.  Authorization Server Operator-Authorizing Party: Follow-
        Policies-Accurately-and-Timely

   When the Authorization Server issues a PAT to the Resource Server and
   as long as the PAT is valid, the Authorization Server Operator gains
   an obligation to the Authorizing Party to adhere to the Authorizing
   Party's policies accurately and timely in granting permissions.

   Comments: At a later stage, the Authorization Server will require the
   Resource Server to present the PAT whenever it uses the Authorization
   Server's protection API on behalf of this Authorizing Party.  The
   Authorization Server Operator may have contracted with the
   Authorizing Party for service-level agreements to respond
   specifically to timeliness needs and so on.  This obligation can be
   removed through PAT revocation.

2.4.2.  Authorization Server Operator-Resource Server Operator: Follow-
        Policies-Accurately-and-Timely

   When the Resource Server registers a requested permission at the
   Authorization Server, the Authorization Server Operator gains an
   obligation to the Resource Server Operator to adhere to the
   Authorizing Party's authorization policies accurately and timely in
   associating authorization data with RPTs presented with the
   registered permission's ticket.

   Comments: At a later stage, when a Client approaches the
   Authorization Server presenting an RPT and a permission ticket, the
   Authorization Server matches Authorizing Party policies to the
   requested permission to drive any requests for claims and ultimate
   authorization processes, but its responsibility for performing this
   task begins now.

2.4.3.  Authorization Server Operator-Requesting Party: Request-Limited-
        Claims

   When the Authorization Server issues an AAT to a Client and as long
   as the AAT is valid, the Authorization Server Operator gains an
   obligation to the Requesting Party to request only claims that
   support the purpose of satisfying an Authorizing Party's policy.

   Comments: At a later stage, the Authorization Server might ask the
   Requesting Party to provide claims for specific permission purposes
   at multiple Resource Servers and/or for multiple Authorizing Parties,
   but its responsibility begins now.  This obligation can be removed
   through AAT revocation.



Maler & Hardjono          Expires July 29, 2013                [Page 15]

Internet-Draft           UMA Binding Obligations            January 2013


2.5.  Obligations of the Authorizing Party

2.5.1.  Authorizing Party-Requesting Party: Adhere-to-Terms

   When the Authorization Server responds positively to a Client's
   request for authorization, the Authorizing Party gains an obligation
   to the Requesting Party using that Client to adhere to the terms
   offered to and accepted by the Requesting Party in the form of
   requests for claims driven by the Authorizing Party's policy at the
   Authorization Server.

   Comments: For example, the Authorizing User cannot subsequently
   protest or sue the Requesting Party for resale of the user's data if
   this was allowed by the terms of access authorization.

2.5.2.  Authorizing Party-Authorization Server Operator: Introduce-
        Resource-Server

   When the Authorization Server issues a PAT to a Resource Server and
   as long as the PAT is valid, the Authorizing Party gains an
   obligation to the Authorization Server Operator to introduce the
   desired Resource Server to this Authorization Server in outsourcing
   protection of this Resource Server's resources.

   Comments: How the Resource Server learned of the Authorization
   Server's location is out of band for UMA; it is the Authorizing
   Party's responsibility to check that it has been redirected to an
   acceptable Authorization Server before the Authorization Server
   successfully issues the PAT.  This obligation can be removed through
   PAT revocation.

2.5.3.  Authorizing Party-Resource Server Operator: Introduce-
        Authorization-Server

   When the Authorization Server issues a PAT to a Resource Server and
   as long as the PAT is valid, the Authorizing Party gains an
   obligation to the Resource Server Operator to introduce the desired
   Authorization Server to this Resource Server in outsourcing
   protection of this Resource Server's resources.

   Comments: Once the Authorization Server Operator becomes the
   Authorizing Party's authorization proxy, the Resource Server Operator
   begins relying on it in other, more specific ways.  How the
   Authorizing Party indicated the desired Authorization Server to the
   host is out of band for UMA; it is the Authorizing Party's
   responsibility to check that it has been redirected to an acceptable
   Authorization Server before the Authorization Server successfully
   issues the PAT.  This obligation can be removed through PAT



Maler & Hardjono          Expires July 29, 2013                [Page 16]

Internet-Draft           UMA Binding Obligations            January 2013


   revocation.


3.  Acknowledgments

   The current editor of this document is Eve Maler of XMLgrrl.com.  The
   following people are co-authors:

   o  Domenico Catalano, Oracle Corp.

   o  Kevin Cox, Edentiti

   o  Sal D'Agostino, IDmachines

   o  Susan Morrow, Avoco Secure

   o  Dazza Greenwood, Civics.com

   Additional contributors to this document include the Kantara UMA Work
   Group participants, a list of whom can be found at [UMAnitarians].
   The co-authors and contributors thank Scott David, Dazza Greenwood,
   and Tom Smedinghoff for offering their legal expertise and insight in
   the preparation of this document.


4.  References

4.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [UMAcore]  Hardjono, T., "User-Managed Access (UMA) Profile of OAuth
              2.0", December 2012,
              <http://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-hardjono-oauth-umacore>.

4.2.  Informative References

   [NSTIC]    US Federal Government, "National Strategy for Trusted
              Identities in Cyberspace", April 2011, <http://
              www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/rss_viewer/
              NSTICstrategy_041511.pdf>.

   [UETA]     Smedinghoff, T., "Uniform Electronic Transactions Act",
              1999, <http://www.law.upenn.edu/bll/archives/ulc/fnact99/
              1990s/ueta99.htm>.

   [UMAFAQ-swim]



Maler & Hardjono          Expires July 29, 2013                [Page 17]

Internet-Draft           UMA Binding Obligations            January 2013


              US Federal Government, "UMA Frequently Asked Questions:
              What is the UMA protocol flow?", January 2013, <http://
              kantarainitiative.org/confluence/display/uma/
              UMA+FAQ#UMAFAQ-WhatistheUMAprotocolflow>.

   [UMAnitarians]
              Maler, E., "UMA Participant Roster", 2012, <http://
              kantarainitiative.org/confluence/display/uma/
              Participant+Roster>.


Appendix A.  Document History

   NOTE: To be removed by RFC editor before publication as an RFC.


Authors' Addresses

   Eve Maler (editor)
   XMLgrrl.com

   Email: eve@xmlgrrl.com


   Thomas Hardjono
   MIT

   Email: hardjono@mit.edu























Maler & Hardjono          Expires July 29, 2013                [Page 18]

