


SCIM WG                                                          P. Hunt
Internet-Draft                                                    Oracle
Intended status: Informational                             B. Khasnabish
Expires: April 11, 2013                                    ZTE USA, Inc.
                                                              A. Nadalin
                                                               Microsoft
                                                              Z. Zeltsan
                                                          Alcatel-Lucent
                                                         October 8, 2012


                             SCIM Use Cases
                    draft-zeltsan-scim-use-cases-00

Abstract

   This document lists the use cases of System for Cross-domain Identity
   Management (SCIM).

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 11, 2013.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2012 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of



Hunt, et al.             Expires April 11, 2013                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft               SCIM Use Cases                 October 2012


   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  SCIM use cases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     2.1.  Change of the ownership of a file  . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     2.2.  Migration of the identities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     2.3.  Single Sign-On (SSO) Service . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     2.4.  Provisioning of the user accounts for a Community of
           Interest (CoI) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     2.5.  Update attributes of a user who had previously
           interacted with a relying party web site . . . . . . . . .  7
     2.6.  Change notification  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   3.  Security considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   4.  IANA considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   5.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   6.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10






























Hunt, et al.             Expires April 11, 2013                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft               SCIM Use Cases                 October 2012


1.  Introduction

   This document describes the SCIM use cases.  It also provides a list
   of the requirements derived from the use cases.  The document's
   objective is to help with understanding of the design and
   applicability of SCIM schema [I-D.ietf-scim-core-schema] and SCIM
   protocol [I-D.ietf-scim-api].

   The following section provides the abbreviated descriptions of the
   use cases.


2.  SCIM use cases

   This section lists the SCIM use cases.

2.1.  Change of the ownership of a file

   Description:

   Bob - an employee of the company SomeEnterprise - creates a file,
   which is located at the cloud provided by SomeCSP.  After Bob leaves
   SomeEnterprise, SomeCSP on a request from SomeEnterprise terminates
   Bob's rights to the file and transfers his former rights to Bill -
   another employee of SomeEnterprise.

   Pre-conditions:

   o  SomeCSP is a cloud service provider for SomeEnterprise

   o  With permission of SomeEnterprise, Bob had created a file at the
      cloud provided by SomeCSP

   o  Bob has left SomeEnterprise

   o  SomeEnterprise terminates Bob's rights to the file and, possibly,
      decommissions Bob's identity

   o  SomeEnterprise communicates the changes to the Bob's rights to
      SomeCSP

   o  SomeCSP enforces the changes made by SomeEnterprise

   o  SomeEnterprise requests SomeCSP to transfer Bob's former rights to
      Bill

   Post-conditions:




Hunt, et al.             Expires April 11, 2013                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft               SCIM Use Cases                 October 2012


   o  Bob does not have the rights to the file at the cloud provided by
      SomeCSP

   o  Bill has the rights to the file that Bob had had

   Requirements:

   o  SomeEnterprise can securely communicate to SomeCSP all changes
      regarding its employee's identity

   o  SomeCSP can enforce the requested changes

   o  SomeCSP shall be able to log all changes regarding a
      SomeEnterprise employee's identity

   o  The logs should be secure and available for auditing

2.2.  Migration of the identities

   Description:

   A company SomeEnterprise runs an application ManageThem that relies
   on the identity information about its employees (e.g., identifiers,
   attributes).  The identity information is stored at the cloud
   provided by SomeCSP.  SomeEnterprise has decided to move identity
   information to the cloud of a different provider - AnotherCSP.  In
   addition, SomeEnterprise has purchased a second application
   ManageThemMore, which also relies on the identity information.
   SomeEnterprise is able to move identity information to AnotherCSP
   without changing the format of identity information.  The application
   ManageThemMore is able to use the identity information.

   Pre-conditions:

   o  SomeCSP is a cloud service provider for SomeEnterprise

   o  AnotherCSP is a new cloud service provider for SomeEnterprise

   o  All involved cloud service providers and applications support the
      same standard specifying the format for and actions on the user
      (e.g., employee) identity information

   Post-conditions:

   o  SomeEnterprise has moved its employees' identity information from
      SomeCSP to AnotherCSP without making any changes to representation
      of identity information




Hunt, et al.             Expires April 11, 2013                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft               SCIM Use Cases                 October 2012


   o  Application ManageThemMore is able to use the identity information

   Requirements:

   o  SomeEnterprise, the applications ManageThem and ManageThemMore,
      the providers SomeCSP and AnotherCSP support a common standard for
      identity information, which specifies the following:

      *  Format (or schema) for representing user identity information

      *  Interfaces and protocol for managing user identity information

   o  Cloud providers shall be able to log all actions related to
      SomeEnterprise employees' identities

   o  The logs should be secure and available for auditing

2.3.  Single Sign-On (SSO) Service

   Description:

   Bob has an account with application hosted by a cloud service
   provider SomeCSP.  SomeCSP has federated its user identities with a
   cloud service provider AnotherCSP.  Bob requests a service from an
   application running on AnotherCSP.  The application running on
   AnotherCSP, relying on Bob's authentication by SomeCSP and using
   identity information provided by SomeCSP, serves Bob's request.

   Pre-conditions:

   o  Bob's identity information is stored on SomeCSP

   o  SomeCSP and AnotherCSP have established trust and federated their
      user identities

   o  SomeCSP is able to authenticate Bob

   o  SomeCSP is able to securely provide the authentication results to
      AnotherCSP

   o  SomeCSP is able to securely provide Bob's identity information
      (e.g., attributes) to AnotherCSP

   o  AnotherCSP is able to verify information provided by SomeCSP

   o  SomeCSP is able to process the identity information received from
      AnotherCSP




Hunt, et al.             Expires April 11, 2013                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft               SCIM Use Cases                 October 2012


   Post-conditions:

   Bob has received the requested service from an application running on
   AnotherCSP without having to authenticate to that application
   explicitly.

   Requirements:

   o  Bob must have an account with SomeCSP

   o  SomeCSP and AnotherCSP must establish trust and federate their
      user identities

   o  SomeCSP must be able to authenticate Bob

   o  SomeCSP must be able to securely provide the authentication
      results to AnotherCSP

   o  SomeCSP must be able to securely provide Bob's identity
      information (e.g., attributes) to AnotherCSP

   o  AnotherCSP must be able to verify the identity information
      provided by SomeCSP

   o  SomeCSP must be able to process the identity information received
      from AnotherCSP

   o  SomeCSP and AnotherCSP must log information generated by Bob's
      actions according to their policies and the trust agreement
      between them

2.4.  Provisioning of the user accounts for a Community of Interest
      (CoI)

   Description:

   Organization YourHR provides Human Resources (HR) services to a
   Community of Interest (CoI) YourCoI.  The HR services are offered as
   Software-as-a-Service (SaaS) on public and private clouds.  YourCoI's
   offices are located all over the world.  Their Information Technology
   (IT) systems may be composed of the combinations of the applications
   running on Private and Public clouds along with the traditional IT
   systems.  The local YourCoI offices are responsible for establishing
   personal information and (i.e., setting the user identities and
   attributes).  YourHR services provide means for provisioning and
   distributing the employee identity information across all YourCoI
   offices.  YourHR also enables the individual users (e.g., employees)
   to manage their personal information that they are responsible for



Hunt, et al.             Expires April 11, 2013                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft               SCIM Use Cases                 October 2012


   (e.g., update of an address or a telephone number).

   Pre-conditions:

   o  YourCoI has a complex infrastructure composed of the large number
      of local offices that rely on the diverse IT systems

   o  YourCoI has contracted YourHR to provide the HR services

   o  Each local office has a right to establish a personal account for
      an employee

   Post-conditions:

   o  All personal accounts are globally available to any authorized
      user or application across the YourCoI system through the services
      provided by YourHR

   o  The employees have ability to manage the part of personal
      information that is in their responsibility

   Requirements:

   o  YourHR must ensure that the personal information generated by the
      local offices is timely available in a globally-accessible
      database

   o  Only authorized users and applications must be able to access
      personal information

   o  Identity management of the personal data must be secure

   o  All operation with identity data must be securely logged

   o  The logs should be available for auditing

2.5.  Update attributes of a user who had previously interacted with a
      relying party web site

   Description:

   An end user has an account in a directory service A with one or more
   attributes.  That user then visits relying party web site B, and
   through a federation protocol (e.g., WS-Federation, SAML, OAuth),
   selected attributes of the user are transferred from the user's
   account in directory service A to the web site B at the time of the
   user's first visit to that site.




Hunt, et al.             Expires April 11, 2013                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft               SCIM Use Cases                 October 2012


   The attributes of the user change later in directory service A. For
   example, the attributes might change if the user changes their name,
   has their account disabled, or terminates their relationship with
   directory service A. The directory service A then wishes to notify
   relying party web site B of these changes, as relying party B might
   (or might not) have a cache of those attributes, and if the relying
   party B were aware of these changes to their cached copy, would
   potentially cause a state change in relying party B. (E.g., if the
   user's account were disabled in A, then the relying party B might
   wish to also change their access control policies as well).

   Pre-conditions:

   o  User has an account in a directory service A

   o  User has one or more attributes

   o  User visits web site of a relying party B

   Post-conditions:

   Selected attributes of the user are transferred from the user's
   account in directory service A to the web site B at the time of the
   user's first visit to that site.

   Requirements:

   Relying parties have to be aware of changes to their cached copy, as
   these would potentially cause a state change in other relying
   parties.

2.6.  Change notification

   Description:

   An end user has an account in a directory service A with one or more
   attributes.  That user then visits relying party web site B. Relying
   party web site B queries directory service A for attributes
   associated with that user, and related resources.

   The attributes of the user change later in directory service A. For
   example, the attributes might change if the user changes their name,
   has their account disabled, or terminates their relationship with
   directory service A. Furthermore, other resources and their
   attributes might also change.  The directory service A then wishes to
   notify relying party web site B of these changes, as relying party B
   might (or might not) have a cache of those attributes, and if the
   relying party B were aware of these changes to their cached copy,



Hunt, et al.             Expires April 11, 2013                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft               SCIM Use Cases                 October 2012


   would potentially cause a state change in relying party B.

   The volume of changes, however, might be substantial, and only some
   of the changes may be of interest to relying party B, so directory
   service A does not wish to "push" all the changes to B. Instead,
   directory service A wishes to notify B that there are changes
   potentially of interest, such that B can at an appropriate time
   subsequently contact directory service A and retrieve just the subset
   of changes of interest to B.

   Pre-conditions:

   o  User has an account in a directory service A

   o  User has one or more attributes

   o  User visits relying party web site B

   Post-conditions:

   Service A is able to notify B that there are changes potentially of
   interest.

   Requirements:

   B must be able at an appropriate time to subsequently contact
   directory service A and retrieve just the subset of changes of
   interest to B.


3.  Security considerations

   TBD


4.  IANA considerations

   This Internet Draft includes no request to IANA.


5.  Acknowledgements

   TBD


6.  Informative References

   [I-D.ietf-scim-api]



Hunt, et al.             Expires April 11, 2013                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft               SCIM Use Cases                 October 2012


              Drake, T., Mortimore, C., Ansari, M., Grizzle, K., and E.
              Wahlstroem, "System for Cross-Domain Identity Management:
              Protocol", draft-ietf-scim-api-00 (work in progress),
              August 2012.

   [I-D.ietf-scim-core-schema]
              Mortimore, C., Harding, P., Madsen, P., and T. Drake,
              "System for Cross-Domain Identity Management: Core
              Schema", draft-ietf-scim-core-schema-00 (work in
              progress), August 2012.


Authors' Addresses

   Phil Hunt
   Oracle

   Email: phil.hunt@oracle.com


   Bhumip Khasnabish
   ZTE USA, Inc.

   Phone: +001-781-752-8003
   Email: vumip1@gmail.com, bhumip.khasnabish@zteusa.com


   Anthony Nadalin
   Microsoft


   Email: tonynad@microsoft.com


   Zachary Zeltsan
   Alcatel-Lucent
   600 Mountain Avenue
   Murray Hill, New Jersey
   USA

   Phone: +1 908 582 2359
   Email: Zachary.Zeltsan@alcatel-lucent.com









Hunt, et al.             Expires April 11, 2013                [Page 10]

