

General Area                                             A. M. Rutkowski 
Internet-Draft                                   Netmagic Associates LLC 
Intended status: Informational 
Expires: January 14, 2014                                  July 14, 2013 

                Accession to the ITRs Considered Harmful  
              draft-rutkowski-itr-accession-harmful-00.txt 


Abstract 

   One of the treaties maintained by the International Telecommunication 
   Union is the International Telecommunication Regulations (ITRs), whose 
   purpose historically has been to create international service 
   uniformity and a global monopoly cartel for provisioning legacy 
   international telecommunication services. Nations such as the U.S. 
   and Canada have typically neither signed them nor accepted their 
   provisions. The 1988 version of the ITRs was similar in purpose and 
   effect, but failed in its objectives because the mandated OSI 
   services and ITU-T standards were unsuccessful in the marketplace. In 
   addition, most of the world's Nation-States moved away from monopoly 
   government-run telecom provisioning to competitive market models. 
   This also resulted in a substantial decline of the ITU itself as an 
   intergovernmental home for monopoly Nation-State providers. 
   
   Given this institutional decline and the vestigial opposition of some 
   ITU Members to this provisioning paradigm shift, efforts were begun a 
   decade ago by some ITU participants and officials to imbue the ITU 
   with a vast expansion of its scope and jurisdiction and impose new 
   regulatory controls through revisions to the moribund ITRs. Most 
   progressive national Administrations opposed these efforts. The 
   conflict played out in Dec 2012 in Dubai at a global treaty conference 
   known as the WCIT. 
   
   Only 89 of the ITU 193 member nations signed the resulting treaty 
   instrument at Dubai - largely those without significant national 
   communication infrastructure, or those favoring strong regulatory 
   regimes for Internet use. The result was an embarrassing 
   miscalculation for those seeking these changes. It bifurcated the 
   treaty basis for the ITU. This document analyses the many adverse 
   effects of the resulting treaty, and identifies problems that may 
   arise for those states acceding to the treaty. It concludes by noting 
   how the Internet community, including citizens of non-signatory 
   countries, benefit from the rejection of this broken treaty 
   instrument. 






Rutkowski               Expires January 14, 2014                 [Page 1] 


Internet-Draft             ITR Accession Harmful                July 2013 


Status of this Memo 

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the 
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79. 
   
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering Task 
   Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other 
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts. 
   
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
   
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt. 
   
   
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
   
   
   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 14, 2014. 


Copyright Notice 

   Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the 
   document authors. All rights reserved. 
   
   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal 
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents 
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of 
   publication of this document. Please review these documents 
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect 
   to this document. Code Components extracted from this document must 
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of the 
   Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as described 
   in the Simplified BSD License. 


Table of Contents 
   
   1.   Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 
   2.   The 2012 ITRs and their far-reaching adverse effects . . . . . 4 
   3.   Specific adverse effects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5 
   4.   Future ITU treaty instrument evolution . . . . . . . . . . . . 7 
   5.   IANA considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7 
   6.   Security considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8 
   7.   Informative references   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8 
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9 



Rutkowski               Expires January 14, 2014                 [Page 2] 


Internet-Draft             ITR Accession Harmful                July 2013 

1. Introduction 

   The World Conference on International Telecommunications (WCIT-12) was 
   convened in December 2012 as a treaty conference among the ITU Member 
   Nation-States to revise the International Telecommunication 
   Regulations (ITRs). The ITRs - which trace their origin to the 1850 
   Dresden Treaty for the electrical telegraph - have historically 
   existed to effect a global cartel among ITU's Members by maintaining 
   provisioning constraints and controls over legacy telecommunication 
   services that they provided. The U.S., Canada, and other nations that 
   did not provide public telecommunications through a national 
   government agency (known as a PTT), typically did not participate in 
   the conferences or adhere to the treaty provisions. 
   
   The most recent version of the ITRs produced in 1988 were an abysmal 
   failure because of wholesale reservations to the provisions, because 
   they mandated the use of OSI platforms and ITU-T standards that failed 
   completely in the marketplace, and the elimination of most national 
   government telecommunication provisioning monopolies in the 1990s. 
   The last factor was accompanied by the emergence of pro-competition 
   treaty regimes such as the World Trade Organization General Agreement 
   on Trade in Services. The Internet, global mobile infrastructure, and 
   myriad additional information services rapidly emerged in most nations 
   as a result - and notwithstanding the potential negative effects of 
   the 1988 ITRs. 
   
   These changes dramatically diminished the relevance of the ITU as an 
   intergovernmental organization involved in the provisioning of 
   telecommunication and information services. The ITRs became
   effecively a nullity because the mandated standards became unused. 
   The ITU's activities and participants diminished. Twenty-nine Member 
   States significantly reduced their financial contributions. Even 
   their once popular and profitable industry Telecom trade shows became 
   embarrassing financial liabilities. 
   
   All of these changes did not set well, however, with those vestigial 
   Member States that felt threatened by robust service provisioning and 
   technological revolutions of which they were either not a part or 
   could not control. Over the past ten years, this hostility to change 
   brought together a combination of some Nation-States and pandering ITU 
   officials. They sought to reverse what had occurred in the global 
   marketplace by morphing the moribund 1988 treaty provisions into what 
   they hoped would be a new relevancy for the ITU and control over the 
   Internet and just about everything else in the way of electronic 
   networks and information systems. 
   
   The result was proposals by some nations and the ITU General 
   Secretariat that used the ITR treaty instrument to vastly expand the 
   jurisdiction and authority of the ITU. The ultimate vision was to 

Rutkowski               Expires January 14, 2014                 [Page 3] 


Internet-Draft             ITR Accession Harmful                July 2013 

   include all "ICT" services, as well as all providers and users of 
   those services. Normative regulatory provisions were then added into 
   the ITRs with the intent like decades past, to make ITU standards 
   "preeminent" and effectively mandatory. 
   
   Most progressive nations rejected this result. Unlike in decades 
   past, where only the U.S. and Canada refused to sign and took 
   reservations, most of the world's networked nations rejected the 
   contrived treaty result. Only 89 signed the instrument - primarily 
   from the Middle East and Africa, plus Russia and China. This result 
   was unprecedented in the history of the ITU, as well as a significant 
   embarrassment for the ITU officials who are continuing to sell what 
   they ludicrously assert are "benefits" without treating the 
   substantial adverse effects of the new instrument. 
   
   The ITRs are utterly irrelevant today, and there are no "difficulties" 
   or downside by not acceding. Indeed, acceding is highly embarrassing 
   for any nation doing so - saying effectively that they do not 
   understand how the global marketplace in services operates today. 
   They also ignore the reality that most major nations have completely 
   ignored the ITR provisions for decades - with only positive results. 
   The old 1988 provisions mandated the use of non-IETF, OSI standards 
   and services. This plainly would not have been good for the Internet 
   or the global economy! 
   
   Few judicious nations would want to accede to the ITRs, and those 
   which already have will likely treat the action as a superficial 
   political gesture. In addition to all the other adverse factors, the
   ITU today - except in the radio spectrum domain - has been largely 
   abandoned, and lacks the ability to take on far reaching roles for the
   world's ICT networks and services. 
      
   2. The 2012 ITRs and their far-reaching adverse effects 
   
   The ITR provisions are a construct for a world that existed in 1850 
   and were incrementally evolved over the decades to apply to a narrow 
   set of legacy international telecommunication services. On the 
   positive side, the 1988 evolution allowed for the first time for 
   alternative uses of international leased lines. However, they also 
   sought to much more broadly apply the ITU-T OSI standards and declare 
   them preeminent. It was a fatal mistake, and guaranteed the ITRs 
   would be irrelevant and ignored. 
   
   Where the 2012 revisions went very wrong was the expansion of the 
   treaty from applying only to "administration or recognized private 
   operating agency(ies)" to now applying to all "authorized operating 
   agencies." The old RPOA term was very narrowly constructed and 
   interpreted to apply only to a handful of legacy telecom carriers. 
   There are almost no RPOAs today. This definitional devise crossed a 
   "red line' that was made plain at the outset of the conference, that 


Rutkowski               Expires January 14, 2014                 [Page 4] 


Internet-Draft             ITR Accession Harmful                July 2013 

   most progressive Nation States were not going to cross. Thus, for 
   example, the new treaty provisions require that "in implementing the 
   principles of these Regulations, authorized operating agencies should 
   comply with, to the greatest extent practicable, the relevant ITU-T 
   Recommendations." 
   
   In the context of the IETF and the Internet, it is inconceivable that 
   such a constraint would be acceptable. For example, where there is a 
   conflict between an IETF and an ITU-T standard, nations acceding to 
   the 2012 ITRs are obliging themselves to ignore the IETF in favor of 
   the ITU-T and consigning their infrastructure to standards that have 
   largely been a proven failure over the past three decades. The 
   adverse effects go far beyond the Internet as even in the world of 
   mobile communications where the infrastructures and services are built 
   on 3GPP and GSMA provisions, it is ITU-T standards under the ITRs that
   would be preeminent.  The result is untenable.
   
   In reality, almost no ICT infrastructure or services make use of ITU-T 
   standards. The change in the ITRs concerning the broad application of
   the obligations is the most far reaching of the multiple highly 
   adverse effects of the 2012 provisions. This fundamental change goes 
   clearly far beyond merely "some editorial revisions to bring them up 
   to date" as ITU officials and staff have suggested. 
   
   
3. Specific adverse effects 

   The generic expansion of the ITRs to apply essentially to all service 
   providers as described above, adversely affects the Internet and other 
   telecommunication infrastructures by creating significant new 
   regulatory requirements through ITU-T Recommendations.  In addition, 
   the new clauses added in Dubai, create still further adverse 
   consequences. 
   
   Regarding specific provisions: 
   
   * In the Preamble, a far reaching new provision was added that states 
     "these Regulations recognize the right of access of Member States to 
     international telecommunication services." The provision was added 
     in response to efforts by some landlocked nations to require access 
     to nearby backbone transit facilities. However, in the past few 
     years, similar ITU provisions have been applied against Internet 
     based service providers who reject traffic from some nations for 
     security or legal compliance purposes. Indeed, the new provision 
     effectively creates a right for a nation to expropriate private 
     resources where that nation can demand access to anything they deem 
     to be an "international telecommunication service." 
   
   * New language in Article 1 vastly expands the jurisdiction of the ITU 
     and the ITRs to anyone designated an "authorized operating agency." 


Rutkowski                Expires January 14, 2014                 [Page 5] 


Internet-Draft             ITR Accession Harmful                 July 2013 

     This expansion was one of the principal reasons why so many nations 
     refused to sign the provisions. In particular, it effectively  
     places the ITU in technical and operational control of the Internet 
     by requiring in numerous ITR provisions that ITU-T standards are 
     "preeminent" and to be followed rather than those of the IETF or 
     other Internet organizations. 
   
   * Other Article 1 sub-clauses repeatedly underscore ITU-T preeminence 
     by stating "authorized operating agencies should comply with, to the 
     greatest extent practicable, the relevant ITU-T Recommendations." 
     Additional sub-clauses "encourage the application of relevant ITU-T 
     Recommendations by [authorized operating agency] service providers." 
   
   * Modified and new provisions in Article 3 require that "Member States 
     endeavor to ensure that authorized operating agencies to provide a 
     satisfactory quality of service," and then explicitly state that "a 
     satisfactory quality of service should be maintained to the greatest 
     extent practicable, corresponding to the relevant ITU-T 
     Recommendations." Here again, the ITRs operate to create an ITU-T 
     preeminence over the IETF and other Internet organizations on 
     "quality of service." If the 1988 ITRs had prevailed, "broadband 
     ISDN" would be used today to meet ITU requirements for "quality of 
     service" rather than IETF standards in a flexible marketplace. 
   
   * A matter of some contemporary conflict with the IETF and Internet 
     organizations over VoIP services arises through three new Article 3 
     clauses. One requires "that international telecommunication 
     numbering resources specified in ITU-T Recommendations are used only 
     by the assignees and only for the purposes for which they were 
     assigned; and that unassigned resources are not used." A second 
     requires Member States to institute calling line identification 
     pursuant to ITU-T Recommendations. A third requires that Member 
     States become involved in "the implementation of regional 
     telecommunication traffic exchange points." This provision 
     potentially adversely affects IETF efforts, for example, related to 
     STIR (Secure Telephone Identity Revisited). 
   
   * Just as the modified provisions in Article 3 provide for ITU-T 
     preeminence for network infrastructure, similar provisions in 
     Article 4 require that "authorized operating agencies...
     international telecommunication services which should conform, to 
     the greatest extent practicable, to the relevant ITU-T 
     Recommendations." The provisions then go further to require Member 
     States "ensure that authorized operating agencies provide and 
     maintain, to the greatest extent practicable, a satisfactory quality 
     of service corresponding to the relevant ITU-T Recommendations." 
   
   




Rutkowski                Expires January 14, 2014                  [Page 6] 


Internet-Draft              ITR Accession Harmful                 July 2013 


4. Future ITU treaty instrument evolution 

   It is unlikely that the many nations who refused to sign the 
   International Telecommunication Regulations will accede in the future.    
   The adverse consequences of accepting and implementing the basic 
   provisions would be far reaching for nations - who would then be 
   obliged to maintain loyalty to an "ITU regime" whose standards are 
   not viable and looks to a global regulatory model for service 
   provisioning. Such nations consign themselves to a kind of second 
   class status among networked nations, and the 89 that signed in Dubai 
   should reject accession. 
   
   Already since December 2012, most major networking nations and their 
   industries have accelerated their flight from the ITU-T - leaving it 
   largely a shell. There is nothing but "upside" to not signing the 
   ITRs - as was amply demonstrated in the years following 1988 when 
   increasing numbers of nations collectively ignored the provisions. 
   
   What the Dubai WCIT made plain was a long-term evolution where "old 
   school" government officials in some nations failed to realize that 
   an intergovernmental treaty organization that functions as a United 
   Nations Specialized Agency, has a very limited value proposition today 
   in a world of the Internet and mobile telecommunications. Indeed, 
   such an organization is in large measure detrimental to the interests 
   and citizens of all nations. The last thing that should occur is to 
   expand the ITU's reach to include and regulate under a common ITR 
   regime, all Information and Communication Technologies (ICTs) and 
   their providers as articulated in the ITR provisions and accompanying 
   Resolutions. 
   
   These fundamental bifurcations represented in development of the ITRs 
   in 2012 in Dubai could spill over into the ITU Plenipotentiary 
   Conference in late 2014. If the same nations who pushed for ITR 
   changes to broaden the ITU's jurisdiction and role attempt to do so in 
   the ITU Constitution as well, a similar scenario is likely to unfold 
   where large numbers of ITU Member States will refuse to sign the 
   treaty containing its Constitution. The trend to flee the ITU will be 
   even further exacerbated. It is possible that an independent ITU 
   Radiocommunication treaty organization could emerge - as existed prior 
   to the ITU amalgamation that occurred in 1934. 


5. IANA considerations 

   None. 






Rutkowski                Expires January 14, 2014                 [Page 7] 


Internet-Draft              ITR Accession Harmful                July 2013 


6. Security considerations 

   The requirement that nations acceding to the 2012 ITRs follow ITU 
   treaty provisions, including an obligation to "comply with, to the 
   greatest extent practicable, the relevant ITU-T Recommendations" for 
   Internet networks and services, is a major security vulnerability. 


7. Informative references 

   [never-say-die]     Telecomtv, Never say die: the ITU goes door-
                       stepping for signatures, 
                       http://www.telecomtv.com/comspace_newsDetail.aspx? 
                       n=50069&id=e9381817-0593-417a-8639-c4c53e2a2a10 
                       
   [staff-gone-wild]   CircleID, ITU Staff Gone Wild, 13 Mar 2013, 
                       http://browse.feedreader.com/c/CircleID/351187458 
                       
   [itu-meltdown]      CircleID, The Continuing ITU Meltdown, 10 Feb 
                       2013, 
                       http://www.circleid.com/posts/20130210_the_continu 
                       ing_itu_meltdown/ 
                       
   [after-dubai        CircleID, After Saying No in Dubai: What Next, 19 
                       Dec 2012, 
                       http://www.circleid.com/posts/20121219_after_sayin 
                       g_no_in_dubai_what_next/ 

   [itu-failed]        c/net, ITU 'failed,' says former policy chief, 12 
                       Dec 2012, http://news.cnet.com/8301-1023_357558819-
                       93/exclusive-itu-failed-says-formerpolicy-
                       chief/ 
                       
   [does-it-matter]    CircleID, The Dubai Debacle: Does It Matter?, 4 
                       Dec 2012, 
                       http://www.circleid.com/posts/20121204_the_dubai_d 
                       ebacle_does_it_matter/ 
                       
   [itu-gone-wild]     Enterprise Tech Central, ITU Gone Wild, 26 Nov 
                       2012, http://blog.itcentralstation.com/itu-gonewild-
                       or-why-free-speech-on-the-internet-is-atrisk/ 
      
   [only-winning-game] CircleID, The Only Winning Game at the WCIT, 15 
                       Nov 2012 
                       http://www.circleid.com/posts/20121115_the_only_wi 
                       nning_game_at_the_wcit/ 
   


Rutkowski                Expires January 14, 2014                  [Page 8] 


Internet-Draft              ITR Accession Harmful                 July 2013 


   [just-say-no]       Computerworld, WCIT-12: Just say no, 14 Sep 2012, 
                       http://blogs.computerworld.com/it
                       industry/20993/wcit-12-just-say-no 
   
   [privatizing-itu-t] Circle ID, Privatizing the ITU-T: Back to the 
                       Future, 16 Aug 2012, 
                       http://www.circleid.com/posts/20120816_privatizing 
                       _the_itu_t_back_to_the_future/ 

   [extreme-agendas]   Wordpress, Extreme agendas in the ITU, 29 June 
                       2012, 
                       http://inetaria.files.wordpress.com/2012/07/ituextreme-
                       agendas-v1-2-1.pdf 


Author's Address 

   A. M. Rutkowski 
   Netmagic Associates LLC 
   Ashburn VA, USA 
   
   Phone: 
   Fax: 
   Email: trutkowski@netmagic.com 



























Rutkowski                Expires January 14, 2014                  [Page 9] 


