A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3071

        Title:      Reflections on the DNS, RFC 1591, and Categories
                    of Domains
        Author(s):  J. Klensin
        Status:     Informational
        Date:       February 2001
        Mailbox:    klensin@jck.com
        Pages:      10
        Characters: 24892
        Updates/Obsoletes/SeeAlso:  None

        I-D Tag:    draft-klensin-1591-reflections-04.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3071.txt


RFC 1591, "Domain Name System Structure and Delegation", laid out the
basic administrative design and principles for the allocation and
administration of domains, from the top level down.  It was written
before the introduction of the world wide web (WWW) and rapid growth
of the Internet put significant market, social, and political pressure
on domain name allocations.  In recent years, 1591 has been cited by
all sides in various debates, and attempts have been made by various
bodies to update it or adjust its provisions, sometimes under
pressures that have arguably produced policies that are less well
thought out than the original.  Some of those efforts have begun from
misconceptions about the provisions of 1591 or the motivation for
those provisions.  The current directions of the Internet Corporation
for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN) and other groups who now
determine the Domain Name System (DNS) policy directions appear to be
drifting away from the policies and philosophy of 1591.  This document
is being published primarily for historical context and comparative
purposes, essentially to document some thoughts about how 1591 might
have been interpreted and adjusted by the Internet Assigned Numbers
Authority (IANA) and ICANN to better reflect today's world while
retaining characteristics and policies that have proven to be
effective in supporting Internet growth and stability.  An earlier
variation of this memo was submitted to ICANN as a comment on its
evolving Top-level Domain (TLD) policies.

This memo provides information for the Internet community.  It does
not specify an Internet standard of any kind.  Distribution of this
memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.

