


Network Working Group                                           S. Jeong
Internet-Draft                                                      ETRI
Intended status: Informational                                  D. Colle
Expires: June 27, 2011                                              IBBT
                                                       December 24, 2010


                   Virtual Networks Problem Statement
              draft-jeong-vnrg-virtual-networks-ps-00.txt

Abstract

   This document presents the definition and effectiveness of virtual
   networks and discusses the key components and challenges of
   supporting virtual networks in the networks.  It also describes acid
   tests for virtual networks.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on June 27, 2011.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.



Jeong & Colle             Expires June 27, 2011                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft             Virtual Networks PS             December 2010


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Motivation and Definition of Virtual Networks . . . . . . . . . 4
     2.1.  Motivation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
     2.2.  Definition of Virtual Networks  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
     2.3.  Effectiveness of Virtual Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   3.  Key Components and Challenges for Virtual Networks  . . . . . . 6
     3.1.  Key Components  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
     3.2.  Key Challenges  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   4.  Acid Tests for Virtual Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   5.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   6.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8





































Jeong & Colle             Expires June 27, 2011                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft             Virtual Networks PS             December 2010


1.  Introduction

   The main objectives of virtualization are to create multiple logical
   instances of the resources that can coexist, to separate the uses of
   the logical instances, and to simplify the use of the underlying
   resources by abstracting the characteristics and interacting with the
   resources with limited abstracted knowledge.

   The virtualization technology has been extensively studied for
   decades from desktop virtualization, application virtualization,
   system virtualization, link virtualization, storage virtualization to
   network virtualization.  All the virtualization technologies above
   have relationship with network virtualization technology, but from
   the simplified view the network elements may be seen as systems with
   links.  Thus, network virtualization would be expected to be realized
   on the basis of traditional virtualization technologies, especially
   system and link virtualization.

   The system virtualization is the ability to run an entire virtual
   system with its own guest OS over another OS or over a bare-machine.
   So, it allows multiple virtual systems with heterogeneous guest OSes
   to run in isolation on the same physical system.  Each virtual system
   has its own set of virtual hardware and can be accessed
   independently.  Thus, each virtual system can participate in
   constructing and providing independent networks.  The virtual system
   can utilize consistent, normalized set of hardware regardless of the
   characteristics of physical hardware specification.  Network
   virtualization allows dynamic creation and management of virtual
   networks over network infrastructures.  These virtual networks may be
   heterogeneous and multiple separate virtual networks can be
   simultaneously coexisted over the network infrastructures.

   The benefits of system virtualization are as follows, but these
   benefits can also be applied to network virtualization.

   o  Since several virtual systems share a single set of hardware, it
      is possible to achieve better resource utilization and to lower
      hardware cost.

   o  Secure and separate environment can be provided among virtual
      systems because each virtual system is isolated from the others.

   o  System virtualization can provide normalized set of interfaces and
      make it easier to provide virtual systems.  Also, it can support
      seamless migration of virtual systems by setting up a virtual
      system using a pre-existing template and shifting virtual system
      from one physical system to another to balance workloads or
      improve efficiency.



Jeong & Colle             Expires June 27, 2011                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft             Virtual Networks PS             December 2010


   There are various technologies for providing virtual networks over
   network infrastructures, for example Virtual Private Network (VPN)
   technologies provide virtual networks.  Although VPN supports
   coexistence of separate virtual networks, it is not easy to
   dynamically reconfigure the capability of given virtual networks
   based on the changes of user's demand.

   Network virtualization is one of prominent technologies to support
   dynamically reconfigurable, isolated, and separate virtual networks
   over network infrastructures.  Network virtualization allows multiple
   heterogeneous virtual networks that are isolated and independently
   manageable to coexist over shared physical network infrastructures.
   Since each virtual network can utilize different network
   architectures, the shared network infrastructure may support the
   architecture of multiple architectures.  For example, by utilizing
   network virtualization technology, different virtual networks can
   provide different end-to-end packet delivery systems and may use
   different protocols and packet formats [1].  These virtual networks
   may be a way to de-ossify the current network architectures.

   This document presents the definition and effectiveness of virtual
   networks.  It also discusses the key components and challenges of
   supporting virtual networks in the networks.  Finally, it describes
   acid tests for virtual networks.


2.  Motivation and Definition of Virtual Networks

2.1.  Motivation

   The current network architectures are facing many challenges as they
   continuously expand application spaces and environments.  Some of the
   challenges may require a variety of the new different architectures
   so as to resolve the challenges.  In order to accelerate the research
   and development of the innovative architectures, a common means
   should be provided to accommodate the new heterogeneous architecture
   researches and experiments in shared network infrastructures.  The
   common means would be a set of virtual networks.

   The virtual networks can be served as non-virtualized networks
   without operational interference with other virtual networks while
   sharing the components of networks.  Thus, multiple virtual networks
   can concurrently use a single physical network for multiple virtual
   networks and different virtual networks may use heterogeneous network
   technologies in the isolated and separate environment.  Also,
   standardized set of interfaces between virtual networks can make it
   easier to provide virtual networks and improve portability.  The
   provision of standardized interfaces can support seamless migration



Jeong & Colle             Expires June 27, 2011                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft             Virtual Networks PS             December 2010


   and update of the capability of virtual networks.  Finally,
   utilization of physical resources can be increased by accommodating
   multiple virtual networks in a single physical resource.

2.2.  Definition of Virtual Networks

   A virtual network is a network of virtual resources where the
   resources can be separated from other virtual resources and their
   capabilities can be dynamically reconfigured.

   In other words, a virtual network is a logical partition of physical
   or logical networks and its capability is the same as or subset of
   the networks.  Also, the virtual network may expand its capability by
   aggregating the capabilities of multiple networks.  From the user's
   point of view, the virtual network can be seen as a non-virtualized
   network.

   A virtual resource is an abstraction of physical or logical resource
   and its partition and has the same mechanisms as the physical or
   logical resource.  It can also inherit all existing mechanisms and
   tools for the physical or logical resource.  In addition to the
   mechanisms above, a virtual resource has several interfaces to access
   and manage the virtual resource.  These interfaces typically include
   virtual data plane interfaces, virtual configuration interfaces, and
   management interfaces.

   A virtual network has following key properties.

   o  Partitioning: Each virtual resource can be used concurrently by
      multiple virtual networks.  Multiple applications or OSes can be
      simultaneously supported within a single physical resource.
      Multiple physical resources can be consolidated into virtual
      resources on either a scale-up or scale-down architecture.

   o  Isolation: Any virtual network can be clearly isolated from all
      others.  Even though a virtual network crashes, the others are not
      affected.  Data in one virtual network do not leak across virtual
      networks and applications can only communicate over configured
      network connections.  Unauthorized accesses to other virtual
      networks are prohibited.

   o  Abstraction: A given virtual resource needs not directly
      correspond to its component resources.  The detailed information
      of the physical resource can be abstracted so that other systems,
      applications, or users access the capabilities of resources by
      using abstracted interfaces.  These interfaces can guarantee
      compatibility for accessing the virtual resources and provide an
      efficient control of the virtual resources..



Jeong & Colle             Expires June 27, 2011                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft             Virtual Networks PS             December 2010


2.3.  Effectiveness of Virtual Networks

   Virtual networks can be used for the same purposes as non-virtualized
   networks without interfering with the operation of other virtual
   networks while sharing the key components among virtual networks.
   Therefore, the coexistence of multiple virtual networks is possible.

   The virtual networks over physical infrastructure are completely
   isolated each other, so different virtual networks may use different
   network technologies, for example, different protocols and packet
   formats or even defining a new layering architecture can be supported
   on each virtual network without interfering with the operation of
   other virtual networks.  In other words, each virtual network can
   provide the corresponding user group with full network services
   similar to those provided by a traditional non-virtualized network.
   From the users' perspective, each user accesses a dedicated network
   independently.  Also, providing virtual networks can reduce the total
   cost by increasing the utilization of resources while still
   maintaining secure separation among virtual networks [2].


3.  Key Components and Challenges for Virtual Networks

3.1.  Key Components

   The key components of virtual networks include traditional network
   elements, such as hosts, routers, links, etc.  In addition to them,
   mechanisms for creating and managing the virtual networks are also
   included.  The virtual network management mechanisms create logical
   partitions in the components and connect those partitions in order to
   construct a virtual network.  The virtual network can be connected
   with non-virtualized components.  Users can see the virtual network
   as a non-virtualized dedicated network, so they can perform any
   actions such as deploy new services, network architectures, etc. as
   if they own the dedicated network.

3.2.  Key Challenges

   The followings investigate the key challenges for virtual networks.

   o  Performance: Virtualization resource is typically realized by
      adopting virtualization layer in the physical resources, so
      creation and management of virtual network also needs to interact
      with the virtualization layer.  Therefore, the performance of the
      virtual networks may not be as good as the non-virtualized network
      and how to reduce the performance degradation is a challenge.





Jeong & Colle             Expires June 27, 2011                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft             Virtual Networks PS             December 2010


   o  Isolation: Multiple virtual networks coexist over the key
      components of virtual networks, so isolation among the coexisting
      virtual networks is the challenge.  The isolation includes various
      aspects such as security isolation, performance isolation, etc.
      Since multiple virtual networks exist over shared physical
      infrastructures, unexpected behavior of a virtual network may
      affect other coexisting services and may cause security problems,
      performance degradation of other services, and so on.  How to
      guarantee isolation of virtual networks by creating isolated
      virtual network environments between users belonging to separate
      groups is a key challenge.

   o  Flexibility: After creating a virtual network based on user's
      requirements, the requirements can be changed.  In that case, it
      will be necessary to modify the capability of the virtual network.
      The update of virtual network's capability may be done dynamically
      and without interrupting the operation of the current virtual
      network.

   o  Scalability: How many virtual networks can be simultaneously
      supported or how many key components can be connected and managed
      are also a challenge.

   o  Management: Since each virtual network can be separately
      configured and managed, how to provide independent management
      functions for each virtual network is a challenge.  Also, the
      management functions need to collaborate with the management for
      the physical infrastructures.


4.  Acid Tests for Virtual Networks

   In the network community, virtual networks has been used as a general
   term without clear definition or requirements, so provision of
   virtual networks across various heterogeneous systems such as network
   operators, network equipment vendors, service providers, etc. has
   been difficult.  This section discusses acid tests for virtual
   networks in order to build common understanding about virtual
   networks.

   o  Control isolation: Since multiple virtual networks concurrently
      exist in virtual resources, each virtual networks need to be
      separately managed.  Thus, isolated control is necessary so that
      separate virtual networks can be individually configured and
      managed.

   o  Access control and virtual network labeling: Since any virtual
      network can be isolated from others, it is necessary to prevent a



Jeong & Colle             Expires June 27, 2011                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft             Virtual Networks PS             December 2010


      user in a virtual network from accessing other virtual networks
      without authorization.  In order to support the clear isolation,
      virtual resources should be able to uniquely identify virtual
      networks and enforce access control for users and applications.

   o  Virtualization of address and port ranges: Since multiple virtual
      networks share a single physical resource, overlapping address
      ranges should be possible.  It is necessary to provide translation
      of virtual address into internal physical address at ingress
      points of the physical resource and vice versa at egress points.

   o  Regulation of resource usage: Considering the utility of
      customers, each virtual network should be capable of using
      physical network resources and constructing a network topology.
      However, one possible problem is that some abnormal virtual
      networks may occupy most of the resources, which deteriorates
      other virtual network performance due to network resource
      exhaustion.  Therefore, it is necessary to regulate the upper
      limit of resource consumption by each virtual network in order to
      maintain the overall utility and performance.  Injecting the
      resource owner's policy into usage of the resource also needs to
      be supported.


5.  Security Considerations

   TBD


6.  Informative References

   [1]  Mosharaf, N. and R. Boutaba, "Network Virtualization: State of
        the Art and Research Challenges", IEEE Communications Magazine ,
        July 2009.

   [2]  Mosharaf, N. and R. Boutaba, "A Survey of Network
        Virtualization", Computer Networks , April 2010.














Jeong & Colle             Expires June 27, 2011                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft             Virtual Networks PS             December 2010


Authors' Addresses

   Sangjin Jeong
   ETRI
   138 Gajeongno, Yuseong
   Daejeon,   305-700
   Korea

   Phone: +82 42 860 1877
   Email: sjjeong@etri.re.kr


   Didier Colle
   Ghent University
   Gaston Crommenlaan 8
   Gent,   B-9050
   Belgium

   Phone: +32 9 331 49 70
   Email: didier.colle@intec.ugent.be































Jeong & Colle             Expires June 27, 2011                 [Page 9]


