


Network Working Group                                            G. Zorn
Internet-Draft                                               Network Zen
Intended status: Standards Track                                   Q. Wu
Expires: April 22, 2011                                           Huawei
                                                              D. Harkins
                                                          Aruba Networks
                                                        October 19, 2010


     The Tunneled Extensible Authentication Protocol Method (TEAM)
                         draft-zorn-emu-team-00

Abstract

   The Extensible Authentication Protocol (EAP) provides support for
   multiple authentication methods.  This document defines the Tunneled
   Extensible Authentication Method (TEAM), which provides an encrypted
   and authenticated tunnel based on transport layer security (TLS) that
   encapsulates EAP authentication mechanisms.  TEAM uses TLS to protect
   against rogue authenticators, protect against various attacks on the
   confidentiality and integrity of the inner EAP method exchange and
   provide EAP peer identity privacy.  TEAM also provides support for
   chaining multiple EAP mechanisms, cryptographic binding between
   authentications performed by inner EAP mechanisms and the tunnel,
   exchange of arbitrary parameters (TLVs), and fragmentation and
   reassembly.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.  This document may not be modified,
   and derivative works of it may not be created, except to format it
   for publication as an RFC or to translate it into languages other
   than English.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 22, 2011.

Copyright Notice



Zorn, et al.             Expires April 22, 2011                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                    TEAM                      October 2010


   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.  Requirements Language  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   3.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   4.  Protocol Overview  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     4.1.  Operational Model  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     4.2.  Sequences  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     4.3.  TEAM Phase 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
       4.3.1.  Initial identity exchange  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
       4.3.2.  TLS Session Establishment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
       4.3.3.  Session Resumption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
       4.3.4.  Version Negotiation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
     4.4.  TEAM Phase 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
       4.4.1.  Protected Conversation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
       4.4.2.  Protected Termination  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
       4.4.3.  Provisioning of Credentials  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
     4.5.  Error Handling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
     4.6.  Fragmentation and Reassembly . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
     4.7.  Key Derivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
       4.7.1.  Compound Session Key Derivation  . . . . . . . . . . . 26
     4.8.  Ciphersuite Negotiation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
   5.  TEAM Protocol Description  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
     5.1.  TEAM Protocol Layers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
     5.2.  TEAM Packet Format . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
   6.  Type-Length-Value Tuples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
     6.1.  TLV Format . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
     6.2.  Result TLV . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
     6.3.  NAK TLV  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
     6.4.  Error-Code TLV . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
     6.5.  Crypto-Binding TLV . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
     6.6.  Connection-Binding TLV . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
     6.7.  Vendor-Specific TLV  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
     6.8.  URI TLV  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
     6.9.  EAP-Payload TLV  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41



Zorn, et al.             Expires April 22, 2011                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                    TEAM                      October 2010


     6.10. Intermediate-Result TLV  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
     6.11. Calling-Station-Id TLV . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
     6.12. Called-Station-Id TLV  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
     6.13. NAS-Port-Type TLV  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
     6.14. Server-Identifier TLV  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
     6.15. Identity-Type TLV  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
     6.16. Server-Trusted-Root TLV  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
     6.17. PKCS#7 TLV . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
     6.18. Request-Action-TLV . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
   7.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
   8.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
   9.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
     9.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
     9.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53





































Zorn, et al.             Expires April 22, 2011                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                    TEAM                      October 2010


1.  Introduction

   The Extensible Authentication Protocol (EAP), defined in [RFC3748],
   provides support for multiple authentication methods.  EAP over PPP
   [RFC3748] is typically deployed with leased lines or modem
   connections.  [IEEE.802-1X.2004] defines EAP over IEEE 802 local area
   networks (EAPOL).

   Since its initial development, a number of weaknesses in the EAP
   framework have become apparent.  These include lack of support for:

      Identity protection
      Protected method negotiation
      Protected notification messages
      Protected termination messages
      Sequences of EAP methods
      Fragmentation and reassembly
      Exchange of arbitrary parameters in a secure channel
      Optimized re-authentication

   In addition, some EAP methods lack the following features:

      Mutual authentication
      Resistance to dictionary attacks
      Adequate key generation

   By wrapping the EAP protocol within TLS, TEAM addresses deficiencies
   in EAP or EAP methods.  Benefits of TEAM include:

   Identity protection
      By encrypting the identity exchange, and allowing client identity
      to be provided after negotiation of the TLS channel, TEAM provides
      for identity protection.

   Dictionary attack resistance
      By conducting the EAP conversation within a TLS channel, TEAM
      protects EAP methods that might be subject to an offline
      dictionary attack were they to be conducted in the clear.

   Protected negotiation
      Since within TEAM, the EAP conversation is authenticated,
      integrity and replay protected on a per-packet basis, the EAP
      method negotiation that occurs within TEAM is protected, as are
      error messages sent within the TLS channel (TLS alerts or EAP
      Notification packets).  EAP negotiation outside of TEAM is not
      protected.





Zorn, et al.             Expires April 22, 2011                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                    TEAM                      October 2010


   Header protection
      Within TEAM, TLS provides per-packet encryption, authentication,
      integrity and replay protection for the EAP conversation.  As a
      result, the Type-Data field within TEAM (including the EAP header
      of the EAP method within TEAM) is protected against modification.
      However, the EAP header of TEAM itself is not protected against
      modification, including the Code, Identifier and Type fields.

   Protected termination
      By sending success/failure indications within the TLS channel,
      TEAM provides support for protected termination of the EAP
      conversation.  This prevents an attacker from carrying out denial
      of service attacks by spoofing EAP Failure messages, or fooling
      the EAP peer into accepting a rogue NAS, by spoofing EAP Success
      messages.

   Fragmentation and Reassembly
      Since EAP does not include support for fragmentation and
      reassembly, individual methods need to include this capability.
      By including support for fragmentation and reassembly within TEAM,
      methods leveraging TEAM do not need to support this on their own.

   Fast reconnect
      Where EAP is used for authentication in wireless networks, the
      authentication latency is a concern.  As a result, it is valuable
      to be able to do a quick re-authentication on roaming between
      access points.  TEAM supports this capability by leveraging the
      TLS session resumption facility, and any EAP method running under
      TEAM can take advantage of it.

   Standard key establishment
      In order to provide keying material for a wide range of link layer
      ciphersuites, EAP methods need to provide keying material.  Key
      derivation is complex.  TEAM provides for key establishment by
      relying on the widely implemented and well-reviewed TLS [RFC4346]
      key derivation mechanism.  TEAM provides keying material for any
      EAP method running within it.

   Sequencing of multiple EAP methods
      In order to enhance security, TEAM implementations may choose to
      provide multi-factor authentication that validates different
      identities (for example user and machine identities) and/or uses
      different credentials of the same or different identities of the
      peer (e.g. user password and machine cert).  TEAM provides a
      standard way to chain different types of authentication mechanisms
      supporting different types of credentials.





Zorn, et al.             Expires April 22, 2011                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                    TEAM                      October 2010


   Protected exchange of arbitrary parameters
      Type-Length-Value (TLV) tuples provide a way to exchange arbitrary
      information between peer and EAP server within a secure channel.
      This information can include signaling parameters for the EAP
      protocol, provisioning parameters, media specific and environment
      specific data, and authorization parameters.  The advantage of
      using TEAM TLVs is that every EAP method does not have to be
      modified.

   Credential provisioning
      TEAM supports provisioning of certificate trust anchors by the
      server using TLVs and can be extended to support provisioning of
      other peer credentials.

   Optimized for light weight devices
      In order to support peers that may not support certificate
      ciphersuites, and may not support provisioning of certificate
      trust anchors, TEAM enables negotiation of other TLS ciphersuites.

   Server unauthenticated tunnel provisioning mode
      In some cases, the peer may only support password credentials and
      may not be provisioned with a certificate trust anchor.

      In server unauthenticated tunnel provisioning mode, a TEAM peer
      can authenticate using a password, in order to be provisioned with
      a pre-shared key and other credentials that can be used for
      subsequent authentication.  In server unauthenticated tunnel
      provisioning mode the TEAM peer only confirms possession of the
      private key corresponding to the public key contained within the
      server certificate, but does not otherwise validate the server
      certificate.  As a result, it is possible for an attacker to act
      as a man-in-the-middle during the initial exchange in order to
      perform an offline dictionary attack, based on capture of the
      password- based authentication exchange.

      In TEAM, implementation of server unauthenticated tunnel
      provisioning mode is optional and due to the security
      vulnerabilities introduced by this mode, it is not recommended for
      use with peers that support certificate validation and
      provisioning of certificate trust anchors.

2.  Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].





Zorn, et al.             Expires April 22, 2011                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                    TEAM                      October 2010


3.  Terminology

   This document frequently uses the following terms:

   Access Point
      A Network Access Server implementing 802.11.

   Authenticator
      The end of the link initiating EAP authentication.  This term is
      also used in [IEEE.802-1X.2004]. and has the same meaning in this
      document.

   Backend Authentication Server
      A backend authentication server is an entity that provides an
      authentication service to an Authenticator.  When used, this
      server typically executes EAP methods for the Authenticator.  This
      terminology is also used in [IEEE.802-1X.2004].

   EAP server
      The entity that terminates the EAP authentication method with the
      peer.  In the case where no backend authentication server is used,
      the EAP server is part of the Authenticator.  In the case where
      the authenticator operates in pass-through mode, the EAP server is
      located on the backend authentication server.

   Link layer ciphersuite
      The ciphersuite negotiated for use at the link layer.

   NAS
      Short for "Network Access Server".

   Peer
      The end of the link that responds to the authenticator.  In
      [IEEE.802-1X.2004], this end is known as the Supplicant.

   TLS Ciphersuite
      The ciphersuite negotiated for protection of Phase 2 of the TEAM
      conversation Section 4.4.

   EAP Master key (MK)
      A key derived between the TEAM client and server during the
      authentication conversation, and that is kept local to TEAM and
      not exported or made available to a third party.








Zorn, et al.             Expires April 22, 2011                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                    TEAM                      October 2010


   Master Session Key (MSK)
      Keying material that is derived between the EAP peer and server
      and exported by the EAP method.  The MSK is at least 64 octets in
      length.  In existing implementations, a AAA server acting as an
      EAP server transports the MSK to the authenticator.

   Extended Master Session Key (EMSK)
      Additional keying material derived between the EAP client and
      server that is exported by the EAP method.  The EMSK is at least
      64 octets in length.  The EMSK is not shared with the
      authenticator or any other third party.  The EMSK is reserved for
      future uses that are not defined yet.

   Type Length Value (TLV)
      The TEAM protocol utilizes objects in Type Length Value (TLV)
      format.  The TLV format is defined in Section 6.1 of this
      document.


4.  Protocol Overview

   TEAM is comprised of a two-part conversation:

   1.  In Phase 1 a TLS session is negotiated, with the server
       authenticating to the client and (optionally) the client to the
       server.  The negotiated key is then used to protect Phase 2 of
       the conversation.

   2.  In Phase 2, within the TLS session, zero or more EAP methods are
       carried out.  Phase 2 completes with a success/failure indication
       protected by the TLS session or a protected error (TLS alert).

   In the following sections, we discuss the TEAM operational model, its
   support for EAP method sequencing and provide an overview of each of
   the parts of the TEAM conversation.

4.1.  Operational Model

   In EAP, the EAP server may be implemented either within a Network
   Access Server (NAS) or on a backend authentication server.  Where the
   EAP server resides on a NAS, the NAS is required to implement the
   desired EAP methods, and therefore needs to be upgraded to support
   each new EAP method.

   One of the goals of EAP is to enable development of new
   authentication methods without requiring deployment of new code on
   the Network Access Server (NAS).  Where a backend authentication
   server is deployed, the NAS acts as a "passthrough" and need not



Zorn, et al.             Expires April 22, 2011                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                    TEAM                      October 2010


   understand specific EAP methods.

   This allows new EAP methods to be deployed on the EAP peer and
   backend authentication server, without the need to upgrade code
   residing on the NAS.

   Figure 1 illustrates the relationship between the EAP peer, NAS and
   EAP server.  As shown in the figure, the EAP conversation occurs
   between the EAP peer and EAP server, "passing through" the NAS.  In
   order for the conversation to proceed in the case where the NAS and
   EAP server reside on separate machines, the NAS and EAP server need
   to establish trust beforehand.







































Zorn, et al.             Expires April 22, 2011                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft                    TEAM                      October 2010


         +-+-+-+-+-+               +-+-+-+-+-+
         |         |               |         |
         | Link    |               | Link    |
         | Layer   |               | Layer   |
         | Cipher- |               | Cipher- |
         | Suite   |               | Suite   |
         |         |               |         |
         +-+-+-+-+-+               +-+-+-+-+-+
             ^                         ^
             |                         |
             |                         |
             |                         |
             V                         V
         +-+-+-+-+-+               +-+-+-+-+-+  Trust +-+-+-+-+-+
         |         |  EAP          |         |<======>|         |
         |         |  Conversation |         |        |         |
         | EAP     |<================================>|  EAP    |
         | Peer    |  (over PPP,   |   NAS   |        |  Server |
         |         |  802.11,etc.) |         |<=======|         |
         |         |               |         |  Keys  |         |
         |         |               |         |        |         |
         +-+-+-+-+-+               +-+-+-+-+-+        +-+-+-+-+-+
             ^                                            ^
             |                                            |
             | EAP API                                    | EAP API
             |                                            |
             V                                            V
         +-+-+-+-+-+                                  +-+-+-+-+-+
         |         |                                  |         |
         |         |                                  |         |
         |  EAP    |                                  |  EAP    |
         |  Method |                                  |  Method |
         |         |                                  |         |
         +-+-+-+-+-+                                  +-+-+-+-+-+

     Figure 1: Relationship between EAP client, backend authentication
                              server and NAS

   In TEAM, the conversation between the EAP peer and the EAP server is
   encrypted, authenticated, integrity and replay protected within a TLS
   channel.

   As a result, where the NAS acts as a "passthrough" it does not have
   knowledge of the TLS master secret derived between the peer and the
   EAP server.  In order to provide keying material for link-layer
   ciphersuites, the NAS obtains the master session key, which is
   derived from a one-way function of the TLS master secret as well as
   keying material provided by EAP methods protected within a TLS



Zorn, et al.             Expires April 22, 2011                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft                    TEAM                      October 2010


   channel.  This enables the NAS and EAP peer to subsequently derive
   transient session keys suitable for encrypting, authenticating and
   integrity protecting session data.  However, the NAS cannot decrypt
   the TEAM conversation or spoof session resumption, since this
   requires knowledge of the TLS master secret.

4.2.  Sequences

   EAP [RFC3748] prohibits use of multiple authentication methods within
   a single EAP conversation, except when tunneled methods such as TEAM
   are used.  This restriction was imposed in order to limit
   vulnerabilities to man-in-the-middle attacks as well as to ensure
   compatibility with existing EAP implementations.

   Within TEAM these concerns are addressed since TEAM includes support
   for cryptographic binding to address man-in-the-middle attacks, as
   well as version negotiation so as to enable backward compatibility
   with future versions of the protocol.

   Within this document, the term "sequence" refers to a series of EAP
   authentication methods run in sequence or TLV exchanges before or
   after EAP methods.  The methods need not be distinct - for example,
   EAP-TLS could be run initially with machine credentials followed by
   the same protocol authenticating with user credentials.

   TEAM supports initiating additional EAP method(s) after a successful
   or a failed EAP method.  The result of failure of a EAP method does
   not always imply a failure of the overall authentication.  The
   overall result of authentication depends on the policy at EAP server
   and the peer.  For example, successful authentication might require a
   successful machine authentication followed by a successful user
   authentication.  Alternatively, if machine authentication fails, then
   user authentication can be attempted.  TEAM does not support
   initiating multiple EAP methods simultaneously.

4.3.  TEAM Phase 1

4.3.1.  Initial identity exchange

   The TEAM conversation typically begins with an optional identity
   exchange.  The authenticator will typically send an EAP- Request/
   Identity packet to the peer, and the peer will respond with an EAP-
   Response/Identity packet to the authenticator.

   The initial identity exchange is used primarily to route the EAP
   conversation to the EAP server.  Since the initial identity exchange
   is in the clear, the peer MAY decide to place a routing realm instead
   of its real name in the EAP-Response/Identity.  The real identity of



Zorn, et al.             Expires April 22, 2011                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft                    TEAM                      October 2010


   the peer can be established later, during Phase 2.

   If the EAP server is known in advance (such as when all users
   authenticate against the same backend server infrastructure and
   roaming is not supported), or if the identity is otherwise determined
   (such as from the dialing phone number or client MAC address), then
   the EAP-Request/Response-identity exchange MAY be omitted.

   Once the optional initial Identity Request/Response exchange is
   completed, while nominally the EAP conversation occurs between the
   authenticator and the peer, the authenticator MAY act as a
   passthrough device, with the EAP packets received from the peer being
   encapsulated for transmission to a backend authentication server.
   However, TEAM does not require a backend authentication server; if
   the authenticator implements TEAM, then it can authenticate local
   users.

   In the discussion that follows, we will use the term "EAP server" to
   denote the ultimate endpoint conversing with the peer.

4.3.2.  TLS Session Establishment

   In this section, the protocol is described.  While this section will
   often describe negotiation of a certificate-based ciphersuite within
   TLS, TEAM supports negotiation of other ciphersuites (for example,
   ciphersuites that do not use certificates) or extensions.  However,
   the conversation may slightly differ if other TLS ciphersuites or
   extensions are used.

   Once having received the peer's Identity, and determined that TEAM
   authentication is to occur, the EAP server MUST respond with a TEAM/
   Start packet, which is an EAP-Request packet with EAP-Type=TEAM, the
   Start (S) bit set, the TEAM version as specified in Section 4.3.4,
   and optionally, the Server-Identifier TLV (Section 6.14).

   Assuming that the peer supports TEAM, the TEAM conversation will then
   begin, with the peer sending an EAP-Response packet with EAP-
   Type=TEAM.  The Type-Data field of the EAP-Response Packet will
   encapsulate one or more TLS records containing the TLS handshake
   messages.  As defined in [RFC4346], the TLS handshake is used to
   negotiate parameters and cryptographic keys and may take several
   roundtrips between the TLS client and server.

   The version offered by the TLS client and server MUST be TLS v1.0 or
   later.  TEAM implementations need not necessarily support all TLS
   ciphersuites listed in [RFC4346].  Not all TLS ciphersuites are
   supported by available TLS tool kits and licenses may be required in
   some cases.



Zorn, et al.             Expires April 22, 2011                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft                    TEAM                      October 2010


   To ensure interoperability, TEAMv2 peers and servers MUST support the
   TLS v1.1 [RFC4346] mandatory-to-implement ciphersuite:

      TLS_DHE_DSS_WITH_3DES_EDE_CBC_SHA

   In addition, TEAM servers SHOULD support and be able to negotiate all
   of the following TLS ciphersuites:

      TLS_RSA_WITH_3DES_EDE_CBC_SHA
      TLS_RSA_WITH_RC4_128_MD5
      TLS_RSA_WITH_RC4_128_SHA
      TLS_RSA_WITH_AES_128_CBC_SHA

   In addition, TEAM peers SHOULD support at least one of the following
   TLS ciphersuites:

      TLS_RSA_WITH_3DES_EDE_CBC_SHA
      TLS_RSA_WITH_RC4_128_MD5
      TLS_RSA_WITH_RC4_128_SHA
      TLS_RSA_WITH_AES_128_CBC_SHA

   TLS as described in [RFC4346] supports compression as well as
   ciphersuite negotiation.  Therefore during the TEAM Phase 1
   conversation the TEAM endpoints MAY request or negotiate TLS
   compression.

   If the full TLS handshake is performed, then the first payload of
   TEAM Phase 2 MAY be sent along with finished handshake message to
   reduce number of round trips.

   Since after the TLS session is established, another complete EAP
   negotiation will occur and the peer will authenticate using a
   secondary mechanism, with TEAM the client need not authenticate as
   part of TLS session establishment.

   Note that since TLS client certificates are sent in the clear, if
   identity protection is required, then it is possible for the TLS
   authentication to be re-negotiated after the first server
   authentication.  Alternatively, if identity protection is required,
   then it is possible to perform certificate authentication using a EAP
   method (for example: EAP-TLS [RFC5216]) within the TLS session during
   TEAM Phase 2.

   To accomplish this, the server will typically not request a
   certificate in the server_hello, then after the server_finished
   message is sent, and before TEAM Phase 2 begins, the server MAY send
   a TLS hello_request.  This allows the client to perform client
   authentication by sending a client_hello if it wants to, or send a



Zorn, et al.             Expires April 22, 2011                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft                    TEAM                      October 2010


   no_renegotiation alert to the server indicating that it wants to
   continue with TEAM Phase 2 instead.  Assuming that the client permits
   renegotiation by sending a client_hello, then the server will respond
   with server_hello, a certificate and certificate_request messages.
   The client replies with certificate, client_key_exchange and
   certificate_verify messages.  Since this re-negotiation occurs within
   the encrypted TLS channel, it does not reveal client certificate
   details.

4.3.3.  Session Resumption

   The purpose of the sessionId within the TLS protocol and the Server-
   Identifier TLV in TEAM is to allow for improved efficiency in the
   case where a client repeatedly attempts to authenticate to an EAP
   server within a short period of time.  This capability is
   particularly useful for support of wireless roaming.

   In order to help the peer choose a sessionID that belongs to the
   specific server, the EAP server MAY send an identifier (Server-
   Identifier TLV) that the peer can use as a hint.  The Server-
   Identifier TLV MAY be sent in the first TEAM packet from the EAP
   server to the peer.  In order to detect modification of the Server-
   Identifier TLV, the Server-Identifier TLV is included in calculation
   of the compound MAC.

   It is left up to the peer whether to attempt to continue a previous
   session, thus shortening the TEAM Phase 1 conversation.  Typically
   the peer's decision will be made based on the time elapsed since the
   previous authentication attempt to that EAP server.

   Based on the sessionId chosen by the peer, and the time elapsed since
   the previous authentication, the EAP server will decide whether to
   allow the continuation, or whether to choose a new session.

   If the EAP server is resuming a previously established session, then
   it MUST include only a TLS change_cipher_spec message and a TLS
   finished handshake message after the server_hello message.  The
   finished message contains the EAP server's authentication response to
   the peer.

   If the preceding server_hello message sent by the EAP server in the
   preceding EAP-Request packet indicated the resumption of a previous
   session, then the peer MUST send only the change_cipher_spec and
   finished handshake messages.  The finished message contains the
   peer's authentication response to the EAP server.  The latter
   contains the EAP server's authentication response to the peer.  The
   peer will verify the hash in order to authenticate the EAP server.




Zorn, et al.             Expires April 22, 2011                [Page 14]

Internet-Draft                    TEAM                      October 2010


   If authentication fails, then the peer and EAP-server MUST follow the
   error handling behavior specified in Section 4.5

   Even if the session is successfully resumed with the same EAP server,
   the peer and EAP server MUST NOT assume that either will skip inner
   EAP methods.  The peer may have roamed to a network which may use the
   same EAP server, but may require conformance with a different
   authentication policy, and therefore may require inner EAP
   authentication methods.

4.3.4.  Version Negotiation

   TEAM packets contain a three bit version field, which enables TEAM
   implementations to be backward compatible with previous versions of
   the protocol.  This specification documents version1 of the TEAM
   protocol; implementations of this specification MUST use a version
   field set to 1.  Version negotiation proceeds as follows:

   1.  In the first EAP-Request sent with EAP-Type=TEAM, the EAP server
       MUST set the version field to the highest supported version
       number.

   2.  If the EAP peer supports that version of the protocol, it MUST
       respond with an EAP-Response of EAP-Type=TEAM, and the version
       number proposed by the EAP server.

   3.  If the EAP peer does not support that version, it responds with
       an EAP-Response of EAP-Type=TEAM and the highest supported
       version number.

   4.  If the TEAM server does not support the version number proposed
       by the TEAM peer, it either starts a different EAP type or
       terminates the conversation by sending an EAP-Failure, depending
       on the server policy.

   The version negotiation procedure guarantees that the EAP peer and
   server will agree to the latest version supported by both parties.
   If version negotiation fails, then use of TEAM will not be possible,
   and another mutually acceptable EAP method will need to be negotiated
   if authentication is to proceed.

   The TEAM version field is not protected by TLS and therefore can be
   modified in transit.  In order to detect modification of the TEAM
   version which could occur as part of a "downgrade" attack, the peer
   and EAP server check if the version it sent during negotiation is
   same as the version claimed to be received by the other party.  Each
   party uses the Crypto-Binding TLV (Section 6.5) to inform the other
   party of the version number it received during the TEAM version



Zorn, et al.             Expires April 22, 2011                [Page 15]

Internet-Draft                    TEAM                      October 2010


   negotiation.  The receiver of the Crypto-Binding TLV must verify that
   the version in the Crypto-Binding TLV matches the version it sent
   during TEAM version negotiation.

4.4.  TEAM Phase 2

   The second part of the TEAMv2 conversation typically consists of a
   complete EAP conversation occurring within the TLS session negotiated
   in TEAM Phase 1, ending with protected termination using the Result
   TLV.  TEAM Phase 2 will occur only if establishment of a new TLS
   session in Phase 1 is successful or a TLS session is successfully
   resumed in Phase 1.  In cases where a new TLS session is established
   in TEAMv2 Phase 1, the first payload of the Phase 2 conversation MAY
   be sent by the EAP server along with the finished message to save a
   round-trip.

   Phase 2 SHOULD NOT occur if the EAP Server authenticates
   unsuccessfully, and MUST NOT occur if establishment of the TLS
   session in Phase 1 was not successful or a TLS fatal error has been
   sent terminating the conversation.

   Since all packets sent within the TEAM Phase 2 conversation occur
   after TLS session establishment, they are protected using the
   negotiated TLS ciphersuite.  All EAP packets of the EAP conversation
   in Phase 2 including the EAP header of the inner EAP method are
   protected using the negotiated TLS ciphersuite.

   Phase 2 may not always include a EAP conversation within the TLS
   session, referred to in this document as inner EAP methods.  However,
   Phase 2 MUST always end with either protected termination or
   protected error termination (e.g.  TLS alert).

   Within Phase 2, protected EAP conversation and protected termination
   packets are always carried within TLVs.  There are TLVs defined for
   specific purposes such as carrying EAP-authentication messages and
   carrying cryptographic binding information.  New TLVs may be
   developed for other purposes.

4.4.1.  Protected Conversation

   Phase 2 of the TEAM conversation typically begins with the EAP server
   sending an optional EAP-Request/Identity packet to the peer,
   protected by the TLS ciphersuite negotiated in Phase 1 of TEAM.  The
   peer responds with an EAP-Response/Identity packet to the EAP server,
   containing the peer's userId.  Since this Identity Request/Response
   exchange is protected by the ciphersuite negotiated in TLS, it is not
   vulnerable to snooping or packet modification attacks.




Zorn, et al.             Expires April 22, 2011                [Page 16]

Internet-Draft                    TEAM                      October 2010


   After the TLS session-protected Identity exchange, the EAP server
   will then select authentication method(s) for the peer, and will send
   an EAP-Request with the Type field set to the initial method.  As
   described in [RFC3748], the peer can NAK the suggested EAP method,
   suggesting an alternative.  Since the NAK will be sent within the TLS
   channel, it is protected from snooping or packet modification.  As a
   result, an attacker snooping on the exchange will be unable to inject
   NAKs in order to "negotiate down" the authentication method.  An
   attacker will also not be able to determine which EAP method was
   negotiated.

   The EAP conversation within the TLS protected session may involve a
   sequence of zero or more EAP authentication methods; it completes
   with the protected termination described in Section 4.4.2 Several
   TLVs may be included in each Request and Response.  EAP packets are
   always encapsulated within EAP Payload TLVs.

   In a typical EAP conversation, the result of the conversation is
   communicated by sending EAP Success or EAP Failure packets after the
   EAP method is complete.  The EAP Success or Failure packet is
   considered the last packet of the EAP conversation; and therefore
   cannot be used when sequences need to be supported.  Hence, instead
   of using the EAP Success or EAP Failure packet, both peer and EAP
   server MUST use the Intermediate-Result TLV (Section 6.10) to
   communicate the result.

   In a typical EAP conversation, the EAP Success or EAP Failure is
   considered the last packet of the EAP conversation.  Within TEAM, the
   EAP server can start another EAP method after success or failure of
   the previous EAP method inside the protected session.

   In a sequence of more than one EAP authentication method, to make
   sure the same parties are involved in tunnel establishment and
   successful completion of previous inner EAP methods, before
   completing negotiation of the next EAP method, both peer and EAP
   server MUST use crypto binding (Crypto-Binding TLV).

   The Intermediate-Result TLV is used to indicate the result of a
   individual successful EAP method, and the Result TLV (Section 6.2) is
   used to indicate result of the entire TEAM conversation.

   The Intermediate-Result and Crypto-Binding TLVs MUST be sent after
   each EAP method that was successful.  If the EAP method failed, or if
   the EAP method negotiation did not complete, then an Intermediate-
   Result TLV MAY be included, and the Crypto-Binding TLV MUST NOT be
   included.  An exception is that the Crypto-Binding TLV MUST be sent
   along with a protected success/failure indication (see
   Section 4.4.2).



Zorn, et al.             Expires April 22, 2011                [Page 17]

Internet-Draft                    TEAM                      October 2010


   If these TLVs are not sent after a successful EAP method, it should
   be considered a tunnel compromise error by peer and EAP server,
   resulting in the termination of the conversation (as described in
   Section 4.5).

   A subsequent EAP conversation can be started after both TLVs are
   exchanged in a TLV packet.  Alternatively, if a subsequent EAP
   conversation is being attempted, then in order to reduce round trips,
   both TLVs SHOULD be sent with the EAP-Payload of the first EAP packet
   of the next EAP conversation (for example, EAP- Identity or EAP
   packet of the EAP method).  Alternatively, if the next packet is the
   protected success/failure packet, then in order to reduce round
   trips, both TLVs MUST be sent with the protected success/failure
   packet.

   If the EAP server sends a valid Crypto-Binding TLV to the peer, the
   peer MUST respond with a Crypto-Binding TLV.  If the Crypto-Binding
   TLV is invalid, it should be considered a tunnel compromise error by
   the peer.  If the peer does not respond with a TLV packet containing
   the Crypto-Binding TLV, it MUST be considered a tunnel compromise
   error by the EAP server.

   Within a TEAM part 2 conversation, a peer MAY request the trusted
   root of a server certificate using a Server-Trusted-Root TLV
   (Section 6.16), and the EAP server MAY respond with a Server-Trusted-
   Root TLV to the peer.  The Server-Trusted-Root TLV can be exchanged
   in regular authentication mode or server unauthenticated tunnel
   provisioning mode.

   After the peer has determined that it has successfully authenticated
   the EAP server and determined that the tunnel and inner EAP methods
   were between the same peer and EAP server by validating the Crypto-
   Binding TLV, it MAY send one or more Server-Trusted-Root TLVs (marked
   as optional) to request the trusted root of server certificate from
   the EAP server.  The peer may receive a response, but is not required
   to use the trusted root received from the EAP server.

   If the EAP server has determined that it has successfully
   authenticated the peer and determined that the tunnel and inner EAP
   methods were between the same peer and EAP server by validating the
   Crypto-Binding TLV, then it MAY respond with the the server-trusted-
   root containing the PCKS#7 TLV (Section 6.17).

4.4.2.  Protected Termination

   Phase 2 of the TEAM conversation is completed by the exchange of
   success/failure indications (Result TLV) within a TLV packet
   protected by the TLS session.



Zorn, et al.             Expires April 22, 2011                [Page 18]

Internet-Draft                    TEAM                      October 2010


   Even if Crypto-Binding TLVs have been exchanged in previous
   conversations, the Crypto-Binding TLV MUST be included in both
   protected success/failure (Result TLV) indications.  If the TLVs are
   not included, or if the TLVs are invalid, it should be considered a
   tunnel compromise error, and the peer and EAP server MUST follow the
   rules described in Section 4.5 to abort the conversation.

   The Result TLV is sent within the TLS channel.  The TEAM client then
   replies with a Result TLV.  The conversation concludes with the TEAM
   server sending a cleartext success/failure indication.

   The only outcome which should be considered as successful
   authentication is when a Result TLV of Status=Success is answered by
   the peer with a Result TLV of Status=Success.

   The combinations (Result TLV=Failure, Result TLV=Success), (Result
   TLV=Failure, Result TLV=Failure), (no TLVs exchange or no protected
   success or failure) should be considered an authentication failure by
   both the peer and EAP server.  Once the peer and EAP server consider
   that authentiation has failed, these are the last packets inside the
   protected tunnel.  These combinations are considered an
   authentication failure regardless of whether a cleartext EAP Success
   or EAP Failure packet is subsequently sent.

   If the EAP server wants authentication to fail, it sends the TLV
   response with Result TLV=Failure.  If the EAP server sends a failure,
   the peer MUST respond with Result TLV=Failure and the Crypto-Binding
   TLV, without any other mandatory TLVs.  The Crypto-Binding TLV is
   calculated using the key derivation formula in Section 2.5; if for
   some reason one or more inner EAP method MSKs were not derived, then
   these MSKs are assumed to be null.

   If the EAP server has sent the success indication (Result
   TLV=Success), the peer is allowed to refuse to accept a Success
   message from the EAP server since the client's policy may require
   completion of certain EAP methods or the client may require
   credentials.

   If the EAP server has sent a success indication (Result TLV=success),
   and the peer wants authentication to fail, it sends the TLV response
   with Result TLV=Failure and Crypto-Binding TLV.

   After the EAP-server returns success, if the peer wants to request
   the EAP server to continue conversation, it sends a Result
   TLV=Success along with a Request-Action TLV with the appropriate
   action (e.g.  Negotiate-EAP, or Process-TLV).  If the Request-Action
   TLV is set to mandatory, then the EAP server MUST process the action,
   or return status=failure, closing the conversation inside the tunnel.



Zorn, et al.             Expires April 22, 2011                [Page 19]

Internet-Draft                    TEAM                      October 2010


   If the Request-Action TLV is set to optional, then the EAP server can
   ignore the TLV and return Result TLV=Success again, closing the
   conversation inside the tunnel.

4.4.3.  Provisioning of Credentials

   TEAM supports built-in provisioning of certificate trust anchors and
   can be extended to provisioning of other types of credentials.  The
   following two provisioning modes are suported:

   1.  Provisioning inside a server authenticated TLS tunnel
   2.  Provisioning inside a server unauthenticated TLS tunnel

4.4.3.1.  Provisioning Inside a Server Authenticated TLS Tunnel

   After regular authentication in TEAM Phase 2, the peer and EAP server
   can use the Server-Trusted-Root TLV to request and provision peer
   credentials.  The provisioning payload is exchanged after the peer
   and EAP server have determined that both have successfully
   authenticated each other (either thru TLS handshake and/or inner EAP
   method), and the tunnel and inner EAP methods are between the same
   peers.

   After the peer has determined that it has successfully authenticated
   the EAP server and determined that the tunnel and inner EAP methods
   were between the same peer and EAP server by validating the Crypto-
   Binding TLV, it MAY send one or more Server- Trusted-Root TLVs
   (marked as optional) to request credentials from the EAP server.  The
   EAP server will send corresponding credentials in the Server-Trusted-
   Root TLVs if its internal policy has been satisfied.  It may ignore
   the credential provisioning request or request additional
   authentication methods if its policy so dictates.  The peer may
   receive a credential, but is not required to use the credentials
   received from the EAP server.

4.4.3.2.  Provisioning Inside a Server Unauthenticated TLS Tunnel

   In some cases, the peer may lack the credentials necessary to
   authenticate the server in the TLS handshake.  At the same time,
   bootstrapping the information to the peer out of band may be
   prohibitive from a deployment cost perspective.  It can rely on the
   inner EAP method using existing credentials to authenticate the
   server.  This provisioning mode provides ease of deployment at the
   cost of introducing man-in-the-middle vulnerabilities.  As a result,
   implementation of the server unauthenticated tunnel provisioning mode
   is OPTIONAL.

   In this provisioning mode, as part of TEAM Phase 1, if the peer does



Zorn, et al.             Expires April 22, 2011                [Page 20]

Internet-Draft                    TEAM                      October 2010


   not authenticate, or does not successfully authenticate the EAP
   server during TLS negotiation, it can decide to go into server
   unauthenticated tunnel provisioning mode.  While this section
   describes negotiation of a certificate-based ciphersuite within TLS,
   TEAM supports negotiation of other ciphersuites (for example,
   ciphersuites that do not use certificates such as anonymous DH) or
   extensions.  However, the conversation may slightly differ if other
   TLS ciphersuites or extensions are used.  For example, in a
   certificate based TLS handshake, the peer verifies that the EAP
   server possesses the private key corresponding to the public key
   contained in the certificate presented by the EAP server.  However,
   the peer does not verify whether the certificate presented by the
   server chains to a provisioned trust anchor, as the peer may not be
   configured with a certificate trust anchor required to validate the
   server certificate.  If the peer cannot verify that the server
   possesses the corresponding private key, or if the certificate
   presented by the server is unacceptable for any reason other than the
   lack of an appropriate trust anchor, the peer MUST NOT use this
   provisioning mode.  Assuming that the server demonstrates possession
   of the private key, the peer continues with establishment of the
   tunnel (TEAM Phase 2).  As a result, it is possible that the TLS
   channel (TEAM Phase 2) may be terminated by an attacker.

   The TEAM Phase 2 conversation is unchanged in this mode, except that
   the peer will only accept an EAP method supporting mutual
   authentication and key derivation that is compatible with its initial
   credentials (such as a password-based EAP method).  The peer then
   uses the Crypto-Binding TLV to validate that the same server
   terminates both the TLS channel and the successfully completed EAP
   method, thereby verifying that the exchange was not subject to a man-
   in-the-middle attack.  Assuming that the Crypto- Binding TLV exchange
   is successful, the peer will request and the server will subsequently
   provide a trusted root, using the Server- Trusted-Root TLV.

   Once the initial provisioning exchange completes, the peer is
   expected to use the provisioned credentials in subsequent TEAM
   authentications, and SHOULD NOT use this provisioning mode.

   TEAM servers implementing this provisioning mode MUST support the
   following additional ciphersuites, beyond those specified in
   Section 4.3.2:

      TLS_DH_anon_WITH_AES_128_CBC_SHA

   TEAM peers implementing this provisioning mode MAY support the
   following additional ciphersuites, beyond those specified in
   Section 4.3.2:




Zorn, et al.             Expires April 22, 2011                [Page 21]

Internet-Draft                    TEAM                      October 2010


      TLS_DH_anon_WITH_AES_128_CBC_SHA

4.5.  Error Handling

   TEAM does not have its own error message capabilities since:

   1.  TLS errors are communicated via TLS alert messages.
   2.  Errors within the EAP conversation in TEAM Phase 2 are expected
       to be handled by individual EAP methods.
   3.  Violation of the TLV rules for inner-TLVs are handled using
       Result-TLVs together with the Error-Code TLV.

   If an error occurs at any point in the TLS layer, the EAP server
   SHOULD send a TLS alert message instead of the next EAP-request
   packet to the peer.  The EAP server SHOULD send an EAP-Request packet
   with EAP-Type=TEAM, encapsulating a TLS record containing the
   appropriate TLS alert message.  The EAP server SHOULD send a TLS
   alert message rather than immediately terminating the conversation so
   as to allow the peer to inform the user of the cause of the failure
   and possibly allow for a restart of the conversation.  To ensure that
   the peer receives the TLS alert message, the EAP server MUST wait for
   the peer to reply with an EAP-Response packet.

   The EAP-Response packet sent by the peer MAY encapsulate a TLS
   client_hello handshake message, in which case the EAP server MAY
   allow the TEAM conversation to be restarted, or it MAY contain an
   EAP-Response packet with EAP-Type=TEAM and no data, in which case the
   TEAM server MUST send an EAP-Failure packet, and terminate the
   conversation.

   It is up to the EAP server whether to allow restarts, and if so, how
   many times the conversation can be restarted.  An EAP server
   implementing restart capability SHOULD impose a limit on the number
   of restarts, so as to protect against denial of service attacks.

   If an error occurs at any point in the TLS layer, the peer SHOULD
   send a TLS alert message instead of the next EAP-response packet to
   the EAP server.  The peer SHOULD send an EAP-Response packet with
   EAP-Type=TEAM, encapsulating a TLS record containing the appropriate
   TLS alert message.  The EAP server may restart the conversation by
   sending a EAP-Request packet encapsulating the TLS
   hello_request_handshake message, in which case the peer MAY allow the
   TEAM conversation to be restarted; or the EAP server can response
   with EAP Failure.

   Any time the peer or the EAP server finds an error when processing
   the sequence of exchanges, such as a violation of TLV rules, it
   should send a Result TLV of failure and Error-Code



Zorn, et al.             Expires April 22, 2011                [Page 22]

Internet-Draft                    TEAM                      October 2010


   TLV=Unexpected_TLVs_Exchanged (a Fatal error), and terminate the
   tunnel.  This is usually due to an implementation problem and is
   considered an fatal error.  The party that receives the Error-Code
   TLV=Unexpected_TLVs_Exchanged should terminate the tunnel.

   If a tunnel compromise error (see (Section 4.4)) is detected by the
   Peer or EAP server, the party SHOULD send a Result TLV of failure
   without a Crypto-Binding TLV, and Error-Code TLV=Tunnel-compromise-
   error (a Fatal error), and terminate the tunnel.  The party that
   receives the Error-Code TLV=Tunnel-compromise error should terminate
   the tunnel.

4.6.  Fragmentation and Reassembly

   A single TLS record may be up to 16384 octets in length, but a TLS
   message may span multiple TLS records, and a TLS certificate message
   may in principle be as long as 16MB.

   The group of TEAM messages sent in a single round may thus be larger
   than the PPP MTU size, the maximum RADIUS packet size of 4096 octets,
   or even the Multilink Maximum Received Reconstructed Unit (MRRU).

   As described in [RFC1990], the multilink MRRU is negotiated via the
   Multilink MRRU LCP option, which includes an MRRU length field of two
   octets, and thus can support MRRUs as large as 64 KB.

   However, note that in order to protect against reassembly lockup and
   denial of service attacks, it may be desirable for an implementation
   to set a maximum size for one such group of TLS messages.  Since a
   typical certificate chain is rarely longer than a few thousand
   octets, and no other field is likely to be anywhere near as long, a
   reasonable choice of maximum acceptable message length might be 64
   KB.

   If this value is chosen, then fragmentation can be handled via the
   multilink PPP fragmentation mechanisms described in [RFC1990]. this
   is desirable, EAP methods are used in other applications such as
   [IEEE.802-11.2007] and there may be cases in which multilink or the
   MRRU LCP option cannot be negotiated.  As a result, a TEAM
   implementation MUST provide its own support for fragmentation and
   reassembly.

   Since EAP is an ACK-NAK protocol, fragmentation support can be added
   in a simple manner.  In EAP, fragments that are lost or damaged in
   transit will be retransmitted, and since sequencing information is
   provided by the Identifier field in EAP, there is no need for a
   fragment offset field as is provided in IPv4.




Zorn, et al.             Expires April 22, 2011                [Page 23]

Internet-Draft                    TEAM                      October 2010


   TEAM fragmentation support is provided through addition of flag bits
   within the EAP-Response and EAP-Request packets, as well as a TLV
   Message Length field of four octets.  Flags include the Length
   included (L), More fragments (M), and TEAM Start (S) bits.  The L
   flag is set to indicate the presence of the four octet TLV Message
   Length field, and MUST be set only for the first fragment of a
   fragmented TLV message or set of messages.

   The TLV Message Length field in the TEAM header is not protected, and
   hence can be modified by a attacker.  The TLS record length in the
   TLS data is protected.  Hence, if the TLV Message length received in
   the first packet (with L bit set) is greater or less than the total
   size of TLS messages received including multiple fragments, then the
   TLV message length should be ignored.

   In order to protect against reassembly lockup and denial of service
   attacks, it may be desirable for an implementation to set a maximum
   size for a single group of Outer-TLV messages.  Since a typical
   certificate chain is rarely longer than a few thousand octets, and no
   other field is likely to be anywhere near as long, a reasonable
   choice of maximum acceptable message length for all the Outer-TLVs in
   a group of messages might be 64 KB.

   The M flag is set on all but the last fragment.  The S flag is set
   only within the TEAM start message sent from the EAP server to the
   peer.  The TLV Message Length field is four octets, and provides the
   total length of the TLV message or set of messages that is being
   fragmented; this simplifies buffer allocation.

   When a peer receives an EAP-Request packet with the M bit set, it
   MUST respond with an EAP-Response with EAP-Type=TEAM and no data.
   This serves as a fragment ACK.  The EAP server MUST wait until it
   receives the EAP-Response before sending another fragment.  In order
   to prevent errors in processing of fragments, the EAP server MUST
   increment the Identifier field for each fragment contained within an
   EAP-Request, and the peer MUST include this Identifier value in the
   fragment ACK contained within the EAP-Response.  Retransmitted
   fragments will contain the same Identifier value.

   Similarly, when the EAP server receives an EAP-Response with the M
   bit set, it MUST respond with an EAP-Request with EAP-Type=TEAM and
   no TLS data.  This serves as a fragment ACK.  The EAP peer MUST wait
   until it receives the EAP-Request before sending another fragment.
   In order to prevent errors in the processing of fragments, the EAP
   server MUST increment the Identifier value for each fragment ACK
   contained within an EAP-Request, and the peer MUST include this
   Identifier value in the subsequent fragment contained within an EAP-
   Response.



Zorn, et al.             Expires April 22, 2011                [Page 24]

Internet-Draft                    TEAM                      October 2010


4.7.  Key Derivation

   Since the normal TLS keys are used in the handshake, and therefore
   should not be used in a different context, new keys must be derived
   from the TLS master secret to protect the conversation within the
   TEAM tunnel.

   Instead of deriving keys specific to link layer ciphersuites, EAP
   methods provide a Master Session Key (MSK) used to derive keys in a
   link layer specific manner.  The method used to extract ciphering
   keys from the MSK is beyond the scope of this document.

   TEAM also derives an Extended Master Session Key (EMSK) which is
   reserved for use in deriving keys in other ciphering applications.
   This draft also does not discuss the format of the attributes used to
   communicate the master session keys from the backend authentication
   server to the NAS; examples of such attributes are provided in
   [RFC2548].

   TEAM combines key material from the TLS exchange with key material
   from inner key generating EAP methods to provide stronger keys and to
   bind inner authentication mechanisms to the TLS tunnel.  Both the
   peer and EAP server MUST derive compound MAC and compound session
   keys using the procedure described below.

   The input for the cryptographic binding includes the following:

   1.  The TEAM tunnel key (TK) is calculated using the first 40 octets
       of the (secret) key material generated as described in the EAP-
       TLS algorithm (see Section 2.3 of [RFC5216]) More explicitly, the
       TK is the first 40 octets of the PRF as defined in RFC 5216:

       Key_Material = TLS-PRF-128(  master_secret, "client EAP
                                    encryption", client.random ||
                                    server.random )

   2.  The first 32 octets of the MSK provided by each successful inner
       EAP method for each successful EAP method completed within the
       tunnel.

       ISK1..ISKn are the MSK portion of the EAP keying material
       obtained from methods 1 to n.  The ISKj SHALL be the first 32
       octets of the generated MSK of the jth EAP method.  If the MSK
       length is less than 32 octets, it SHALL be padded with 0x00's to
       ensure the MSK is 32 octets.  Similarly, if no keying material is
       provided for the EAP method, then ISKj SHALL be set to zero (e.g.
       32 octets of 0x00).




Zorn, et al.             Expires April 22, 2011                [Page 25]

Internet-Draft                    TEAM                      October 2010


   The PRF algorithm is based on PRF+ from IKEv2 [RFC5996] shown below
   ("|" denotes concatenation).

      PRF (K,S,LEN) = T1 | T2 | T3 | T4 | ...

   Where:
      K = Key
      S = Seed
      LEN = output length, represented as binary in a single octet
   and
      T1 = HMAC-SHA1(K, S | LEN | 0x01)
      T2 = HMAC-SHA1 (K, T1 | S | LEN | 0x02)
      T3 = HMAC-SHA1 (K, T2 | S | LEN | 0x03)
      T4 = HMAC-SHA1 (K, T3 | S | LEN | 0x04)
      ...

   The intermediate combined key is generated as described below after
   each successful EAP method inside the tunnel.

      S-IPMK0 = TK
      for j = 1 to k do

      IPMKj = PRF+(  S-IPMK(j-1),"Inner Methods Compound Keys " | ISKj,
                     60 )

   Where
      S-IPMKj are the first 40 octets of IPMKj and CMKj are the last 20
      octets of IPMKj used to generate the intermediate Compound MACs
   and
      k = the last successful EAP method inside the tunnel at the point
      where the combined MAC key is derived

   Each IPMKj output is 60 octets.  The first 40 octets are used as the
   key input to the succeeding IPMK(j+1) derivation and the latter 20
   octets are used as the key, CMKj, used to generate the intermediate
   Crypto-Binding Compound MAC value at the jth EAP method.

4.7.1.  Compound Session Key Derivation

   The compound session key (CSK) is derived on both the peer and EAP
   server:

      CSK = PRF+(S-IPMKn, "Session Key Generating Function",
      OutputLength)

   The output length of the CSK must be at least 128 bytes.  The first
   64 octets are taken as the MSK and the second 64 octets are taken as
   the EMSK.  The MSK and EMSK are described in [RFC3748].



Zorn, et al.             Expires April 22, 2011                [Page 26]

Internet-Draft                    TEAM                      October 2010


4.8.  Ciphersuite Negotiation

   Since TLS supports TLS ciphersuite negotiation, peers completing the
   TLS negotiation will also have selected a TLS ciphersuite, which
   includes key strength, encryption and hashing methods.  However,
   unlike in [RFC5216], within TEAM, the negotiated TLS ciphersuite
   relates only to the mechanism by which the TEAM Phase 2 conversation
   will be protected, and has no relationship to link layer security
   mechanisms negotiated within the PPP Encryption Control Protocol
   (ECP) [RFC1968] or within IEEE 802.11 [IEEE.802-11.2007].

   As a result, this specification currently does not support secure
   negotiation of link layer ciphersuites.

5.  TEAM Protocol Description

5.1.  TEAM Protocol Layers

   TEAM packets may include TLVs both inside and outside the TLS tunnel.
   The term "Outer TLVs" is used to refer to optional TLVs outside the
   TLS tunnel, which are only allowed in the first two messages in the
   TEAM protocol.  That is the first EAP server to peer message and
   first peer to EAP server message.  If the message is fragmented, the
   whole set of messages is counted as one message.  The term "Inner
   TLVs" is used to refer to TLVs sent within the TLS tunnel.

   In TEAM Phase 1, Outer TLVs are used to help establishing the TLS
   tunnel, but no Inner TLVs are used.  Therefore the layering of TEAM
   Phase 1 is as follows:

              +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
              |            TLS        |  Optional Outer TLVs    |
              +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
              |                    TEAM                         |
              +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
              |                     EAP                         |
              +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+

   In Phase 2 of the TEAM conversation, TLS records may encapsulate zero
   or more Inner TLVs, but no Outer TLVs.  EAP packets (including EAP
   header fields) used within tunneled EAP authentication methods are
   carried within Inner TLVs.  Therefore the layering of TEAM Part 2 is
   as follows:








Zorn, et al.             Expires April 22, 2011                [Page 27]

Internet-Draft                    TEAM                      October 2010


              +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
              |                     EAP                         |
              +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
              |          Inner-TLVs (EAP-Payload TLV)           |
              +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
              |                     TLS                         |
              +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
              |                    TEAM                         |
              +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
              |                     EAP                         |
              +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+

5.2.  TEAM Packet Format

   A summary of the TEAM packet format is shown below.  The fields are
   transmitted from left to right.

        0                   1                   2                   3
        0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
       +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
       |     Code      |   Identifier  |            Length             |
       +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
       |     Type      |   Flags | Ver |    Fragment Message Length
       +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
       |   Fragment Message Length     |    TLS Message Length
       +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
       |     TLS Message Length        |      TLS Data...
       +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
       |             Outer TLVs...
       +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+

   Code

      1 -  Request
      2 -  Response

   Identifier

      The Identifier field is one octet and aids in matching responses
      with requests.  The Identifier field MUST be changed on each
      Request packet.  The Identifier field in a Response packet MUST
      match the Identifier field from the corresponding Request.

   Length

      The Length field is two octets and indicates the length of the EAP
      packet including the Code, Identifier, Length, Type, Flags,
      Version, Fragmented Length, TLS Message Length, TLS Data, and



Zorn, et al.             Expires April 22, 2011                [Page 28]

Internet-Draft                    TEAM                      October 2010


      Outer-TLV fields.  Octets outside the range of the Length field
      should be treated as Data Link Layer padding and should be ignored
      on reception.

   Type

      <TBD1> - TEAM

   Flags

       0 1 2 3 4
      +-+-+-+-+-+
      |L M S T R|
      +-+-+-+-+-+

      L =  Length included
      M =  More fragments
      S =  TEAM start
      T =  TLS length included
      R =  Reserved (must be zero)

      The L bit (Fragmented Message Length included) is set to indicate
      the presence of the four octet Fragmented Message Length field,
      and MUST be set for the first fragment of a fragmented TEAM
      message or set of messages.  The M bit (more fragments) is set on
      all but the last fragment.  The S bit (TEAM start) is set in a
      TEAM Start message.  This differentiates the TEAM Start message
      from a fragment acknowledgment.  The T bit (TLS Message Length
      included) is set to indicate the presence of the four octet TLS
      Message Length field, and MUST only be set for packet that
      contains Outer-TLVs.  It can be used to calculate the start of the
      Outer-TLVs.

   Version

       0 1 2
      +-+-+-+
      |R|0|1|
      +-+-+-+

      R = Reserved (must be zero)

   Fragmented Message Length

      The Fragmented Message Length field is four octets, and is present
      only if the L bit is set.  This field provides the total length of
      the data after the Fragmented Message Length field in the TEAM
      message or set of messages that is being fragmented.



Zorn, et al.             Expires April 22, 2011                [Page 29]

Internet-Draft                    TEAM                      October 2010


   TLS Message Length

      The TLS Message Length field is four octets, and is present only
      if the T bit is set.  This field provides the total length of the
      TLS Data in the TEAM message.  Data after this length of TLS data
      are the Outer TLVs.

   TLS Data

      The TLS data consists of the encapsulated packet in TLS record
      format.

   Outer TLVs

      The Outer-TLVs consists of the optional data used to help
      establishing the TLS tunnel in TLV format.  The start of the
      Outer-TLV can be derived from the EAP Length field and TLS Length
      field.

6.  Type-Length-Value Tuples

   The TLVs used within TEAM are standard Type-Length-Value (TLV)
   objects.  The TLV objects could be used to carry arbitrary parameters
   between EAP peer and EAP server.  Possible uses for TLV objects
   include: language and character set for Notification messages and
   cryptographic binding.

   The EAP peer may not necessarily implement all the TLVs supported by
   the EAP server; and hence to allow for interoperability, TLVs allow
   an EAP server to discover if a TLV is supported by the EAP peer,
   using the NAK TLV.  The TEAM packet does not have to contain any
   TLVs, nor need it contain any mandatory TLVs.

   The mandatory bit in a TLV indicates whether support of the TLV is
   required.  If the peer or server does not support the TLV, it MUST
   send a NAK TLV in response, and all the other TLVs in the message
   MUST be ignored.  If an EAP peer or server finds an unsupported TLV
   which is marked as optional, it can ignore the unsupported TLV.  It
   MUST NOT send an NAK TLV.

   Note that a peer or server may support a TLV with the mandatory bit
   set, but may not understand the contents.  The appropriate response
   to a supported TLV with content that is not understood is defined by
   the TLV specification.

   Outer-TLVs SHOULD NOT be included in messages after the first two
   Outer-TLV messages sent by the peer and EAP server respectively.  A
   single Outer-TLV message may be fragmented in multiple TEAM packets.



Zorn, et al.             Expires April 22, 2011                [Page 30]

Internet-Draft                    TEAM                      October 2010


   All Outer-TLVs MUST NOT have the mandatory bit set.  If an Outer-TLV
   has the mandatory bit set, then the packet MUST be ignored.

   TEAM implementations MUST support TLVs, as well as processing of
   mandatory/optional settings on the TLV.

6.1.  TLV Format

   TLVs are defined as described below.  The fields are transmitted from
   left to right.

       0                   1                   2                   3
       0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
      +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
      |M|R|            TLV Type       |            Length             |
      +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
      |                              Value...
      +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+

   M

      0 -  Optional TLV
      1 -  Mandatory TLV

   R

      Reserved, set to zero (0)

   TLV Type

      A 14-bit field, denoting the TLV type.  Allocated types include:

      1  -  Result
      2  -  NAK
      3  -  Error-Code
      4  -  Connection-Binding
      5  -  Vendor-Specific
      6  -  URI
      7  -  EAP-Payload
      8  -  Intermediate-Result
      9  -  Crypto-Binding
      10 -  Calling-Station-Id
      11 -  Called-Station-Id
      12 -  NAS-Port-Type







Zorn, et al.             Expires April 22, 2011                [Page 31]

Internet-Draft                    TEAM                      October 2010


      13 -  Server-Identifier
      14 -  Identity-Type
      15 -  Server-Trusted-Root
      16 -  Request-Action
      17 -  PKCS#7

   Length

      The length of the Value field in octets

   Value

      The value of the TLV


6.2.  Result TLV

   The Result TLV provides support for acknowledged success and failure
   messages within TEAM.  TEAM implementations MUST support this TLV,
   which cannot be responded to with a NAK TLV.  If the Status field
   does not contain one of the known values, then the peer or EAP server
   MUST drop the connection.  The Result TLV is defined as follows:


      0                   1                   2                   3
      0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
     +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
     |M|R|         TLV Type          |            Length             |
     +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
     |             Status            |
     +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+

   M

      1 (Mandatory)

   R

      0

   TLV Type

      1 for Result








Zorn, et al.             Expires April 22, 2011                [Page 32]

Internet-Draft                    TEAM                      October 2010


   Length

      2

   Status

      The Status field is two octets.  Values include:

      1 -  Success
      2 -  Failure


6.3.  NAK TLV

   The NAK TLV allows a peer to detect TLVs that are not supported by
   the other peer.  A TLV packet can contain 0 or more NAK TLVs.  TEAM
   implementations MUST support the NAK TLV, which cannot be responded
   to with a NAK TLV.  The NAK TLV is defined as follows:

      0                   1                   2                   3
      0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
     +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
     |M|R|         TLV Type          |            Length             |
     +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
     |                          Vendor-Id                            |
     +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
     |            NAK-Type           |           TLVs....
     +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+

   M

      1 (Mandatory)

   R

      0

   TLV Type

      2 for NAK

   Length

      >= 6







Zorn, et al.             Expires April 22, 2011                [Page 33]

Internet-Draft                    TEAM                      October 2010


   Vendor-ID

      The Vendor-Id field is four octets, and contains the Vendor-Id of
      the TLV that was not supported.  The high-order octet is 0 and the
      low-order 3 octets are the SMI Network Management Private
      Enterprise Code of the Vendor in network byte order.  The Vendor-
      Id field MUST be zero for TLVs that are not Vendor-Specific TLVs.
      For Vendor-Specific TLVs, the Vendor-ID MUST be set to the SMI
      code.

   NAK-Type

      The NAK-Type field is two octets.  The field contains the Type of
      the TLV that was not supported.  A TLV of this Type MUST have been
      included in the previous packet.

   TLVs

      This field contains a list of TLVs, each of which MUST NOT have
      the mandatory bit set.  These optional TLVs can be used in the
      future to communicate why the offending TLV was determined to be
      unsupported.


6.4.  Error-Code TLV

   The Error-Code TLV allows a TEAM peer or server to indicate errors to
   the other party.  A TLV packet can contain 0 or more Error TLVs.
   Error-Code TLVs MUST be marked as Mandatory.  TEAM implementations
   MUST support the Error-Code TLV, which cannot be responded to with a
   NAK TLV.  The Error-Code TLV is defined as follows:

      0                   1                   2                   3
      0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
     +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
     |M|R|         TLV Type          |            Length             |
     +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
     |                           Error-Code                          |
     +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+

   M

      1 (Mandatory)








Zorn, et al.             Expires April 22, 2011                [Page 34]

Internet-Draft                    TEAM                      October 2010


   R

      0

   TLV Type

      3 for Error-Code

   Length

      4

   Error-Code

      The Error-Code field is four octets.  Error Codes 1-999 represent
      successful outcomes (informative messages), 1000-1999 represent
      warnings, and codes 2000-2999 represent fatal errors.  If an
      Error- Code TLV with a fatal error has been sent, then the
      conversation must be terminated.

      Currently defined values for Error-Code include:

      2001 -  Tunnel_Compromise_Error
      2002 -  Unexpected_TLVs_Exchanged


6.5.  Crypto-Binding TLV

   The Crypto-Binding TLV is used prove that both peers participated in
   the sequence of authentications (specifically the TLS session and
   inner EAP methods that generate keys).

   Both the Binding Request (B1) and Binding Response (B2) use the same
   packet format.  However the Sub-Type indicates whether it is B1 or
   B2.

   The Crypto-Binding TLV MUST be used to perform Cryptographic Binding
   after each successful EAP method in a sequence of EAP methods is
   complete in TEAM Phase 2.  The Crypto-Binding TLV can also be used
   during Protected Termination.

   The Crypto-Binding TLV must have the version number received during
   the TEAM version negotiation.  The receiver of the Crypto-Binding TLV
   must verify that the version in the Crypto-Binding TLV matches the
   version it sent during the TEAM version negotiation.  If this check
   fails then the TLV is invalid.

   The receiver of the Crypto-Binding TLV must verify that the subtype



Zorn, et al.             Expires April 22, 2011                [Page 35]

Internet-Draft                    TEAM                      October 2010


   is not set to any value other than the ones allowed.  If this check
   fails then the TLV is invalid.

   This message format is used for the Binding Request (B1) and also the
   Binding Response.  This uses TLV type CRYPTO_BINDING_TLV.  TEAM
   implementations MUST support this TLV and this TLV cannot be
   responded to with a NAK TLV.  The Crypto-Binding TLV is defined as
   follows:


      0                   1                   2                   3
      0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
     +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
     |M|R|         TLV Type          |            Length             |
     +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
     |    Reserved   |    Version    |  Received Ver.    | Sub-Type  |
     +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
     |                                                               |
     ~                             Nonce                             ~
     |                                                               |
     +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
     |                                                               |
     ~                          Compound MAC                         ~
     |                                                               |
     +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+

   M

      1 (Mandatory)

   R

      0

   TLV Type

      9 for Crypto-Binding

   Length

      56

   Reserved

      Reserved, set to zero (0)






Zorn, et al.             Expires April 22, 2011                [Page 36]

Internet-Draft                    TEAM                      October 2010


   Version

      The Version field is a single octet, which is set to the version
      of Crypto-Binding TLV.  For the Crypto-Binding TLV defined in this
      specification, it is set to one (1).

   Sub-Type

      The Sub-Type field is two octets.  Possible values include:

      0 -  Binding Request
      1 -  Binding Response

   Nonce

      The Nonce field is 32 octets.  It contains a 256 bit nonce that is
      temporally unique, used for compound MAC key derivation at each
      end.  This is the S_NONCE for the B1 message and a C_NONCE for the
      B2 message.

   Compound MAC

      The Compound MAC field is 20 octets.  This can be the Server MAC
      (B1_MAC) or the Client MAC (B2_MAC).  It is computed using the
      HMAC-SHA1-160 keyed MAC that provides 160 bits of output using the
      CMK key.  The MAC is computed over the buffer created after
      concatenating these fields in the following order:

      1.  The entire Crypto-Binding TLV attribute with the MAC field
          zeroed out
      2.  The EAP Type sent by the other party in the first TEAM message
      3.  All the Outer-TLVs from the first TEAM message sent by EAP-
          server to peer.  If a single TEAM message is fragmented into
          multiple TEAM packets; then the Outer-TLVs in all the
          fragments of that message MUST be included.
      4.  All the Outer-TLVs from the first TEAM message sent by the
          peer to the EAP server.  If a single TEAM message is
          fragmented into multiple TEAM packets, then the Outer-TLVs in
          all the fragments of that message MUST be included.

6.6.  Connection-Binding TLV

   The Connection-Binding TLV allows for connection specific information
   to be sent by the peer to the AAA server.  This TLV should be logged
   by the EAP or AAA server.  The AAA or EAP server should not deny
   access if there is a mismatch between the value sent through the AAA
   protocol and this TLV.




Zorn, et al.             Expires April 22, 2011                [Page 37]

Internet-Draft                    TEAM                      October 2010


   The format of this TLV is defined for the layer that defines the
   parameters.  The format of the value sent by the peer to the EAP
   server may be different from the format of the corresponding value
   sent through the AAA protocol.  For example, the connection binding
   TLV may contain the 802.11 MAC Address or SSID [IEEE.802-11.2007].

   TEAM implementations MAY support this TLV and this TLV MUST NOT be
   responded to with a NAK TLV.  The Connection-Binding TLV is defined
   as follows:


      0                   1                   2                   3
      0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
     +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
     |M|R|         TLV Type          |            Length             |
     +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
     |                           TLVs...
     +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+

   M

      0 (Optional)

   R

      0

   TLV Type

      4 for Connection-Binding

   Length

      >= 0

   TLVs

      The field contains a list of TLVs, each in the same format defined
      in Section 6.1, with the Mandatory flag bit cleared (0).  These
      TLVs contain information on the identity of the peer and
      authenticator (layer 2 or IP addresses); the media used to connect
      the peer and authenticator (NAS-Port-Type); and/or the service the
      client is trying to access on the gateway (SSID).  The format of
      these TLVs will be defined in a separate draft.







Zorn, et al.             Expires April 22, 2011                [Page 38]

Internet-Draft                    TEAM                      October 2010


6.7.  Vendor-Specific TLV

   The Vendor-Specific TLV is available to allow vendors to support
   their own extended attributes not suitable for general usage.

   A Vendor-Specific-TLV can contain one or more TLVs, referred to as
   Vendor TLVs.  The TLV-type of the Vendor-TLV will be defined by the
   vendor.  All the Vendor TLVs inside a single Vendor- Specific TLV
   belong to the same vendor.

   TEAM implementations MUST support the Vendor-Specific TLV, and this
   TLV MUST NOT be responded to with a NAK TLV.  TEAM implementations
   may not support the Vendor TLVs inside in the Vendor-Specific TLV,
   and can respond to the Vendor TLVs with a NAK TLV containing the
   appropriate Vendor-ID and Vendor-TLV type.

   Vendor TLVs may be optional or mandatory.  Vendor TLVs sent in the
   protected success and failure packets MUST be marked as optional.  If
   Vendor TLVs sent in protected success/failure packets are marked as
   Mandatory, then the peer or EAP server MUST drop the connection.

   The Vendor-Specific TLV is defined as follows:


      0                   1                   2                   3
      0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
     +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
     |M|R|         TLV Type          |            Length             |
     +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
     |                          Vendor-Id                            |
     +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
     |                         Vendor TLVs....
     +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+

   M

      1 (Mandatory)

   R

      0

   TLV Type

      5 for Vendor-Specific






Zorn, et al.             Expires April 22, 2011                [Page 39]

Internet-Draft                    TEAM                      October 2010


   Length

      >= 4

   Vendor-ID

      The Vendor-Id field is four octets, and contains the Vendor-Id of
      the TLV that was not supported.  The high-order octet is 0 and the
      low-order 3 octets are the SMI Network Management Private
      Enterprise Code of the Vendor in network byte order.  The Vendor-
      Id field MUST be zero for TLVs that are not Vendor-Specific TLVs.
      For Vendor-Specific TLVs, the Vendor-ID MUST be set to the SMI
      code.

   Vendor TLVs

      This field is of indefinite length.  It contains vendor-
      specificTLVs, in a format defined by the vendor.


6.8.  URI TLV

   The URI TLV allows a server to send a URI to the client to refer it
   to a resource.  The TLV contains a URI in the format specified in RFC
   3986 [RFC3986] with UTF-8 encoding.  Interpretation of the value of
   the URI is outside the scope of this document.

   If a packet contains multiple URI TLVs, then the client SHOULD select
   the first TLV it can implement, and ignore the others.  If the client
   is unable to implement any of the URI TLVs, then it MAY ignore the
   error.  TEAM implementations MAY support this TLV; and this TLV
   cannot be responded to with a NAK TLV.  The URI TLV is defined as
   follows:

      0                   1                   2                   3
      0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
     +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
     |M|R|         TLV Type          |            Length             |
     +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
     |                              URI
     +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+

   M

      0 (Optional)






Zorn, et al.             Expires April 22, 2011                [Page 40]

Internet-Draft                    TEAM                      October 2010


   R

      0

   TLV Type

      6 for URI

   Length

      >= 0

   URI

      This field is of indefinite length, and conforms to the format
      specified in RFC 3986.


6.9.  EAP-Payload TLV

   To allow piggybacking EAP request and response with other TLVs, the
   EAP Payload TLV is defined, which includes an encapsulated EAP packet
   and 0 or more TLVs.  TEAM implementations MUST support this TLV,
   which cannot be responded to with a NAK TLV.  The EAP-Payload TLV is
   defined as follows:

      0                   1                   2                   3
      0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
     +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
     |M|R|         TLV Type          |            Length             |
     +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
     |                          EAP-Packet...
     +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
     |                             TLVs...
     +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+

   M

      1 (Mandatory)

   R

      0








Zorn, et al.             Expires April 22, 2011                [Page 41]

Internet-Draft                    TEAM                      October 2010


   TLV Type

      7 for EAP-Payload

   Length

      >= 0

   EAP-Packet

      This field contains a complete EAP packet, including the EAP
      header (Code, Identifier, Length, Type) fields.  The length of
      this field is determined by the Length field of the encapsulated
      EAP packet.

   TLVs

      This (optional) field contains a list of TLVs associated with the
      EAP-Packet field.  The TLVs utilize the same format described
      Section 6.1, and MUST NOT have the mandatory bit set.  The total
      length of this field is equal to the Length field of the EAP-
      Payload-TLV, minus the Length field in the EAP header of the EAP
      packet field.


6.10.  Intermediate-Result TLV

   The Intermediate-Result TLV provides support for acknowledged
   intermediate Success and Failure messages within EAP.  TEAM
   implementations MUST support this TLV, which cannot be responded to
   with a NAK TLV.  The Intermediate-Result TLV is defined as follows:

      0                   1                   2                   3
      0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
     +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
     |M|R|         TLV Type          |            Length             |
     +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
     |             Status            |        TLVs...
     +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+

   M

      1 (Mandatory)








Zorn, et al.             Expires April 22, 2011                [Page 42]

Internet-Draft                    TEAM                      October 2010


   R

      0

   TLV Type

      8 for Intermediate-Result

   Length

      >= 2

   Status

      The Status field is two octets.  Values include:

         1 - Success
         2 - Failure

   TLVs

      This (optional) field contains a list of TLVs associated with the
      Intermediate-Result TLV.  The TLVs utilize the same format
      described Section 6.1, and MUST NOT have the mandatory bit set.


6.11.  Calling-Station-Id TLV

   This TLV allows a peer to send information to EAP server about the
   call originator.  This TLV MAY be included in the Connection-Binding-
   TLV.

   For dial-up, the Called-Station-ID TLV contains the phone number of
   the peer.  For use with IEEE 802.1X, the MAC address of the peer is
   included [RFC3580].

   For VPN, this attribute is used to send the IPv4 or IPV6 address of
   the interface of the peer used to initiate the VPN in ASCII format.
   Where the Fully Qualified Domain Name (FQDN) of the VPN client is
   known, it SHOULD be appended, separated from the address with a " "
   (space).  Example: "12.20.2.3 vpnserver.company.com".

   As described in Section 7.15 of [RFC3748], this TLV SHOULD be logged
   by the EAP or AAA server, and MAY be used for comparison with
   information gathered by other means.

   However, since the format of this TLV may not match the format of the
   information gathered by other means, if an EAP server or AAA server



Zorn, et al.             Expires April 22, 2011                [Page 43]

Internet-Draft                    TEAM                      October 2010


   supports the capability to deny access based on a mismatch, spurious
   authentication failures may occur.  As a result, implementations
   SHOULD allow the administrator to disable this check.

   TEAM implementations MAY support this TLV and this TLV MUST NOT be
   responded to with a NAK TLV.  The Calling-Station-ID TLV is defined
   as follows:


      0                   1                   2                   3
      0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
     +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
     |M|R|         TLV Type          |            Length             |
     +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
     |                           String...
     +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+

   M

      0 (Optional)

   R

      0

   TLV Type

      10 for Calling-Station-Id

   Length

      >= 0

   String

      The field should be the same as the value of the
      Calling-Station-ID attribute in [RFC2865].


6.12.  Called-Station-Id TLV

   This TLV allows a peer to send information to EAP server about the
   NAS it called.  This TLV MAY be included in the Connection-Binding
   TLV.

   For dial-up, the Calling-Station-ID TLV contains the phone number
   called by the peer.  For use with IEEE 802.1X, the MAC address of the
   NAS is included, as specified in [RFC3580].



Zorn, et al.             Expires April 22, 2011                [Page 44]

Internet-Draft                    TEAM                      October 2010


   For VPN, this attribute is used to send the IPv4 or IPv6 address of
   VPN server in ASCII format.  Where the Fully Qualified Domain Name
   (FQDN) of the VPN server is known, it SHOULD be appended, separated
   from the address with a " " (space).  Example: "12.20.2.3
   vpnserver.company.com".

   This TLV SHOULD be logged by the EAP or AAA server, and MAY be used
   for comparison with information gathered by other means.  However,
   since the format of this TLV may not match the format of the
   information gathered by other means, if an EAP server or AAA server
   supports the capability to deny access based on a mismatch, spurious
   authentication failures may occur.  As a result, implementations
   SHOULD allow the administrator to disable this check.

   TEAM implementations MAY support this TLV, and this TLV MUST NOT be
   responded to with a NAK TLV.  The Called-Station-ID TLV is defined as
   follows:


      0                   1                   2                   3
      0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
     +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
     |M|R|         TLV Type          |            Length             |
     +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
     |                     String...
     +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+

   M

      0 (Optional)

   R

      0

   TLV Type

      11 for Called-Station-Id

   Length

      >= 0

   String

      The field should be the same as the value of the Called-Station-ID
      attribute in [RFC2865].




Zorn, et al.             Expires April 22, 2011                [Page 45]

Internet-Draft                    TEAM                      October 2010


6.13.  NAS-Port-Type TLV

   This TLV allows a peer to send information to EAP server about the
   type of physical connection used by the peer to connect to NAS.  This
   TLV MAY be included in the Connection-Binding-TLV.

   The value of this field is the same as the value of NAS-Port-Type
   attribute in [RFC2865].

   This TLV SHOULD be logged by the EAP or AAA server and MAY be used
   for comparison with information gathered by other means.  However,
   since the format of this TLV may not match the format of the
   information gathered by other means, if an EAP server or AAA server
   supports the capability to deny access based on a mismatch, spurious
   authentication failures may occur.  As a result, implementations
   SHOULD allow the administrator to disable this check.

   TEAM implementations MAY support this TLV; and this TLV MUST NOT be
   responded to with a NAK TLV.  The NAS-Port-Type TLV is defined as
   follows:


      0                   1                   2                   3
      0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
     +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
     |M|R|         TLV Type          |            Length             |
     +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
     |                            Value                              |
     +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+

   M

      0 (Optional)

   R

      0

   TLV Type

      12 for NAS-Port-Type

   Length

      4






Zorn, et al.             Expires April 22, 2011                [Page 46]

Internet-Draft                    TEAM                      October 2010


   String

      The String field is four octets.  Values are the same as for the
      NAS-Port-Type attribute defined in [RFC2865].


6.14.  Server-Identifier TLV

   This TLV allows a EAP server to send a hint to the EAP peer to help
   the EAP peer select the appropriate sessionID for session resumption.
   The field is a string sent by the EAP server, and the field should be
   treated as a opaque string by the peer.  During a full-tls-handshake,
   the EAP peer MAY keep track of this field and the corresponding
   sessionID, and use it as a hint to select the appropriate sessionID
   during session resumption.

   TEAM implementations MAY support this TLV and this TLV MUST NOT be
   responded to with a NAK TLV.  The Server-Identifier TLV is defined as
   follows:


      0                   1                   2                   3
      0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
     +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
     |M|R|         TLV Type          |            Length             |
     +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
     |                            String...
     +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+

   M

      0 (Optional)

   R

      0

   TLV Type

      13 for Server-Identifier

   Length

      >= 0







Zorn, et al.             Expires April 22, 2011                [Page 47]

Internet-Draft                    TEAM                      October 2010


   String

      Contains an identifier sent by the EAP server.


6.15.  Identity-Type TLV

   The Identity-Type TLV allows an EAP-server to send a hint to help the
   EAP-peer select the right type of identity; for example; user or
   machine.

   TEAM implementations MAY support this TLV, which cannot be responded
   to with a NAK TLV.

   If the Identity-type field does not contain one of the known values
   or if the EAP peer does not have an identity corresponding to the
   identity-type, then the peer MUST ignore the value.  The Identity-
   Type TLV is defined as follows:


      0                   1                   2                   3
      0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
     +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
     |M|R|         TLV Type          |            Length             |
     +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
     |             Identity-Type     |
     +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+

   M

      0 (Optional)

   R

      0

   TLV Type

      14 for Identity-Type

   Length

      2








Zorn, et al.             Expires April 22, 2011                [Page 48]

Internet-Draft                    TEAM                      October 2010


   Identity-Type

      The Identity-Type field is two octets.  Values include:
         1 - Human
         2 - Machine


6.16.  Server-Trusted-Root TLV

   The Server-Trusted-Root TLV allows the peer to send a request to the
   EAP server for a trusted root in PKCS #7 format.

   The Server-Trusted-Root TLV is always marked as optional, and cannot
   be responded to with a NAK TLV.  TEAM server implementations that
   claim to support provisioning MUST support Server-Trusted-Root TLV,
   PKCS#7 TLV, and the PKCS#7-Server-Certificate-Root credential format
   defined in this TLV.  TEAM peer implementations may not support this
   TLV.

   The Server-Trusted-Root TLV can only be sent as an inner TLV (inside
   the TEAM Phase 2 conversation), in both server unauthenticated tunnel
   provisioning mode, and the regular authentication process.

   The peer MUST NOT request, or accept the trusted root sent inside the
   Server-Root credential TLV by the EAP-server until it has completed
   authentication of the EAP server, and validated the Crypto-Binding
   TLV.  The peer may receive a trusted root, but is not required to use
   the trusted root received from the EAP server.

   If the EAP server sets credential-format to PKCS#7-Server-
   Certificate-Root, then the Server-Trusted-Root TLV MUST contain the
   root of the certificate chain of the certificate issued to the EAP
   server packages in a PKCS#7 TLV.  If the Server certificate is a
   self-signed certificate, then the root is the self-signed
   certificate.  In this case, the EAP server does not have to sign the
   certificate inside the PCKS#7 TLV since it does not necessarily have
   access to the private key for it.

   If the Server-Trusted-Root TLV credential format does not contain one
   of the known values, then the EAP-server MUST ignore the value.

   The Server-Trusted-Root TLV is defined as follows:









Zorn, et al.             Expires April 22, 2011                [Page 49]

Internet-Draft                    TEAM                      October 2010


      0                   1                   2                   3
      0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
     +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
     |M|R|         TLV Type          |            Length             |
     +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
     |           Credential Format   |     TLVs...
     +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-++-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-

   M

      0 (Optional)

   R

      0

   TLV Type

      15 for Server-Trusted-Root

   Length

      >= 2

   Credential Format

      The Credential Format field is two octets.  Values include:
         1 - PKCS#7-Server-Certificate-Root

   TLVs

      This (optional) field contains a list of TLVs associated with the
      Server-Trusted-Root TLV.  The TLVs utilize the same format
      described Section 6.1, and MUST NOT have the mandatory bit set.


6.17.  PKCS#7 TLV

   This TLV contains a certificate or certificate chain requested by the
   peer in PKCS#7 format [RFC2315].

   The PKCS#7 TLV is always marked as optional, and cannot be responded
   to with a NAK TLV.  PEAPv2 server implementations that claim to
   support provisioning MUST support this TLV.  PEAPv2 peer
   implementations may not support this TLV.

   If the PKCS#7 TLV contains a certificate or certificate chain that is
   not acceptable to the peer, then peer MUST ignore the value.



Zorn, et al.             Expires April 22, 2011                [Page 50]

Internet-Draft                    TEAM                      October 2010


   The PKCS#7 TLV is defined as follows:


      0                   1                   2                   3
      0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
     +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
     |M|R|         TLV Type          |            Length             |
     +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
     |           PKCS#7 data...
     +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+

   M

      0 (Optional)

   R

      0

   TLV Type

      17 for PKCS#7

   Length

      >= 0

   PKCS#7 Data

      This field contains a certificate or certificate chain in PKCS#7
      format.


6.18.  Request-Action-TLV

   The Request-Action TLV MAY be sent by the peer along with
   acknowledged failure.  It allows the peer to request the EAP server
   to negotiate EAP methods or process TLVs specified in the failure
   packet.  The server MAY ignore this TLV.

   PEAPv2 implementations MUST support this TLV, which cannot be
   responded to with a NAK TLV.

   The Request-Action TLV is defined as follows:







Zorn, et al.             Expires April 22, 2011                [Page 51]

Internet-Draft                    TEAM                      October 2010


      0                   1                   2                   3
      0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
     +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
     |M|R|         TLV Type          |            Length             |
     +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
     |             Action            |
     +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+

   M

      1 (Mandatory)

   R

      0

   TLV Type

      16 for Request-Action

   Length

      2

   Action

      The Action field is two octets.  Values include:

         1 - Process-TLV
         2 - Negotiate-EAP


7.  Security Considerations

   TBC.

8.  IANA Considerations

   TBC.

9.  References

9.1.  Normative References

   [RFC1321]           Rivest, R., "The MD5 Message-Digest Algorithm",
                       RFC 1321, April 1992.

   [RFC2119]           Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to



Zorn, et al.             Expires April 22, 2011                [Page 52]

Internet-Draft                    TEAM                      October 2010


                       Indicate Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
                       March 1997.

   [RFC2315]           Kaliski, B., "PKCS #7: Cryptographic Message
                       Syntax Version 1.5", RFC 2315, March 1998.

   [RFC3748]           Aboba, B., Blunk, L., Vollbrecht, J., Carlson,
                       J., and H. Levkowetz, "Extensible Authentication
                       Protocol (EAP)", RFC 3748, June 2004.

   [RFC3986]           Berners-Lee, T., Fielding, R., and L. Masinter,
                       "Uniform Resource Identifier (URI): Generic
                       Syntax", STD 66, RFC 3986, January 2005.

   [RFC4017]           Stanley, D., Walker, J., and B. Aboba,
                       "Extensible Authentication Protocol (EAP) Method
                       Requirements for Wireless LANs", RFC 4017,
                       March 2005.

   [RFC4282]           Aboba, B., Beadles, M., Arkko, J., and P. Eronen,
                       "The Network Access Identifier", RFC 4282,
                       December 2005.

   [RFC4291]           Hinden, R. and S. Deering, "IP Version 6
                       Addressing Architecture", RFC 4291,
                       February 2006.

   [RFC4346]           Dierks, T. and E. Rescorla, "The Transport Layer
                       Security (TLS) Protocol Version 1.1", RFC 4346,
                       April 2006.

   [RFC5226]           Narten, T. and H. Alvestrand, "Guidelines for
                       Writing an IANA Considerations Section in RFCs",
                       BCP 26, RFC 5226, May 2008.

9.2.  Informative References

   [DESMODES]          National Bureau of Standards, "DES MODES of
                       Operation", FIPS PUB 81, December .

   [FIPSDES]           National Bureau of Standards, "Data Encryption
                       Standard", FIPS PUB 46, January 1977.

   [IEEE.802-11.2007]  IEEE Computer Society, "Information technology -
                       Telecommunications and information exchange
                       between systems - Local and metropolitan area
                       networks - Specific requirements - Part 11:
                       Wireless LAN Medium Access Control (MAC) and



Zorn, et al.             Expires April 22, 2011                [Page 53]

Internet-Draft                    TEAM                      October 2010


                       Physical Layer (PHY) specifications",
                       IEEE Standard 802.11, June 2007.

   [IEEE.802-1X.2004]  IEEE Computer Society, "IEEE Standard for Local
                       and metropolitan area networks: Port-Based
                       Network Access Control", IEEE Standard 802.1X,
                       December 2004.

   [RFC1968]           Meyer, G. and K. Fox, "The PPP Encryption Control
                       Protocol (ECP)", RFC 1968, June 1996.

   [RFC1990]           Sklower, K., Lloyd, B., McGregor, G., Carr, D.,
                       and T. Coradetti, "The PPP Multilink Protocol
                       (MP)", RFC 1990, August 1996.

   [RFC2419]           Sklower, K. and G. Meyer, "The PPP DES Encryption
                       Protocol, Version 2 (DESE-bis)", RFC 2419,
                       September 1998.

   [RFC2420]           Kummert, H., "The PPP Triple-DES Encryption
                       Protocol (3DESE)", RFC 2420, September 1998.

   [RFC2548]           Zorn, G., "Microsoft Vendor-specific RADIUS
                       Attributes", RFC 2548, March 1999.

   [RFC2865]           Rigney, C., Willens, S., Rubens, A., and W.
                       Simpson, "Remote Authentication Dial In User
                       Service (RADIUS)", RFC 2865, June 2000.

   [RFC3078]           Pall, G. and G. Zorn, "Microsoft Point-To-Point
                       Encryption (MPPE) Protocol", RFC 3078,
                       March 2001.

   [RFC3079]           Zorn, G., "Deriving Keys for use with Microsoft
                       Point-to-Point Encryption (MPPE)", RFC 3079,
                       March 2001.

   [RFC3579]           Aboba, B. and P. Calhoun, "RADIUS (Remote
                       Authentication Dial In User Service) Support For
                       Extensible Authentication Protocol (EAP)",
                       RFC 3579, September 2003.

   [RFC3580]           Congdon, P., Aboba, B., Smith, A., Zorn, G., and
                       J. Roese, "IEEE 802.1X Remote Authentication Dial
                       In User Service (RADIUS) Usage Guidelines",
                       RFC 3580, September 2003.

   [RFC3766]           Orman, H. and P. Hoffman, "Determining Strengths



Zorn, et al.             Expires April 22, 2011                [Page 54]

Internet-Draft                    TEAM                      October 2010


                       For Public Keys Used For Exchanging Symmetric
                       Keys", BCP 86, RFC 3766, April 2004.

   [RFC4366]           Blake-Wilson, S., Nystrom, M., Hopwood, D.,
                       Mikkelsen, J., and T. Wright, "Transport Layer
                       Security (TLS) Extensions", RFC 4366, April 2006.

   [RFC5216]           Simon, D., Aboba, B., and R. Hurst, "The EAP-TLS
                       Authentication Protocol", RFC 5216, March 2008.

   [RFC5996]           Kaufman, C., Hoffman, P., Nir, Y., and P. Eronen,
                       "Internet Key Exchange Protocol Version 2
                       (IKEv2)", RFC 5996, September 2010.

Authors' Addresses

   Glen Zorn
   Network Zen
   227/358 Thanon Sanphawut
   Bang Na, Bangkok  10260
   Thailand

   Phone: +66 (0) 87-040-4617
   EMail: gwz@net-zen.net


   Qin Wu
   Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd.
   101 Software Avenue, Yuhua District
   Nanjing, Jiangsu  21001
   China

   Phone: +86-25-84565892
   EMail: sunseawq@huawei.com


   Dan Harkins
   Aruba Networks
   1322 Crossman Avenue
   Sunnyvale, CA  94089-1113
   United States of America

   EMail: dharkins@arubanetworks.com








Zorn, et al.             Expires April 22, 2011                [Page 55]

