


SIPPING Working Group                                            V. Hilt
Internet-Draft                                  Bell Labs/Alcatel-Lucent
Intended status: Standards Track                          H. Schulzrinne
Expires: October 28, 2010                            Columbia University
                                                          April 26, 2010


           Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) Overload Control
                     draft-hilt-sipping-overload-08

Abstract

   Overload occurs in Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) networks when
   SIP servers have insufficient resources to handle all SIP messages
   they receive.  Even though the SIP protocol provides a limited
   overload control mechanism through its 503 (Service Unavailable)
   response code, SIP servers are still vulnerable to overload.  This
   document defines an overload control mechanism for SIP.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on October 28, 2010.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of



Hilt & Schulzrinne      Expires October 28, 2010                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft              Overload Control                  April 2010


   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   3.  Via Header Parameters for Overload Control . . . . . . . . . .  4
     3.1.  The 'oc_accept' Parameter  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     3.2.  Creating the 'oc' Parameter  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     3.3.  Determining the 'oc' Parameter Value . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.4.  Processing the 'oc' Parameter  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.5.  Using the 'oc' Parameter Value . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     3.6.  Self-Limiting  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   4.  Responding to an Overload Indication . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     4.1.  Message Prioritization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     4.2.  Rejecting Requests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   5.  Syntax . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   6.  Design Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     6.1.  SIP Mechanism  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
       6.1.1.  SIP Response Header  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
       6.1.2.  SIP Event Package  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     6.2.  Backwards Compatibility  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   7.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   8.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   9.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     9.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     9.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   Appendix A.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14




















Hilt & Schulzrinne      Expires October 28, 2010                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft              Overload Control                  April 2010


1.  Introduction

   As with any network element, a Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)
   [RFC3261] server can suffer from overload when the number of SIP
   messages it receives exceeds the number of messages it can process.
   Overload can pose a serious problem for a network of SIP servers.
   During periods of overload, the throughput of a network of SIP
   servers can be significantly degraded.  In fact, overload may lead to
   a situation in which the throughput drops down to a small fraction of
   the original processing capacity.  This is often called congestion
   collapse.

   Overload is said to occur if a SIP server does not have sufficient
   resources to process all incoming SIP messages.  These resources may
   include CPU processing capacity, memory, network bandwidth, input/
   output, or disk resources.

   For overload control, we only consider failure cases where SIP
   servers are unable to process all SIP requests due to resource
   constraints.  There are other cases where a SIP server can
   successfully process incoming requests but has to reject them due to
   other failure conditions.  For example, a PSTN gateway that runs out
   of trunk lines but still has plenty of capacity to process SIP
   messages should reject incoming INVITEs using a 488 (Not Acceptable
   Here) response [RFC4412].  Similarly, a SIP registrar that has lost
   connectivity to its registration database but is still capable of
   processing SIP messages should reject REGISTER requests with a 500
   (Server Error) response [RFC3261].  Overload control does not apply
   to these cases and SIP provides appropriate response codes for them.

   The SIP protocol provides a limited mechanism for overload control
   through its 503 (Service Unavailable) response code.  However, this
   mechanism cannot prevent overload of a SIP server and it cannot
   prevent congestion collapse.  In fact, the use of the 503 (Service
   Unavailable) response code may cause traffic to oscillate and to
   shift between SIP servers and thereby worsen an overload condition.
   A detailed discussion of the SIP overload problem, the problems with
   the 503 (Service Unavailable) response code and the requirements for
   a SIP overload control mechanism can be found in [RFC5390].


2.  Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].





Hilt & Schulzrinne      Expires October 28, 2010                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft              Overload Control                  April 2010


3.  Via Header Parameters for Overload Control

   This document defines new parameters for the SIP Via header for
   overload control.  These parameters provide a SIP mechanism for
   conveying overload control information between SIP entities.

3.1.  The 'oc_accept' Parameter

   A SIP server that supports this specification MUST add an "oc_accept"
   parameter to the Via headers it inserts into SIP requests.  This
   provides an indication to downstream neighbors that this server
   supports overload control.

   A SIP server MUST remove the 'oc_accept' parameter from the topmost
   Via header in a response before forwarding the response.  The topmost
   Via header is determined after the SIP server has removed its own Via
   header.  I.e., it is the Via header that was generated by the next
   upstream neighbor.

3.2.  Creating the 'oc' Parameter

   A SIP server can provide overload control feedback to its upstream
   neighbors by adding the 'oc' parameter to the topmost Via header
   field of a SIP response.  The 'oc' parameter is a new Via header
   parameter defined in this specification.  When an 'oc' parameter is
   added to a response, it MUST be inserted into the topmost Via header.
   It MUST NOT be added to any other Via header in the response.  The
   topmost Via header is determined after the SIP server has removed its
   own Via header.  I.e., it is the Via header that was generated by the
   next upstream neighbor.

   Since the topmost Via header of a response will be removed by an
   upstream neighbor after processing it, overload control feedback
   contained in the 'oc' parameter will not travel beyond the next SIP
   server.  A Via header parameter therefore provides hop-by-hop
   semantics for overload control feedback (see
   [I-D.ietf-sipping-overload-design]) even if the next hop neighbor
   does not support this specification.

   The 'oc' parameter can be used in all response types, including
   provisional, success and failure responses.  A SIP server MAY add the
   'oc' parameter to all responses it is sending.  A SIP server SHOULD
   add an 'oc' parameter to responses, that contain an 'oc_accept'
   parameter in the topmost Via header.  A SIP server MUST add an 'oc'
   parameter to responses when the transmission of overload control
   feedback is required by the overload control algorithm to limit the
   traffic received by the server.  I.e., a SIP server MUST insert the
   'oc' parameter when the overload control algorithm sets the 'oc'



Hilt & Schulzrinne      Expires October 28, 2010                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft              Overload Control                  April 2010


   parameter to a value different than the default value.

   A SIP server that has added an 'oc' parameter to Via header SHOULD
   also add a 'oc_validity' parameter to the same Via header.  The
   'oc_validity' parameter defines the time in milliseconds during which
   the content (i.e., the overload control feedback) of the 'oc'
   parameter is valid.  The default value of the 'oc_validity' parameter
   is 500.  A SIP server SHOULD use a shorter 'oc_validity' time if its
   overload status varies quickly and MAY use a longer 'oc_validity'
   time if this status is more stable.  If the 'oc_validity' parameter
   is not present, its default value is used.  The 'oc_validity'
   parameter MUST NOT be used in a Via header without an 'oc' parameter
   and MUST be ignored if it appears in a Via header without 'oc'
   parameter.

   A SIP server MAY forward the content of an 'oc' parameter it has
   received from a downstream neighbor on to its upstream neighbor.
   However, forwarding the content of the 'oc' parameter is generally
   NOT RECOMMENDED and should only be performed if permitted by the
   configuration of SIP servers.  For example, a SIP server that only
   relays messages between exactly two SIP servers may forward an 'oc'
   parameter.  The 'oc' parameter is forwarded by copying it from the
   Via in which it was received into the next Via header (i.e., the Via
   header that will be on top after processing the response).  If an
   'oc_validity' parameter is present, MUST be copied along with the
   'oc' parameter.

   The 'oc' and 'oc_validity' Via header parameters are only defined in
   SIP responses and MUST NOT be used in SIP requests.  These parameters
   are only useful to the upstream neighbor of a SIP server (i.e., the
   entity that is sending requests to the SIP server) since this is the
   entity that can offload traffic by redirecting/rejecting new
   requests.  If requests are forwarded in both directions between two
   SIP servers (i.e., the roles of upstream/downstream neighbors
   change), there are also responses flowing in both directions.  Thus,
   both two SIP servers can exchange overload information.  While adding
   'oc' and 'oc_validity' parameters to requests may increase the
   frequency with which overload information is exchanged in these
   scenarios, this increase will rarely provide benefits and does not
   justify the added overhead and complexity needed.

   A SIP server MAY decide to add 'oc' and 'oc_validity' parameters only
   to responses that are sent via a secured transport channel such as
   TLS.  The SIP server can use transport level authentication to
   identify the SIP servers, to which responses with these parameters
   are sent.  This enables a SIP server to protect overload control
   information and ensure that it is only visible to trusted parties.
   Since overload control protects a SIP server from overload, it is



Hilt & Schulzrinne      Expires October 28, 2010                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft              Overload Control                  April 2010


   RECOMMENDED that a SIP server generally inserts 'oc' and
   'oc_validity' parameters into responses to all SIP servers.

3.3.  Determining the 'oc' Parameter Value

   The value of the 'oc' parameter is determined by an overload control
   algorithm (see [I-D.ietf-sipping-overload-design]).  This
   specification does not mandate the use of a specific overload control
   algorithm.  However, the output of an overload control algorithm MUST
   be compliant to the semantics of this Via header parameter.

   The 'oc' parameter value specifies the percentage by which the load
   forwarded to this SIP server should be reduced.  Possible values
   range from 0 (the traffic forwarded is reduced by 0%, i.e., all
   traffic is forwarded) to 100 (the traffic forwarded is reduced by
   100%, i.e., no traffic forwarded).  The default value of this
   parameter is 0.

      OPEN ISSUE: the 'oc' parameter value specified in this document is
      defined to contain a loss rate.  However, other types of overload
      control feedback exist, for example, a target rate for rate-based
      overload control or message confirmations and window-size for
      window-based overload control.
      While it would in theory be possible to allow multiple types of
      overload control feedback to co-exist (e.g., by using different
      parameters for the different feedback types) it is very
      problematic for interoperability purposes and would require SIP
      servers to implement multiple overload control mechanisms.

3.4.  Processing the 'oc' Parameter

   A SIP entity compliant to this specification SHOULD remove 'oc' and
   'oc_validity' parameters from all Via headers of a response received,
   except for the topmost Via header.  This prevents 'oc'/'oc_validity'
   parameters that were accidentally or maliciously inserted into Via
   headers by a downstream SIP server from traveling upstream.

   A SIP server maintains the 'oc' parameter values received along with
   the address of the SIP servers from which they were received for the
   duration specified in the 'oc_validity' parameter or the default
   duration.  Each time a SIP server receives a response with an 'oc'
   parameter from a SIP server, it overwrites the 'oc' value it has
   currently stored for this server with the new value received.  The
   SIP server restarts the validity period of an 'oc' parameter each
   time a response with an 'oc' parameter is received from this server.
   A stored 'oc' parameter value MUST be discarded once it has reached
   the end of its validity.




Hilt & Schulzrinne      Expires October 28, 2010                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft              Overload Control                  April 2010


3.5.  Using the 'oc' Parameter Value

   A SIP server compliant to this specification MUST honor 'oc'
   parameter values it receives from downstream neighbors.  The SIP
   server MUST NOT forward more messages to a SIP server than allowed by
   the current 'oc' parameter value from this server.

   When forwarding a SIP request, a SIP entity uses the SIP procedures
   to determine the next hop SIP server as, e.g., described in [RFC3261]
   and [RFC3263].  After selecting the next hop server, the SIP server
   MUST determine if it has an 'oc' parameter value for this server.  If
   it has a non-expired 'oc' parameter value, the SIP server MUST
   determine if it can or cannot forward the current request within the
   current conditions.

   The SIP server SHOULD use the following algorithm to determine if it
   can forward the request.  The SIP server draws a random number
   between 1 and 100 for the current request.  If the random number is
   less than or equal to the 'oc' parameter value, the request is not
   forwarded.  Otherwise, the request is forwarded.  An alternative
   algorithm for SIP entities that processes a large number of requests
   is to reject/redirect the first X of every 100 requests processed.
   Other algorithms that lead to the same result can be used as well.

3.6.  Self-Limiting

   In some cases, a SIP server may not receive a response from a
   downstream neighbor when sending a request.  RFC3261 [RFC3261]
   defines that when a timeout error is received from the transaction
   layer, it MUST be treated as if a 408 (Request Timeout) status code
   has been received.  If a fatal transport error is reported by the
   transport layer, it MUST be treated as a 503 (Service Unavailable)
   status code.

   In these cases, a SIP server MUST stop sending requests to this
   server.  The SIP server SHOULD occasionally forward a single request
   to probe if the downstream neighbor is alive.  Once a SIP server has
   successfully transmitted a request to the downstream neighbor, it can
   resume normal transmission of requests.  It should, of course, honor
   an 'oc' parameters it may receive.  This avoids that a SIP server,
   which is unable to respond to incoming requests, is overloaded with
   additional requests.


4.  Responding to an Overload Indication

   An element can receive overload control feedback indicating that it
   needs to reduce the traffic it sends to its downstream neighbor.  An



Hilt & Schulzrinne      Expires October 28, 2010                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft              Overload Control                  April 2010


   element can accomplish this task by sending some of the requests that
   would have gone to the overloaded element to a different destination.
   It needs to ensure, however, that this destination is not in overload
   and capable of processing the extra load.  An element can also buffer
   requests in the hope that the overload condition will resolve quickly
   and the requests still can be forwarded in time.  In many cases,
   however, it will need to reject these requests.

4.1.  Message Prioritization

   During an overload condition, a SIP server needs to prioritize
   messages and select messages that need to be rejected or redirected.
   The selection is largely a matter of local policy.

   A SIP server SHOULD honor the Resource-Priority header field as
   defined in RFC4412 [RFC4412] if it is present in a SIP request.  The
   Resource-Priority header field enables a proxy to identify high-
   priority requests, such as emergency service requests, and preserve
   them as much as possible during times of overload.

4.2.  Rejecting Requests

   A SIP server that rejects a request because of overload MUST reject
   this request with a 503 (Service Unavailable) response code.  This
   response code indicates that the request did not succeed because the
   SIP servers processing the request are under overload.

   A SIP server that is under overload and has started to throttle
   incoming traffic SHOULD use 503 responses without Retry-After header
   to reject a fraction of requests from upstream neighbors that do not
   include the 'oc_accept' parameter in their Via headers.  These
   neighbors do not support this specification and will not respond to
   overload control feedback in the 'oc' parameter.  The fraction of
   requests rejected SHOULD be equivalent to the fraction of requests
   the upstream server would reject/redirect if it did support this
   specification.  This is to ensure that SIP servers, which do not
   support this specification, don't receive an unfair advantage over
   those that do.

   A SIP server that has reached overload (i.e., a load close to 100)
   SHOULD start using 503 responses in addition to using the 'oc'
   parameter for all upstream neighbors.  If the proxy has reached a
   load close to 100, it needs to protect itself against overload.
   Also, it is likely that upstream proxies have ignored overload
   feedback and do not support this specification.






Hilt & Schulzrinne      Expires October 28, 2010                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft              Overload Control                  April 2010


5.  Syntax

   This section defines the syntax of three new Via header parameters:
   'oc', 'oc_validity' and 'oc_accept'.  These Via header parameters are
   used to implement an overload control feedback loop between
   neighboring SIP servers.

   The 'oc' and 'oc_validity' parameters are only defined in the topmost
   Via header of a response.  They MUST NOT be used in the Via headers
   of requests and MUST NOT be used in other Via headers of a response.
   The 'oc' and 'oc_validity' parameters MUST be ignored if received
   outside of the topmost Via header of a response.  The 'oc_accept'
   parameter MAY appear in all Via headers.

   The 'oc' Via header parameter contains a number between 0 and 100.
   It describes the percentage by which the traffic to the SIP server
   from which the response has been received should be reduced.  The
   default value for this parameter is 0.

   The 'oc_validity' Via header parameter contains the time during which
   the corresponding 'oc' Via header parameter is valid.  The
   'oc_validity' parameter can only be present in a Via header in
   conjunction with an 'oc' parameter.

   The 'oc_accept' Via header parameter indicates that the SIP server,
   which has created this Via header, supports overload control.

      oc = "oc" [EQUAL 0-100]

      oc-validity = "oc_validity" [EQUAL delta-ms]

      oc-accept = "oc_accept"

   This extends the existing definition of the Via header field
   parameters, so that its BNF now looks like:

     via-params        =  via-ttl / via-maddr
                         / via-received / via-branch
                         / oc / oc-validity
                         / oc-accept / via-extension

   Example:

     Via: SIP/2.0/TCP ss1.atlanta.example.com:5060
       ;branch=z9hG4bK2d4790.1
       ;received=192.0.2.111
       ;oc=20;oc_validity=500




Hilt & Schulzrinne      Expires October 28, 2010                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft              Overload Control                  April 2010


6.  Design Considerations

   This section discusses specific design considerations for the
   mechanism described in this document.  General design considerations
   for SIP overload control can be found in
   [I-D.ietf-sipping-overload-design].

6.1.  SIP Mechanism

   A SIP mechanism is needed to convey overload feedback from the
   receiving to the sending SIP entity.  A number of different
   alternatives exist to implement such a mechanism.

6.1.1.  SIP Response Header

   Overload control information can be transmitted using a new Via
   header field parameter for overload control.  A SIP server can add
   this header parameter to the responses it is sending upstream to
   provide overload control feedback to its upstream neighbors.  This
   approach has the following characteristics:

   o  A Via header parameter is light-weight and creates very little
      overhead.  It does not require the transmission of additional
      messages for overload control and does not increase traffic or
      processing burdens in an overload situation.
   o  Overload control status can frequently be reported to upstream
      neighbors since it is a part of a SIP response.  This enables the
      use of this mechanism in scenarios where the overload status needs
      to be adjusted frequently.  It also enables the use of overload
      control mechanisms that use regular feedback such as window-based
      overload control.
   o  With a Via header parameter, overload control status is inherent
      in SIP signaling and is automatically conveyed to all relevant
      upstream neighbors, i.e., neighbors that are currently
      contributing traffic.  There is no need for a SIP server to
      specifically track and manage the set of current upstream or
      downstream neighbors with which it should exchange overload
      feedback.
   o  Overload status is not conveyed to inactive senders.  This avoids
      the transmission of overload feedback to inactive senders, which
      do not contribute traffic.  If an inactive sender starts to
      transmit while the receiver is in overload it will receive
      overload feedback in the first response and can adjust the amount
      of traffic forwarded accordingly.
   o  A SIP server can limit the distribution of overload control
      information by only inserting it into responses to known upstream
      neighbors.  A SIP server can use transport level authentication
      (e.g., via TLS) with its upstream neighbors.



Hilt & Schulzrinne      Expires October 28, 2010               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft              Overload Control                  April 2010


6.1.2.  SIP Event Package

   Overload control information can also be conveyed from a receiver to
   a sender using a new event package.  Such an event package enables a
   sending entity to subscribe to the overload status of its downstream
   neighbors and receive notifications of overload control status
   changes in NOTIFY requests.  This approach has the following
   characteristics:

   o  Overload control information is conveyed decoupled from SIP
      signaling.  It enables an overload control manager, which is a
      separate entity, to monitor the load on other servers and provide
      overload control feedback to all SIP servers that have set up
      subscriptions with the controller.
   o  With an event package, a receiver can send updates to senders that
      are currently inactive.  Inactive senders will receive a
      notification about the overload and can refrain from sending
      traffic to this neighbor until the overload condition is resolved.
      The receiver can also notify all potential senders once they are
      permitted to send traffic again.  However, these notifications do
      generate additional traffic, which adds to the overall load.
   o  A SIP entity needs to set up and maintain overload control
      subscriptions with all upstream and downstream neighbors.  A new
      subscription needs to be set up before/while a request is
      transmitted to a new downstream neighbor.  Servers can be
      configured to subscribe at boot time.  However, this would require
      additional protection to avoid the avalanche restart problem for
      overload control.  Subscriptions need to be terminated when they
      are not needed any more, which can be done, for example, using a
      timeout mechanism.
   o  A receiver needs to send NOTIFY messages to all subscribed
      upstream neighbors in a timely manner when the control algorithm
      requires a change in the control variable (e.g., when a SIP server
      is in an overload condition).  This includes active as well as
      inactive neighbors.  These NOTIFYs add to the amount of traffic
      that needs to be processed.  To ensure that these requests will
      not be dropped due to overload, a priority mechanism needs to be
      implemented in all servers these request will pass through.
   o  As overload feedback is sent to all senders in separate messages,
      this mechanism is not suitable when frequent overload control
      feedback is needed.
   o  A SIP server can limit the set of senders that can receive
      overload control information by authenticating subscriptions to
      this event package.
   o  This approach requires each proxy to implement user agent
      functionality (UAS and UAC) to manage the subscriptions.

   This document defines a new Via header field parameter for overload



Hilt & Schulzrinne      Expires October 28, 2010               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft              Overload Control                  April 2010


   control.

6.2.  Backwards Compatibility

   An new overload control mechanism needs to be backwards compatible so
   that it can be gradually introduced into a network and functions
   properly if only a fraction of the servers support it.

   Hop-by-hop overload control (see [I-D.ietf-sipping-overload-design])
   has the advantage that it does not require that all SIP entities in a
   network support it.  It can be used effectively between two adjacent
   SIP servers if both servers support overload control and does not
   depend on the support from any other server or user agent.  The more
   SIP servers in a network support hop-by-hop overload control, the
   better protected the network is against occurrences of overload.

   A SIP server may have multiple upstream neighbors from which only
   some may support overload control.  If a server would simply use this
   overload control mechanism, only those that support it would reduce
   traffic.  Others would keep sending at the full rate and benefit from
   the throttling by the servers that support overload control.  In
   other words, upstream neighbors that do not support overload control
   would be better off than those that do.

   A SIP server should therefore use 5xx responses towards upstream
   neighbors that do not support overload control.  The server should
   reject the same amount of requests with 5xx responses that would be
   otherwise be rejected/redirected by the upstream neighbor if it would
   support overload control.  If the load condition on the server does
   not permit the creation of 5xx responses, the server should drop all
   requests from servers that do not support overload control.


7.  Security Considerations

   Overload control mechanisms can be used by an attacker to conduct a
   denial-of-service attack on a SIP entity if the attacker can pretend
   that the SIP entity is overloaded.  When such a forged overload
   indication is received by an upstream SIP entity, it will stop
   sending traffic to the victim.  Thus, the victim is subject to a
   denial-of-service attack.

   An attacker can create forged overload feedback by inserting itself
   into the communication between the victim and its upstream neighbors.
   The attacker would need to add overload feedback indicating a high
   load to the responses passed from the victim to its upstream
   neighbor.  Proxies can prevent this attack by communicating via TLS.
   Since overload feedback has no meaning beyond the next hop, there is



Hilt & Schulzrinne      Expires October 28, 2010               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft              Overload Control                  April 2010


   no need to secure the communication over multiple hops.

   Another way to conduct an attack is to send a message containing a
   high overload feedback value through a proxy that does not support
   this extension.  If this feedback is added to the second Via headers
   (or all Via headers), it will reach the next upstream proxy.  If the
   attacker can make the recipient believe that the overload status was
   created by its direct downstream neighbor (and not by the attacker
   further downstream) the recipient stops sending traffic to the
   victim.  A precondition for this attack is that the victim proxy does
   not support this extension since it would not pass through overload
   control feedback otherwise.

   A malicious SIP entity could gain an advantage by pretending to
   support this specification but never reducing the amount of traffic
   it forwards to the downstream neighbor.  If its downstream neighbor
   receives traffic from multiple sources which correctly implement
   overload control, the malicious SIP entity would benefit since all
   other sources to its downstream neighbor would reduce load.

      OPEN ISSUE: the solution to this problem depends on the overload
      control method.  For rate-based and window-based overload control,
      it is very easy for a downstream entity to monitor if the upstream
      neighbor throttles traffic forwarded as directed.  For percentage
      throttling this is not always obvious since the load forwarded
      depends on the load received by the upstream neighbor.


8.  IANA Considerations

   [TBD.]


9.  References

9.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC3261]  Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., Camarillo, G., Johnston,
              A., Peterson, J., Sparks, R., Handley, M., and E.
              Schooler, "SIP: Session Initiation Protocol", RFC 3261,
              June 2002.

   [RFC3263]  Rosenberg, J. and H. Schulzrinne, "Session Initiation
              Protocol (SIP): Locating SIP Servers", RFC 3263,
              June 2002.



Hilt & Schulzrinne      Expires October 28, 2010               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft              Overload Control                  April 2010


   [RFC4412]  Schulzrinne, H. and J. Polk, "Communications Resource
              Priority for the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)",
              RFC 4412, February 2006.

9.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.ietf-sipping-overload-design]
              Hilt, V., Noel, E., Shen, C., and A. Abdelal, "Design
              Considerations for Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)
              Overload Control", draft-ietf-sipping-overload-design-02
              (work in progress), July 2009.

   [RFC5390]  Rosenberg, J., "Requirements for Management of Overload in
              the Session Initiation Protocol", RFC 5390, December 2008.


Appendix A.  Acknowledgements

   Many thanks to Rich Terpstra, Daryl Malas, Jonathan Rosenberg and
   Charles Shen for their contributions to this specification.


Authors' Addresses

   Volker Hilt
   Bell Labs/Alcatel-Lucent
   791 Holmdel-Keyport Rd
   Holmdel, NJ  07733
   USA

   Email: volkerh@bell-labs.com


   Henning Schulzrinne
   Columbia University/Department of Computer Science
   450 Computer Science Building
   New York, NY  10027
   USA

   Phone: +1 212 939 7004
   Email: hgs@cs.columbia.edu
   URI:   http://www.cs.columbia.edu









Hilt & Schulzrinne      Expires October 28, 2010               [Page 14]


