


Internet Engineering Task Force                            M. Ersue, Ed.
Internet-Draft                              Nokia Solutions and Networks
Intended status: Informational                              D. Romascanu
Expires: April 24, 2014                                            Avaya
                                                        J. Schoenwaelder
                                                Jacobs University Bremen
                                                        October 21, 2013


 Management of Networks with Constrained Devices: Problem Statement and
                              Requirements
               draft-opsawg-ersue-coman-probstate-reqs-00

Abstract

   This document provides a problem statement, deployment and management
   topology options as well as the requirements for the management of
   networks where constrained devices are involved.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 24, 2014.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of



Ersue, et al.            Expires April 24, 2014                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft         Constrained Mgmt: PS, Rqmts          October 2013


   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.1.  Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.2.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     1.3.  Networks Types and Characteristics in Focus  . . . . . . .  5
     1.4.  Constrained Device Deployment Options  . . . . . . . . . .  9
     1.5.  Management Topology Options  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     1.6.  Managing the Constrainedness of a Device or Network  . . . 10
   2.  Problem Statement  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   3.  Requirements on the Management of Networks with
       Constrained Devices  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
     3.1.  Management Architecture/System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
     3.2.  Management protocols and data model  . . . . . . . . . . . 21
     3.3.  Configuration management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
     3.4.  Monitoring functionality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
     3.5.  Self-management  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
     3.6.  Security and Access Control  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
     3.7.  Energy Management  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
     3.8.  SW Distribution  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
     3.9.  Traffic management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
     3.10. Transport Layer  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
     3.11. Implementation Requirements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
   4.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
   5.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
   6.  Contributors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
   7.  Acknowledgments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
   8.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
     8.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
     8.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
   Appendix A.  Related Development in other Bodies . . . . . . . . . 47
     A.1.  ETSI TC M2M  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
     A.2.  OASIS  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
     A.3.  OMA  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
     A.4.  IPSO Alliance  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
   Appendix B.  Related Research Projects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
   Appendix C.  Open issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
   Appendix D.  Change Log  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
     D.1.  draft-ersue-constrained-mgmt-03 -
           draft-ersue-coman-probstate-reqs-00  . . . . . . . . . . . 53
     D.2.  draft-ersue-constrained-mgmt-02-03 . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
     D.3.  draft-ersue-constrained-mgmt-01-02 . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
     D.4.  draft-ersue-constrained-mgmt-00-01 . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56



Ersue, et al.            Expires April 24, 2014                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft         Constrained Mgmt: PS, Rqmts          October 2013


1.  Introduction

1.1.  Overview

   Small devices with limited CPU, memory, and power resources, so
   called constrained devices (aka. sensor, smart object, or smart
   device) can constitute a network.  Such a network of constrained
   devices itself may be constrained or challenged, e.g. with unreliable
   or lossy channels, wireless technologies with limited bandwidth and a
   dynamic topology, needing the service of a gateway or proxy to
   connect to the Internet.  In other scenarios, the constrained devices
   can be connected to a non-constrained network using off-the-shelf
   protocol stacks.

   Constrained devices might be in charge of gathering information in
   diverse settings including natural ecosystems, buildings, and
   factories and send the information to one or more server stations.
   Constrained devices may work under severe resource constraints such
   as limited battery and computing power, little memory and
   insufficient wireless bandwidth, and communication capabilities.  A
   central entity, e.g., a base station or controlling server, might
   have more computational and communication resources and can act as a
   gateway between the constrained devices and the application logic in
   the core network.

   Today diverse size of small devices with different resources and
   capabilities are being connected.  Mobile personal gadgets, building-
   automation devices, cellular phones, Machine-to-machine (M2M)
   devices, etc. benefit from interacting with other "things" in the
   near or somewhere in the Internet.  With this the Internet of Things
   (IoT) becomes a reality build up of uniquely identifiable objects
   (things).  And over the next decade, this could grow to trillions of
   constrained devices and will greatly increase the Internet's size and
   scope.

   Network management is characterized by monitoring network status,
   detecting faults, and inferring their causes, setting network
   parameters, and carrying out actions to remove faults, maintain
   normal operation, and improve network efficiency and application
   performance.  The traditional network management application
   periodically collects information from a set of elements that are
   needed to manage, processes the data, and presents them to the
   network management users.  Constrained devices, however, often have
   limited power, low transmission range, and might be unreliable.  They
   might also need to work in hostile environments with advanced
   security requirements or need to be used in harsh environments for a
   long time without supervision.  Due to such constraints, the
   management of a network with constrained devices offers different



Ersue, et al.            Expires April 24, 2014                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft         Constrained Mgmt: PS, Rqmts          October 2013


   type of challenges compared to the management of a traditional IP
   network.

   The IETF has already done a lot of standardization work to enable the
   communication in IP networks and to manage such networks as well as
   the manifold type of nodes in these networks [RFC6632].  However, the
   IETF so far has not developed any specific technologies for the
   management of constrained devices and the networks comprised by
   constrained devices.  IP-based sensors or constrained devices in such
   an environment, i.e., devices with very limited memory and CPU
   resources, use today application-layer protocols in an ad-hoc manner
   to do simple resource management and monitoring.

   This document provides a problem statement and lists the requirements
   for the management of a network with constrained devices.
   Section 1.3 and Section 1.5 describe different topology options for
   the networking and management of constrained devices.  Section 2
   provides a problem statement on the issue of the management of
   networked constrained devices.  Section 3 lists requirements on the
   management of applications and networks with constrained devices.
   Note that the requirements in Section 3 need to be seen as standalone
   requirements, where different implementer may decide to realize a
   different set of them.

   The use cases in the context of networks with constrained devices can
   be found in the companion document [COM-US].

1.2.  Terminology

   Concerning constrained devices and networks this document generally
   builds on the terminology defined in [I-D.ietf-lwig-terminology],
   where the terms Constrained Device, Constrained Network, etc. are
   defined.

   The following terms are additionally used throughout this
   documentation:

   AMI:  (Advanced Metering Infrastructure) A system including hardware,
      software, and networking technologies that measures, collects, and
      analyzes energy usage, and communicates with a hierarchically
      deployed network of metering devices, either on request or on a
      schedule.

   C0:  Class 0 constrained device as defined in Section 3. of
      [I-D.ietf-lwig-terminology].






Ersue, et al.            Expires April 24, 2014                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft         Constrained Mgmt: PS, Rqmts          October 2013


   C1:  Class 1 constrained device as defined in Section 3. of
      [I-D.ietf-lwig-terminology].

   C2:  Class 2 constrained device as defined in Section 3. of
      [I-D.ietf-lwig-terminology].

   Network of Constrained Devices:  A network to which constrained
      devices are connected that may or may not be a Constrained Network
      (see [I-D.ietf-lwig-terminology] for the definition of the term
      Constrained Network).

   M2M:  (Machine to Machine) stands for the automatic data transfer
      between devices of different kind.  In M2M scenarios a device
      (such as a sensor or meter) captures an event, which is relayed
      through a network (wireless, wired or hybrid) to an application.

   MANET:  Mobile Ad-hoc Networks, a self-configuring and
      infrastructureless network of mobile devices connected by wireless
      technologies.

   Smart Grid:  An electrical grid that uses communication technologies
      to gather and act on information in an automated fashion to
      improve the efficiency, reliability and sustainability of the
      production and distribution of electricity.

   Smart Meter:  An electrical meter in the context of a Smart Grid.

      For a detailed discussion on the constrained networks as well as
      classes of constrained devices and their capabilities please see
      [I-D.ietf-lwig-terminology].

1.3.  Networks Types and Characteristics in Focus

   In this document we differentiate following type of networks
   concerning their transport and communication technologies:

   Note that a network in general can involve constrained and non-
   constrained devices.

   1.  Wireline non-constrained networks, e.g. an Ethernet-LAN with non-
       constrained and constrained devices involved.

   2.  A combination of wireline and wireless networks, which may or may
       not be mesh-based but have a multi-hop connectivity between
       constrained devices, utilizing dynamic routing in both the
       wireless and wireline portions of the network.  Such networks
       usually support highly distributed applications with many nodes
       (e.g. environmental monitoring) and tend to deal with large-scale



Ersue, et al.            Expires April 24, 2014                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft         Constrained Mgmt: PS, Rqmts          October 2013


       multipoint-to-point systems with massive data flows.  Wireless
       Mesh Networks (WMN), as a specific variant, use off-the-shelf
       radio technology such as Wi-Fi, WiMax, and cellular 3G/4G. WMNs
       are reliable based on the redundancy they offer and have often a
       more planned deployment to provide dynamic and cost effective
       connectivity over a certain geographic area.

   3.  A combination of wireline and wireless networks with point-to-
       point or point-to-multipoint communication generally with single-
       hop connectivity to constrained devices, utilizing static routing
       over the wireless network.  Such networks support short-range,
       point-to-point, low-data-rate, source-to-sink type of
       applications such as RFID systems, light switches, fire and smoke
       detectors, and home appliances.  This type of networks also
       support confined short-range spaces such as a home, a factory, a
       building, or the human body.  IEEE 802.15.1 (Bluetooth) and IEEE
       802.15.4 are well-known examples of applicable standards for such
       networks.

   4.  Mobile Adhoc networks (MANET) are self-configuring
       _infrastructureless_ networks of mobile devices connected by
       wireless technologies.  MANETs are based on point-to-point
       communications of devices moving independently in any direction
       and changing the links to other devices frequently.  MANET
       devices do act as a router to forward traffic unrelated to their
       own use.

   Wireline non-constrained networks are mainly used for specific
   applications like Building Automation or Infrastructure Monitoring.
   However, wireline and wireless networks with multi-hop or point-to-
   multipoint connectivity are especially in the interest of the
   analysis on the management of constrained devices in this document.

   Furthermore different network characteristics are determined by
   multiple dimensions: dynamicity of the topology, bandwidth, and loss
   rate.  In the following, each dimension is explained, and networks in
   scope for this document are outlined:

   Network Topology:

   The topology of a network can be represented as a graph, with edges
   (i.e., links) and vertices (routers and hosts).  Examples of
   different topologies include "star" topologies (with one central node
   and multiple nodes in one hop distance), tree structures (with each
   node having exactly one parent), directed acyclic graphs (with each
   node having one or more parents), clustered topologies (where one or
   more "cluster heads" are responsible for a certain area of the
   network), mesh topologies (fully distributed), etc.



Ersue, et al.            Expires April 24, 2014                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft         Constrained Mgmt: PS, Rqmts          October 2013


   Management protocols may take advantage of specific network
   topologies, for example by distributing large-scale management tasks
   amongst multiple distributed network management stations (e.g., in
   case of a mesh topology), or by using a hierarchical management
   approach (e.g., in case of a tree topology).  These different
   management topology options are described in Section 1.6.

   Note that in certain network deployments, such as community ad hoc
   networks (see the use case "Community Network Applications" in
   [COM-US]), the topology is not pre-planned, and thus may be unknown
   for management purposes.  In other use cases, such as industrial
   applications (see the use case "Industrial Applications" in
   [COM-US]), the topology may be designed in advance and therefore
   taken advantage of when managing the network.

   Dynamicity of the network topology:

   The dynamicity of the network topology determines the rate of change
   of the graph per time.  Such changes can occur due to different
   factors, such as mobility of nodes (e.g., in MANETs or cellular
   networks), duty cycles (for low-power devices enabling their network
   interface only periodically to transmit or receive packets), or
   unstable links (in particular wireless links with strongly
   fluctuating link quality).

   Examples of different levels of dynamicity of the topology are
   Ethernets (with typically a very static topology) on the one side,
   and low-power and lossy networks (LLNs) on the other side.  LLNs
   nodes often using duty cycles, operate on unreliable wireless links
   and are potentially mobile (e.g. for sensor networks).

   The more the topology is dynamic, the more routing, transport and
   application layer protocols have to cope with interrupted
   connectivity and/or longer delays.  For example, management protocols
   (with a given underlying transport protocol) that expect continuous
   session flows without changes of routes during a communication flow,
   may fail to operate.

   Networks with a very low dynamicity (e.g.  Ethernet) with no or
   infrequent topology changes (e.g. less than once every 30 minutes),
   are in-scope of this document if they are used with constrained
   devices (see e.g. the use case "Building Automation" in [COM-US]).

   Traffic flows:

   The traffic flow in a network determines from which sources data
   traffic is sent to which destinations in the network.  Several
   different traffic flows are defined in [I-D.ietf-roll-terminology],



Ersue, et al.            Expires April 24, 2014                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft         Constrained Mgmt: PS, Rqmts          October 2013


   including "point-to-point" (P2P), "multipoint-to-point" (MP2P), and
   "point-to-multipoint" (P2MP) flows as:

   o  P2P: Point To Point.  This refers to traffic exchanged between two
      nodes (regardless of the number of hops between the two nodes).

   o  P2MP: Point-to-Multipoint traffic refers to traffic between one
      node and a set of nodes.  This is similar to the P2MP concept in
      Multicast or MPLS Traffic Engineering.

   o  MP2P: Multipoint-to-Point is used to describe a particular traffic
      pattern (e.g.  MP2P flows collecting information from many nodes
      flowing inwards towards a collecting sink).

   If one of these traffic patterns is predominant in a network,
   protocols (routing, transport, application) may be optimized for the
   specific traffic flow.  For example, in a network with a tree
   topology and MP2P traffic, collection tree protocols are efficient to
   send data from the leaves of the tree to the root of the tree, via
   each node's parent.

   Bandwidth:

   The bandwidth of the network is the amount of data that can be sent
   per time between two communication end-points.  It is usually
   determined by the link with the minimum bandwidth on the path from
   the source to the destination of data packets.  The bandwidth in
   networks can range from a few Kilobytes per second (such as on some
   802.15.4 link layers) to many Gigabytes per second (e.g., on fiber
   optics).

   For management purposes, the management protocol typically requires
   to send information between the network management station and the
   clients, for monitoring or control purposes.  If the available
   bandwidth is insufficient for the management protocol, packets will
   be buffered and eventually dropped, and thus management is not
   possible with such a protocol.

   Networks without bandwidth limitation (e.g.  Ethernet) are in-scope
   of this document if they are used with constrained devices (see the
   use case "Building Automation" in [COM-US]).

   Loss rate:

   The loss rate (or bit error rate) is the number of bit errors divided
   by the total number of bits transmitted.  For wired networks, loss
   rates are typically extremely low, e.g. around 10^-12 or 10^-13 for
   the latest 10Gbit Ethernet.  For wireless networks, such as 802.15.4,



Ersue, et al.            Expires April 24, 2014                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft         Constrained Mgmt: PS, Rqmts          October 2013


   the bit error rate can be as high as 10^-1 to 10^-0 in case of
   interferences.Even when using a reliable transport protocol,
   management operations can fail if the loss rate is too high, unless
   they are specifically designed to cope with these situations.

   Note: The discussion on the management requirements of MANETs is
   currently not in the focus of this document.  [COM-US] provides a use
   case to make it clear how a MANET-based application differs from
   others.

1.4.  Constrained Device Deployment Options

   We differentiate following Deployment options for the constrained
   devices:

   o  a network of constrained devices, which communicate with each
      other,

   o  Constrained devices, which are connected directly to the Internet
      or an IP network

   o  A network of constrained devices which communicate with a gateway
      or proxy with more communication capabilities acting possibly as a
      representative of the device to entities in the non-constrained
      network

   o  Constrained devices, which are connected to the Internet or an IP
      network via a gateway/proxy

   o  A hierarchy of constrained devices, e.g., a network of C0 devices
      connected to one or more C1 devices - connected to one or more C2
      devices - connected to one or more gateways - connected to some
      application servers or NMS system

   o  The possibility of device grouping (possibly in a dynamic manner)
      such as that the grouped devices can act as one logical device at
      the edge of the network and one device in this group can act as
      the managing entity

1.5.  Management Topology Options

   We differentiate following options for the management of networks of
   constrained devices:

   o  A network of constrained devices managed by one central manager.
      A logically centralized management might be implemented in a
      hierarchical fashion for scalability and robustness reasons.  The
      manager and the management application logic might have a gateway/



Ersue, et al.            Expires April 24, 2014                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft         Constrained Mgmt: PS, Rqmts          October 2013


      proxy in between or might be on different nodes in different
      networks, e.g., management application running on a cloud server.

   o  Distributed management, where a constrained network is managed by
      more than one manager.  Each manager controls a subnetwork and may
      communicate directly with other manager stations in a cooperative
      fashion.  The distributed management may be weakly distributed,
      where functions are broken down and assigned to many managers
      dynamically, or strongly distributed, where almost all managed
      things have embedded management functionality and explicit
      management disappears, which usually comes with the price that the
      strongly distributed management logic now needs to be managed.

   o  Hierarchical management, where a hierarchy of constrained networks
      are managed by the managers at their corresponding hierarchy
      level.  I.e. each manager is responsible for managing the nodes in
      its sub-network.  It passes information from its sub-network to
      its higher-level manager, and disseminates management functions
      received from the higher-level manager to its sub-network.
      Hierarchical management is essentially a scalability mechanism,
      logically the decision-making may be still centralized.

1.6.  Managing the Constrainedness of a Device or Network

   The capabilities of a constrained device or network and the
   constrainedness thereof influence and have an impact on the
   requirements for the management of such network or devices.

   A constrained device:

   o  might only support an unreliable radio with lossy links, i.e. the
      client and server of a management protocol need to gracefully
      ignore incomplete commands or repeat commands as necessary.

   o  might only be able to go online from time-to-time, where it is
      reachable, i.e. a command might be necessary to repeat after a
      longer timeout or the timeout value with which one endpoint waits
      on a response needs to be sufficiently high.

   o  might only be able to support a limited operating time (e.g. based
      on the available battery), i.e. the devices need to economize
      their energy usage with suitable mechanisms and the managing
      entity needs to monitor and control the energy status of the
      constrained devices it manages.

   o  might only be able to support one simple communication protocol,
      i.e. the management protocol needs to be possible to downscale
      from constrained (C2) to very constrained (C0) devices with



Ersue, et al.            Expires April 24, 2014                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft         Constrained Mgmt: PS, Rqmts          October 2013


      modular implementation and a very basic version with just a few
      simple commands.

   o  might only be able to support limited or no user and/or transport
      security, i.e. the management system needs to support a less-
      costly and simple but sufficiently secure authentication
      mechanism.

   o  might not be able to support compression and decompression of
      exchanged data based on limited CPU power, i.e. an intermediary
      entity which is capable of data compression should be able to
      communicate with both, devices, which support data compression
      (e.g.  C2) and devices, which do not support data compression
      (e.g.  C1 and C0).

   o  might only be able to support very simple encryption, i.e. it
      would be efficient if the devices use cryptographic algorithms
      that are supported in hardware.

   o  might only be able to communicate with one single managing entity
      and cannot support the parallel access of many managing entities.

   o  might depend on a self-configuration feature, i.e. the managing
      entity might not know all devices in a network and the device
      needs to be able to initiate connection setup for the device
      configuration.

   o  might depend on self- or neighbor-monitoring feature, i.e. the
      managing entity might not be able to monitor all devices in a
      network continuously.

   o  might only be able to communicate with its neighbors, i.e. the
      device should be able to get its configuration from a neighbor.

   o  might only be able to support parsing of data models with limited
      size, i.e. the device data models need to be compact containing
      the most necessary data and if possible parsable as a stream.

   o  might only be able to support a limited or no failure detection,
      i.e. the managing entity needs to handle the situation, where a
      failure does not get detected or gets detected late gracefully
      e.g. with asking repeatedly.

   o  might only be able to support the reporting of just one or a
      limited set failure types.

   o  might only be able to support a limited set of notifications,
      possible only an "I-am-alive" message.



Ersue, et al.            Expires April 24, 2014                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft         Constrained Mgmt: PS, Rqmts          October 2013


   o  might only be able to support a soft-reset from failure recovery.

   o  might possibly generate a huge amount of redundant reporting data,
      i.e. the intermediary management entity (see [I-D.ietf-core-coap])
      should be able to filter and aggregate redundant data.

   A constrained network:

   o  might only support an unreliable radio with lossy links, i.e. the
      client and server of a management protocol need to repeat commands
      as necessary or gracefully ignore incomplete commands.

   o  might be necessary to manage based on multicast communication,
      i.e. the managing entity needs to be prepared to configure many
      devices at once based on the same data model.

   o  might have a very large topology supporting 10.000 or more nodes
      for some applications and as such node naming is a specific issue
      for constrained networks.

   o  must be able to self-organize, i.e. given the large number of
      nodes and their potential placement in hostile locations and
      frequently changing topology, manual configuration is typically
      not feasible.  As such the network must be able to reconfigure
      itself so that it can continue to operate properly and support
      reliable connectivity.

   o  needs a management solution, which is energy-efficient, using as
      little wireless bandwidth as possible since communication is
      highly energy demanding.

   o  needs to support localization schemes to determine the location of
      devices since the devices might be moving and location information
      is important for some applications.

   o  needs a management solution, which is scalable as the network may
      consist of thousands of nodes and may need to be extended
      continuously.

   o  needs to provide fault tolerance.  Faults in network operation
      including hardware and software errors or failures detected by the
      transport protocol should be handled smoothly enabling.  In such a
      case it should be possible to run the protocol possibly at a
      reduced level but avoiding to fail completely.  E.g. self-
      monitoring mechanisms or graceful degradation of features can be
      used to provide fault tolerance.





Ersue, et al.            Expires April 24, 2014                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft         Constrained Mgmt: PS, Rqmts          October 2013


   o  might require new management capabilities: for example, network
      coverage information and a constrained device power-distribution-
      map.

   o  might require a new management function for data management, since
      the type and amount of data collected in constrained networks is
      different from those of the traditional networks.

   o  might also need energy-efficient key management algorithms for
      security.









































Ersue, et al.            Expires April 24, 2014                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft         Constrained Mgmt: PS, Rqmts          October 2013


2.  Problem Statement

   The terminology for the "Internet of Things" is still nascent, and
   depending on the network type or layer in focus diverse technologies
   and terms are in use.  Common to all these considerations is the
   "Things" or "Objects" are supposed to have physical or virtual
   identities using interfaces to communicate.  In this context, we need
   to differentiate between the Constrained and Smart Devices identified
   by an IP address compared to virtual entities such as Smart Objects,
   which can be identified as a resource or a virtual object by using a
   unique identifier.  Furthermore, the smart devices usually have a
   limited memory and CPU power as well as aim to be self-configuring
   and easy to deploy.

   However, the tininess of the network nodes requires a rethinking of
   the protocol characteristics concerning power consumption,
   performance, memory, and CPU usage.  As such, there is a demand for
   protocol simplification, energy-efficient communication, less CPU
   usage and small memory footprint.

   On the application layer the IETF is already developing protocols
   like the Constrained Application Protocol (CoAP) [I-D.ietf-core-coap]
   supporting constrained devices and networks e.g., for smart energy
   applications or home automation environments.  The deployment of such
   an environment involves in fact many, in some scenarios up to million
   small devices (e.g. smart meters), which produce a huge amount of
   data.  This data needs to be collected, filtered, and pre-processed
   for further use in diverse services.

   Considering the high number of nodes to deploy, one has to think on
   the manageability aspects of the smart devices and plan for easy
   deployment, configuration, and management of the networks of
   constrained devices as well as the devices themselves.  Consequently,
   seamless monitoring and self-configuration of such network nodes
   becomes more and more imperative.  Self-configuration and self-
   management is already a reality in the standards of some of the
   bodies such as 3GPP.  To introduce self-configuration of smart
   devices successfully a device-initiated connection establishment is
   required.

   A simple application layer protocol, such as CoAP, is essential to
   address the issue of efficient object-to-object communication and
   information exchange.  Such an information exchange should be done
   based on interoperable data models to enable the exchange and
   interpretation of diverse application and management related data.

   In an ideal world, we would have only one network management protocol
   for monitoring, configuration, and exchanging management data,



Ersue, et al.            Expires April 24, 2014                [Page 14]

Internet-Draft         Constrained Mgmt: PS, Rqmts          October 2013


   independently of the type of the network (e.g., Smart Grid, wireless
   access, or core network).  Furthermore, it would be desirable to
   derive the basic data models for constrained devices from the core
   models used today to enable reuse of functionality and end-to-end
   information exchange.  However, the current management protocols seem
   to be too heavyweight compared to the capabilities the constrained
   devices have and are not applicable directly for the use in a network
   of constrained devices.  Furthermore, the data models addressing the
   requirements of such smart devices need yet to be designed.

   The IETF so far has not developed any specific technologies for the
   management of constrained devices and the networks comprised by
   constrained devices.  IP-based sensors or constrained devices in such
   an environment, i.e., devices with very limited memory and CPU
   resources, use today, e.g., application-layer protocols to do simple
   resource management and monitoring.  This might be sufficient for
   some basic cases, however, there is a need to reconsider the network
   management mechanisms based on the new, changed, as well as reduced
   requirements coming from smart devices and the network of such
   constrained devices.  Albeit it is questionable whether we can take
   the same comprehensive approach we use in an IP network also for the
   management of constrained devices.  Hence, the management of a
   network with constrained devices is necessary to design in a
   simplified and less complex manner.

   As the Section 1.6 highlights, there are diverse characterists of
   constrained devices or networks, which stem from their constraindness
   and therefor have an impact on the requirements for the management of
   such a network with constrained devices.  The use cases discussed in
   [COM-US] show that the requirements on constrained networks are
   manifold and need to be analyzed from different angles, e.g.
   concerning the design of the management architecture, the selection
   of the appropriate protocol features as well as the specific issues
   which are new in the context of constrained devices.  Examples of
   such issues are e.g. the careful management of the scarce energy
   resources, the necessity for self-organization and self-management of
   such devices but also the implementation considerations to enable the
   use of common communication technologies on a constrained hardware in
   an efficient manner.  For an exhaustive list of issues and
   requirements, which need to be addressed for the management of a
   network with constrained devices please see Section 1.6 and
   Section 3.









Ersue, et al.            Expires April 24, 2014                [Page 15]

Internet-Draft         Constrained Mgmt: PS, Rqmts          October 2013


3.  Requirements on the Management of Networks with Constrained Devices

   This section describes the requirements categorized by management
   areas listed in subsections.

   Note that the requirements in this section need to be seen as
   standalone requirements.  A device might be able to provide only a
   particular profile of requirements (i.e. selected set of
   requirements) and might not be capable to provide all requirements in
   this document.  On the other hand a device vendor might select a
   subset of the requirements to implement.  As of today this document
   does not recommend the realization of a profile of requirements.

   Following template is used for the definition of the requirements.

   Req-ID:  An ID uniquely identified by a three-digit number

   Title:  The title of the requirement.

   Description:  The rational and description of the requirement.

   Source:  The origin of the requirement and the matching use case or
      application.  For the discussion of referred use cases for
      constrained management please see [COM-US].

   Requirement Type:  Functional Requirement, Non-Functional
      Requirement.  A functional requirement is related to a proposed
      function or component.  As such functional requirements may be
      technical details, or specific functionality that define what a
      system is supposed to accomplish.  Non-functional requirements
      (also known as design constraints or quality requirements) impose
      implementation related considerations such as performance
      requirements, security, or reliability.

   Device type:  The device types by which this requirement can be
      supported: C0, C1 and/or C2.

   Priority:  The priority of the requirement showing it's importance
      for a particular type of device: High, Medium, and Low. The
      priority of a requirement can be High e.g. for a C2 device but Low
      for a C1 or C0 device as the realization of complex features in a
      C1 device is in many cases not possible.

3.1.  Management Architecture/System







Ersue, et al.            Expires April 24, 2014                [Page 16]

Internet-Draft         Constrained Mgmt: PS, Rqmts          October 2013


   Req-ID:  4.1.001

   Title:  Support multiple device classes within a single network.

   Description:  Larger networks usually are made up of devices
      belonging to different device classes (e.g., constrained mesh
      endpoints and less constrained routers) that work together.
      Hence, the management architecture must be applicable to networks
      that have a mix of different device classes.  See Section 3. of
      [I-D.ietf-lwig-terminology] for the definition of Constrained
      Device Classes.

   Source:  All use cases.

   Requirement Type:  Non-Functional Requirement

   Device type:  Managing and intermediary entities.

   Priority:  High

   ---

   Req-ID:  4.1.002

   Title:  Management scalability.

   Description:  The management architecture must be able to scale with
      the number of devices involved and operate efficiently in any
      network size and topology.  This implies that e.g. the managing
      entity is able to handle huge amount of device monitoring data and
      the management protocol is not sensitive to the decrease of the
      time between two client requests.  To achieve good scalability,
      caching techniques, in-network data aggregation techniques,
      hierarchical management models may be used.

   Source:  General requirement for all use cases to enable large scale
      networks.

   Requirement Type:  Non-Functional Requirement

   Device type:  C0, C1, and C2

   Priority:  High

   ---






Ersue, et al.            Expires April 24, 2014                [Page 17]

Internet-Draft         Constrained Mgmt: PS, Rqmts          October 2013


   Req-ID:  4.1.003

   Title:  Hierarchical management

   Description:  Provide a means of hierarchical management, i.e.
      provide intermediary management entities on different levels,
      which can take over the responsibility for the management of a
      sub-hierarchy of the network of constraint devices.  The
      intermediary management entity can e.g. support management data
      aggregation to handle e.g. high-frequent monitoring data or
      provide a caching mechanism for the uplink and downlink
      communication.  Hierarchical management contributes to management
      scalability.

   Source:  Use cases where a huge amount of devices are deployed with a
      hierarchical topology.

   Requirement Type:  Non-Functional Requirement

   Device type:  Managing and intermediary entities.

   Priority:  Medium

   ---

   Req-ID:  4.1.004

   Title:  Minimize state maintained on constrained devices.

   Description:  The amount of state that needs to be maintained on
      constrained devices should be minimized.  This is important in
      order to save memory (especially relevant for C0 and C1 devices)
      and in order to allow devices to restart for example to apply
      configuration changes or to recover from extended periods of
      inactivity.  One way to achieve this is to adopt a RESTful
      architecture that minimizes the amount of state maintained by
      managed constrained devices and that makes resources of a device
      addressable via URIs.

   Source:  Basic requirement which concerns all use cases.

   Requirement Type:  Functional Requirement

   Device type:  C0, C1, and C2







Ersue, et al.            Expires April 24, 2014                [Page 18]

Internet-Draft         Constrained Mgmt: PS, Rqmts          October 2013


   Priority:  High

   ---

   Req-ID:  4.1.005

   Title:  Automatic re-synchronization with eventual consistency.

   Description:  To support large scale networks, where some constrained
      devices may be offline at any point in time, it is necessary to
      distribute configuration parameters in a way that allows temporary
      inconsistencies but eventually converges, after a sufficiently
      long period of time without further changes, towards global
      consistency.

   Source:  Use cases with large scale networks with many devices.

   Requirement Type:  Functional Requirement

   Device type:  C0, C1, and C2

   Priority:  High

   ---

   Req-ID:  4.1.006

   Title:  Support for lossy links and unreachable devices.

   Description:  Some constrained devices will only be able to support
      lossy and unreliable links characterized by a limited data rate, a
      high latency, and a high transmission error rate.  Furthermore
      constrained devices often duty cycle their radio or the whole
      device in order to save energy.  In both cases the management
      system must not assume that constrained devices are always
      reachable.  The management protocol(s) must act gracefully if a
      conctrained device is not reachable and provide a high degree of
      resilience.  Intermediaries may be used that provide information
      for devices currently inactive or that take responsibility to re-
      synchronize devices when they become reachable again after an
      extended offline period.

   Source:  Basic requirement for constrained networks with unreliable
      links and constrained devices which sleep to save energy.







Ersue, et al.            Expires April 24, 2014                [Page 19]

Internet-Draft         Constrained Mgmt: PS, Rqmts          October 2013


   Requirement Type:  Non-Functional Requirement

   Device type:  C0, C1, and C2

   Priority:  High

   ---

   Req-ID:  4.1.007

   Title:  Network-wide configuration

   Description:  Provide means by which the behavior of the network can
      be specified at a level of abstraction (network-wide
      configuration) higher than a set of configuration information
      specific to individual devices.  It is useful to derive the device
      specific configuration from the network-wide configuration.  The
      identification of the relevant subset of the policies to be
      provisioned is according to the capabilities of each device and
      can be obtained from a pre-configured data-repository.  Such a
      repository can be used to configure pre-defined device or protocol
      parameters for the whole network.  Furthermore, such a network-
      wide view can be used to monitor and manage a group of routers or
      a whole network.  E.g. monitoring the performance of a network
      requires additional information other than what can be acquired
      from a single router using a management protocol.

   Source:  In general all use cases, which want to configure the
      network and its devices based on a network view in a top-down
      manner.

   Requirement Type:  Non-Functional Requirement

   Device type:  C0, C1, and C2

   Priority:  Medium

   ---

   Req-ID:  4.1.008

   Title:  Distributed Management

   Description:  Provide a means of simple distributed management, where
      a constrained network can be managed or monitored by more than one
      manager.  Since the connectivity to a server cannot be guaranteed
      at all times, a distributed approach may provide a higher
      reliability, at the cost of increased complexity.  This



Ersue, et al.            Expires April 24, 2014                [Page 20]

Internet-Draft         Constrained Mgmt: PS, Rqmts          October 2013


      requirement implies the handling of data consistency in case of
      concurrent read and write access to the device datastore.  It
      might also happen that no management (configuration) server is
      accessible and the only reachable node is a peer device.  In this
      case the device should be able to obtain its configuration from
      peer devices.

   Source:  Use cases where the count of devices to manage is high.

   Requirement Type:  Non-Functional Requirement

   Device type:  C1 and C2

   Priority:  Medium

3.2.  Management protocols and data model

   Req-ID:  4.2.001

   Title:  Modular implementation of management protocols

   Description:  Management protocols should allow modular
      implementations, i.e., it should be possible to implement only a
      basic set of protocol primitives on highly constrained devices
      while devices with additional resources may provide more support
      for additional protocol primitives.  It should be possible to
      discover the management protocol primitives by a device.

   Source:  Basic requirement interesting for all use cases.

   Requirement Type:  Non-Functional Requirement

   Device type:  C0, C1, and C2

   Priority:  High

   ---

   Req-ID:  4.2.002

   Title:  Compact encoding of management data

   Description:  The encoding of management data should be compact and
      space efficient, enabling small message sizes.







Ersue, et al.            Expires April 24, 2014                [Page 21]

Internet-Draft         Constrained Mgmt: PS, Rqmts          October 2013


   Source:  General requirement to save memory for the receiver buffer
      and on-air bandwith.

   Requirement Type:  Functional Requirement

   Device type:  C0, C1, and C2

   Priority:  High

   ---

   Req-ID:  4.2.003

   Title:  Compression of management data or complete messages

   Description:  Management data exchanges can be further optimized by
      applying data compression techniques or delta encoding techniques.
      Compression typically requires additional code size and some
      additional buffers and/or the maintenance of some additional state
      information.  For C0 devices compression may not be feasible.  As
      such, this requirement is marked as optional.

   Source:  Use cases where it is beneficial to reduce transmission time
      and bandwith, e.g. mobile applications which require to save on-
      air bandwith.

   Requirement Type:  Functional Requirement

   Device type:  C1 and C2

   Priority:  Medium

   ---

   Req-ID:  4.2.004

   Title:  Mapping of management protocol interactions.

   Description:  It is desirable to have a loss-less automated mapping
      between the management protocol used to manage constrained devices
      and the management protocols used to manage regular devices.  In
      the ideal case, the same core management protocol can be used with
      certain restrictions taking into account the resource limitations
      of constrained devices.  However, for very resource constrained
      devices, this goal might not be achievable.  Hence this
      requirement is marked optional for device class C2.





Ersue, et al.            Expires April 24, 2014                [Page 22]

Internet-Draft         Constrained Mgmt: PS, Rqmts          October 2013


   Source:  Use cases where high-frequent interaction with the
      management system of a non-constrained network is required.

   Requirement Type:  Functional Requirement

   Device type:  C2

   Priority:  Medium

   ---

   Req-ID:  4.2.005

   Title:  Consistency of data models with the underlying information
      model.

   Description:  The data models used by the management protocol must be
      consistent with the information model used to define data models
      for non-constrained networks.  This is essential to facilitate the
      integration of the management of constrained networks with the
      management of non-constrained networks.  Using an underlying
      information model for future data model design enables furthermore
      top-down model design and model reuse as well as data
      interoperability (i.e. exchange of management information between
      the constrained and non-constrained networks).  This is a strong
      requirement, even despite the fact that the underlying information
      models are often not explicitly documented in the IETF.

   Source:  General requirement to support data interoperability,
      consistency and model reuse.

   Requirement Type:  Non-Functional Requirement

   Device type:  C0, C1, and C2

   Priority:  High

   ---

   Req-ID:  4.2.006

   Title:  Loss-less mapping of management data models.

   Description:  It is desirable to have a loss-less automated mapping
      between the management data models used to manage regular devices
      and the management data models used for managing constrained
      devices.  In the ideal case, the same core data models can be used
      with certain restrictions taking into account the resource



Ersue, et al.            Expires April 24, 2014                [Page 23]

Internet-Draft         Constrained Mgmt: PS, Rqmts          October 2013


      limitations of constrained devices.  However, for very resource
      constrained devices, this goal might not be achievable.  Hence
      this requirement is marked optional for device class C2.

   Source:  Use cases where consistent data exchange with the management
      system of a non-constrained network is required.

   Requirement Type:  Functional Requirement

   Device type:  C2

   Priority:  Medium

   ---

   Req-ID:  4.2.007

   Title:  Protocol extensibility

   Description:  Provide means of extensibility for the management
      protocol, i.e. by adding new protocol messages or mechanisms that
      can deal with the changing requirements on a supported message and
      data types effectively, without causing inter-operability problems
      or having to replace/update large amounts of deployed devices.

   Source:  Basic requirement useful for all use cases.

   Requirement Type:  Functional Requirement

   Device type:  C0, C1, and C2

   Priority:  High

3.3.  Configuration management

   Req-ID:  4.3.001

   Title:  Self-configuration capability

   Description:  Automatic configuration and re-configuration of devices
      without manual intervention.  Compared to the traditional
      management of devices where the management application is the
      central entity configuring the devices, in the auto-configuration
      scenario the device is the active part and initiates the
      configuration process.  Self-configuration can be initiated during
      the initial configuration or for subsequent configurations, where
      the configuration data needs to be refreshed.  Self-configuration
      should be also supported during the initialization phase or in the



Ersue, et al.            Expires April 24, 2014                [Page 24]

Internet-Draft         Constrained Mgmt: PS, Rqmts          October 2013


      event of failures, where prior knowledge of the network topology
      is not available or the topology of the network is uncertain.

   Source:  In general all use cases requiring easy deployment and plug&
      play behavior as well as easy maintenance of many constrained
      devices.

   Requirement Type:  Functional Requirement

   Device type:  C0, C1, and C2

   Priority:  High for device categories C0 and C1, Medium for C2.

   ---

   Req-ID:  4.3.002

   Title:  Capability Discovery

   Description:  Enable the discovery of supported optional management
      capabilities of a device and their exposure via at least one
      protocol and/or data model.

   Source:  Use cases where the device interaction with other devices or
      applications is a function of the level of support for its
      capabilities.

   Requirement Type:  Functional Requirement

   Device type:  C1 and C2

   Priority:  Medium

   ---

   Req-ID:  4.3.003

   Title:  Asynchronous Transaction Support

   Description:  Provide configuration management with asynchronous
      transaction support.  Configuration operations must support a
      transactional model, with asynchronous indications that the
      transaction was completed.

   Source:  Use cases, which require transaction-oriented processing
      because of reliability or distributed architecture functional
      requirements.




Ersue, et al.            Expires April 24, 2014                [Page 25]

Internet-Draft         Constrained Mgmt: PS, Rqmts          October 2013


   Requirement Type:  Functional Requirement

   Device type:  C1 and C2

   Priority:  Medium

   ---

   Req-ID:  4.3.004

   Title:  Network reconfiguration

   Description:  Provide a means of iterative network reconfiguration in
      order to recover the network functionality from node and
      communication faults.  The network reconfiguration can be failure-
      driven and self-initiated (automatic reconfiguration).  The
      network reconfiguration can be also performed on the whole
      hierarchical structure of a network (network topology).

   Source:  Practically all use cases, as network connectivity is a
      basic requirement.

   Requirement Type:  Functional Requirement

   Device type:  C0, C1, and C2

   Priority:  Medium

3.4.  Monitoring functionality

   Req-ID:  4.4.001

   Title:  Device status monitoring

   Description:  Provide a monitoring function to collect and expose
      information about device status and exposing it via at least one
      management interface.  The device monitoring might make use of the
      hierarchical management through the intermediary entities and the
      data caching mechanism.  The device monitoring might also make use
      of neighbor-monitoring (fault detection in local network) to
      support fast fault detection and recovery, e.g. in a scenario
      where a managing entity is unreachable and a neighbor can take
      over the monitoring responsibility.

   Source:  All use cases






Ersue, et al.            Expires April 24, 2014                [Page 26]

Internet-Draft         Constrained Mgmt: PS, Rqmts          October 2013


   Requirement Type:  Functional Requirement

   Device type:  C0, C1, and C2

   Priority:  High, Medium for neighbor-monitoring.

   ---

   Req-ID:  4.4.002

   Title:  Energy status monitoring

   Description:  Provide a monitoring function to collect and expose
      information about device energy parameters and usage (e.g. battery
      level and communication power).

   Source:  Use case Energy Management

   Requirement Type:  Functional Requirement

   Device type:  C0, C1, and C2

   Priority:  High for energy reporting devices, Low for others.

   ---

   Req-ID:  4.4.003

   Title:  Monitoring of current and estimated device availability

   Description:  Provide a monitoring function to collect and expose
      information about current device availability (energy, memory,
      computing power, forwarding plane utilization, queue buffers,
      etc.) and estimation of remaining available resources.

   Source:  All use cases.  Note that monitoring energy resources (like
      battery status) may be required on all kinds of devices.

   Requirement Type:  Functional Requirement

   Device type:  C0, C1, and C2

   Priority:  Medium

   ---






Ersue, et al.            Expires April 24, 2014                [Page 27]

Internet-Draft         Constrained Mgmt: PS, Rqmts          October 2013


   Req-ID:  4.4.004

   Title:  Network status monitoring

   Description:  Provide a monitoring function to collect and expose
      information related to the status of a network or network segments
      connected to the interfaces of the device.

   Source:  All use cases.

   Requirement Type:  Functional Requirement

   Device type:  C1 and C2

   Priority:  Low, based on the realization complexity.

   ---

   Req-ID:  4.4.005

   Title:  Self-monitoring

   Description:  Provide self-monitoring (local fault detection) feature
      for fast fault detection and recovery.

   Source:  Use cases where the devices cannot be monitored centrally in
      appropriate manner, e.g. self-healing is required.

   Requirement Type:  Functional Requirement

   Device type:  C1 and C2

   Priority:  High for C2, Medium for C1

   ---

   Req-ID:  4.4.006

   Title:  Performance Monitoring

   Description:  The device will provide a monitoring function to
      collect and expose information about the basic performance
      parameter (TBD) of the device.  The performance management
      functionality might make use of the hierarchical management
      through the intermediary devices.






Ersue, et al.            Expires April 24, 2014                [Page 28]

Internet-Draft         Constrained Mgmt: PS, Rqmts          October 2013


   Source:  Use cases Building automation, and Transport applications

   Requirement Type:  Functional Requirement

   Device type:  C1 and C2

   Priority:  Low

   ---

   Req-ID:  4.4.007

   Title:  Fault detection monitoring

   Description:  The device will provide fault detection monitoring.
      The system collects information about network states in order to
      identify whether faults have occurred.  In some cases the
      detection of the faults might be based on the processing and
      analysis of the parameters retrieved from the network or other
      devices.  In case of C0 devices the monitoring might be limited to
      the check whether the device is alive or not.

   Source:  Use cases Environmental Monitoring, Building Automation,
      Energy Management, Infrastructure Monitoring

   Requirement Type:  Functional Requirement

   Device type:  C0, C1 and C2

   Priority:  Medium

   ---

   Req-ID:  4.4.008

   Title:  Passive and Reactive Monitoring

   Description:  The device will provide passive and reactive monitoring
      capabilities.  The system or manager collects information about
      device components and network states (passive monitoring) and may
      perform postmortem analysis of collected data.  In case events of
      interest have occurred the system or manager can adaptively react
      (reactive monitoring), e.g. reconfigure the network.  Typically
      actions (re-actions) will be executed or sent as commands by the
      management applications.






Ersue, et al.            Expires April 24, 2014                [Page 29]

Internet-Draft         Constrained Mgmt: PS, Rqmts          October 2013


   Source:  Diverse use cases relevant for device status and network
      state monitoring

   Requirement Type:  Functional Requirement

   Device type:  C2

   Priority:  Medium

   ---

   Req-ID:  4.4.009

   Title:  Recovery

   Description:  Provide local, central and hierarchical recovery
      mechanisms (recovery is in some cases achieved by recovering the
      whole network of constrained devices).

   Source:  Use cases Industrial applications, Home and Building
      Automation, Mobile Applications that involve different forms of
      clustering or area managers.

   Requirement Type:  Functional Requirement

   Device type:  C2

   Priority:  Medium

   ---

   Req-ID:  4.4.010

   Title:  Network topology discovery

   Description:  Provide a network topology discovery capability (e.g.
      use of topology extraction algorithms to retrieve the network
      state) and a monitoring function to collect and expose information
      about the network topology.

   Source:  Use cases Community Network Applications and Mobile
      Applications

   Requirement Type:  Functional Requirement







Ersue, et al.            Expires April 24, 2014                [Page 30]

Internet-Draft         Constrained Mgmt: PS, Rqmts          October 2013


   Device type:  C1 and C2

   Priority:  Low, based on the realization complexity.

   ---

   Req-ID:  4.4.011

   Title:  Notifications

   Description:  The device will provide the capability of sending
      notifications on critical events and faults.

   Source:  All use cases.

   Requirement Type:  Functional Requirement

   Device type:  C0, C1, and C2

   Priority:  Medium for C2, Low for C1

   ---

   Req-ID:  4.4.012

   Title:  Logging

   Description:  The device will provide the capability of building,
      keeping, and allowing retrieval of logs of events (including but
      not limited to critical faults and alarms).

   Source:  Use cases Industrial Applications, Building Automation,
      Infrastructure monitoring

   Requirement Type:  Functional Requirement

   Device type:  C2

   Priority:  High for some medical or industrial applications, Medium
      otherwise

3.5.  Self-management

   Req-ID:  4.5.001







Ersue, et al.            Expires April 24, 2014                [Page 31]

Internet-Draft         Constrained Mgmt: PS, Rqmts          October 2013


   Title:  Self-management - Self-healing

   Description:  Enable event-driven and/or periodic self-management
      functionality in a device.  The device should be able to react in
      case of a failure e.g. by initiating a fully or partly reset and
      initiate a self-configuration or management data update as
      necessary.  A device might be further able to check for failures
      cyclically or schedule-controlled to trigger self-management as
      necessary.  It is a matter of device design and subject for
      discussion how much self-management a C1 device can support.  A
      minimal failure detection and self-management logic is assumed to
      be generally useful for the self-healing of a device.

   Source:  The requirement generally relates to all use cases in this
      document.

   Requirement Type:  Functional Requirement

   Device type:  C1 and C2

   Priority:  High for C2, Medium for C1

3.6.  Security and Access Control

   Req-ID:  4.6.001

   Title:  Authentication of management system and devices.

   Description:  Systems having a management role must be properly
      authenticated to the device such that the device can exercise
      proper access control and in particular distinguish rightful
      management systems from rogue systems.  On the other hand managed
      devices must authenticate themselves to systems having a
      management role such that management systems can protect
      themselves from rogue devices.  In certain application scenarios,
      it is possible that a large number of devices need to be
      (re)started at about the same time.  Protocols and authentication
      systems should be designed such that a large number of devices
      (re)starting simultaneously does not negatively impact the device
      authentication process.

   Source:  Basic security requirement for all use cases.

   Requirement Type:  Functional Requirement







Ersue, et al.            Expires April 24, 2014                [Page 32]

Internet-Draft         Constrained Mgmt: PS, Rqmts          October 2013


   Device type:  C0, C1, and C2

   Priority:  High, Medium for the (re)start of a large number of
      devices

   ---

   Req-ID:  4.6.002

   Title:  Support suitable security bootstrapping mechanisms

   Description:  Mechanisms should be supported that simplify the
      bootstrapping of device that is the discovery of newly deployed
      devices in order to add them to access control lists.

   Source:  Basic security requirement for all use cases.

   Requirement Type:  Functional Requirement

   Device type:  C0, C1, and C2

   Priority:  High

   ---

   Req-ID:  4.6.003

   Title:  Access control on management system and devices

   Description:  Systems acting in a management role must provide an
      access control mechanism that allows the security administrator to
      restrict which devices can access the managing system (e.g., using
      an access control white list of known devices).  On the other hand
      managed constrained devices must provide an access control
      mechanism that allows the security administrator to restrict how
      systems in a management role can access the device (e.g., no-
      access, read-only access, and read-write access).

   Source:  Basic security requirement for use cases where access
      control is essential.

   Requirement Type:  Functional Requirement

   Device type:  C0, C1, and C2







Ersue, et al.            Expires April 24, 2014                [Page 33]

Internet-Draft         Constrained Mgmt: PS, Rqmts          October 2013


   Priority:  High

   ---

   Req-ID:  4.6.004

   Title:  Select cryptographic algorithms that are efficient in both
      code space and execution time.

   Description:  Cryptographic algorithms have a major impact in terms
      of both code size and overall execution time.  It is therefore
      necessary to select mandatory to implement cryptographic
      algorithms (like some elliptic curve algorithm) that are
      reasonable to implement with the available code space and that
      have a small impact at runtime.  Furthermore some wireless
      technologies (e.g., IEEE 802.15.4) require the support of certain
      cryptographic algorithms.  It might be useful to choose algorithms
      that are likely to be supported in wireless chipsets for certain
      wireless technologies.

   Source:  Generic requirement to reduce the footprint and CPU usage of
      a constrained device.

   Requirement Type:  Non-Functional Requirement

   Device type:  C0, C1, and C2

   Priority:  High, Medium for hardware-supported algorithms.

3.7.  Energy Management

   Req-ID:  4.7.001

   Title:  Management of Energy Resources

   Description:  Enable managing power resources in the network, e.g.
      reduce the sampling rate of nodes with critical battery and reduce
      node transmission power, put nodes to sleep, put single interfaces
      to sleep, reject a management job based on available energy,
      criteria e.g. importance levels pre-defined by the management
      application, etc. (e.g. a task marked as essential can be executed
      even if the energy level is low).  The device may further
      implement standard data models for energy management and expose it
      through a management protocol interface, e.g.  EMAN MIB modules
      and extensions.  It might be necessary to downscale EMAN MIBs for
      the use in C1 and C2 devices.





Ersue, et al.            Expires April 24, 2014                [Page 34]

Internet-Draft         Constrained Mgmt: PS, Rqmts          October 2013


   Source:  Use case Energy Management

   Requirement Type:  Functional Requirement

   Device type:  C0, C1, and C2

   Priority:  Medium for the use case Energy Management, Low otherwise.

   ---

   Req-ID:  4.7.002

   Title:  Support of energy-optimized communication protocols

   Description:  Use of an optimized communication protocol to minimize
      energy usage for the device (radio) receiver/transmitter, on-air
      bandwidth (protocol efficiency), reduced amount of data
      communication between nodes (implies data aggregation and
      filtering but also a compact format for the transferred data).

   Source:  Use cases Energy Management and Mobile Applications.

   Requirement Type:  Non-Functional Requirement

   Device type:  C2

   Priority:  Medium

   ---

   Req-ID:  4.7.003

   Title:  Support for layer 2 energy-aware protocols

   Description:  The device will support layer 2 energy management
      protocols (e.g. energy-efficient Ethernet IEEE 802.3az) and be
      able to report on these.

   Source:  Use case Energy Management

   Requirement Type:  Non-Functional Requirement

   Device type:  C0, C1, and C2

   Priority:  Medium

   ---




Ersue, et al.            Expires April 24, 2014                [Page 35]

Internet-Draft         Constrained Mgmt: PS, Rqmts          October 2013


   Req-ID:  4.7.004

   Title:  Dying gasp

   Description:  When energy resources draw below the red line level,
      the device will send a dying gasp notification and perform if
      still possible a graceful shutdown including conservation of
      critical device configuration and status information.

   Source:  Use case Energy Management

   Requirement Type:  Functional Requirement

   Device type:  C0, C1, and C2

   Priority:  Medium

3.8.  SW Distribution

   Req-ID:  4.8.001

   Title:  Group-based provisioning

   Description:  Support group-based provisioning, i.e. firmware update
      and configuration management, of a large set of constrained
      devices with eventual consistency and coordinated reload times.
      The device should accept group-based configuration management
      based on bulk commands, which aim similar configurations of a
      large set of constrained devices of the same type in a given
      group.  Activation of configuration may be based on pre-loaded
      sets of default values.

   Source:  All use cases

   Requirement Type:  Non-Functional Requirement

   Device type:  C0, C1, and C2

   Priority:  Medium

3.9.  Traffic management

   Req-ID:  4.9.001

   Title:  Congestion avoidance






Ersue, et al.            Expires April 24, 2014                [Page 36]

Internet-Draft         Constrained Mgmt: PS, Rqmts          October 2013


   Description:  Provide the ability to avoid congestion by modifying
      the device's reporting rate for periodical data (which is usually
      redundant) based on the importance and reliability level of the
      management data.  This functionality is usually controlled by the
      managing entity, where the managing entity marks the data as
      important or relevant for reliability.  However reducing a
      device's reporting rate can also be initiated by a device if it is
      able to detect congestion or has insufficient buffer memory.

   Source:  Use cases with high reporting rate and traffic e.g.  AMI or
      M2M.

   Requirement Type:  Non-Functional Requirement

   Device type:  C1 and C2

   Priority:  Medium

   ---

   Req-ID:  4.9.002

   Title:  Redirect traffic

   Description:  Provide the ability for network nodes to redirect
      traffic from overloaded intermediary nodes in a network to another
      path in order to prevent congestion on a central server and in the
      primary network.

   Source:  Use cases with high reporting rate and traffic e.g.  AMI or
      M2M.

   Requirement Type:  Non-Functional Requirement

   Device type:  Intermediary entity in the network.

   Priority:  Medium

   ---

   Req-ID:  4.9.003

   Title:  Traffic delay schemes.

   Description:  Provide the ability to apply delay schemes to incoming
      and outgoing links on an overloaded intermediary node as necessary
      in order to reduce the amount of traffic in the network.




Ersue, et al.            Expires April 24, 2014                [Page 37]

Internet-Draft         Constrained Mgmt: PS, Rqmts          October 2013


   Source:  Use cases with high reporting rate and traffic e.g.  AMI or
      M2M.

   Requirement Type:  Non-Functional Requirement

   Device type:  Intermediary entity in the network.

   Priority:  Medium

3.10.  Transport Layer

   Req-ID:  4.10.001

   Title:  Scalable transport layer

   Description:  Enable the use of a scalable transport layer, i.e. not
      sensitive to the decrease of the time between two client requests,
      which is useful for applications requiring frequent access to
      device data.

   Source:  Applications with high frequent access to the device data.

   Requirement Type:  Non-Functional Requirement

   Device type:  C0, C1 and C2

   Priority:  Medium

   ---

   Req-ID:  4.10.002

   Title:  Reliable unicast transport of messages

   Description:  Diverse applications need a reliable transport of
      messages.  The reliability might be achieved based on a transport
      protocol such as TCP or can be supported based message repetition
      if an acknowledgement is missing.

   Source:  Generally applications benefit from the reliability of the
      message transport.

   Requirement Type:  Functional Requirement

   Device type:  C0, C1, and C2






Ersue, et al.            Expires April 24, 2014                [Page 38]

Internet-Draft         Constrained Mgmt: PS, Rqmts          October 2013


   Priority:  High

   ---

   Req-ID:  4.10.003

   Title:  Best-effort multicast

   Description:  Provide best-effort multicast of messages, which is
      generally useful when devices need to discover a service provided
      by a server or many devices need to be configured by a managing
      entity at once based on the same data model.

   Source:  Use cases where a device needs to discover services as well
      as use cases with high amount of devices to manage, which are
      hierarchically deployed, e.g.  AMI or M2M.

   Requirement Type:  Functional Requirement

   Device type:  C0, C1, and C2

   Priority:  Medium

   Req-ID:  4.10.004

   Title:  Secure message transport.

   Description:  Enable secure message transport providing
      authentication, data integrity, confidentiality by using existing
      transport layer technologies with small footprint such as TLS/
      DTLS.

   Source:  All use cases.

   Requirement Type:  Non-Functional Requirements

   Device type:  C1 and C2

   Priority:  High

3.11.  Implementation Requirements

   Req-ID:  4.11.001

   Title:  Avoid complex application layer transactions requiring large
      application layer messages.





Ersue, et al.            Expires April 24, 2014                [Page 39]

Internet-Draft         Constrained Mgmt: PS, Rqmts          October 2013


   Description:  Complex application layer transactions tend to require
      large memory buffers that are typically not available on C0 or C1
      devices and only by limiting functionality on C2 devices.
      Furthermore, the failure of a single large transaction requires
      repeating the whole transaction.  On constrained devices, it is
      often more desirable to a large transaction down into a sequence
      of smaller transactions, which require less resources and allow to
      make progress using a sequence of smaller steps.

   Source:  Basic requirement which concerns all use cases with memory
      constrained devices.

   Requirement Type:  Non-Functional Requirement

   Device type:  C0, C1, and C2

   Priority:  High

   Req-ID:  4.11.002

   Title:  Avoid reassembly of messages at multiple layers in the
      protocol stack.

   Description:  Reassembly of messages at multiple layers in the
      protocol stack requires buffers at multiple layers, which leads to
      inefficient use of memory resources.  This can be avoided by
      making sure the application layer, the security layer, the
      transport layer, the IPv6 layer and any adaptation layers are
      aware of the limitations of each other such that unnecessary
      fragmentation and reassembly can be avoided.  In addition, message
      size constraints must be announced to protocol peers such that
      they can adapt and avoid sending messages that can't be processed
      due to resource constraints on the receiving device.

   Source:  Basic requirement which concerns all use cases with memory
      constrained devices.

   Requirement Type:  Non-Functional Requirement

   Device type:  C0, C1, and C2

   Priority:  High









Ersue, et al.            Expires April 24, 2014                [Page 40]

Internet-Draft         Constrained Mgmt: PS, Rqmts          October 2013


4.  IANA Considerations

   This document does not introduce any new code-points or namespaces
   for registration with IANA.

   Note to RFC Editor: this section may be removed on publication as an
   RFC.












































Ersue, et al.            Expires April 24, 2014                [Page 41]

Internet-Draft         Constrained Mgmt: PS, Rqmts          October 2013


5.  Security Considerations

   This document discusses the problem statement and requirements on the
   network of constrained devices.  If specific requirements for
   security will be identified, they will be described in future
   versions of this document.













































Ersue, et al.            Expires April 24, 2014                [Page 42]

Internet-Draft         Constrained Mgmt: PS, Rqmts          October 2013


6.  Contributors

   Ulrich Herberg (Fujitsu Laboratories of America) contributed to the
   Section 1.3 on Networks Types and Characteristics in Focus.















































Ersue, et al.            Expires April 24, 2014                [Page 43]

Internet-Draft         Constrained Mgmt: PS, Rqmts          October 2013


7.  Acknowledgments

   Following persons reviewed and provided valuable comments to
   different versions of this document:

   Dominique Barthel, Carsten Bormann, Zhen Cao, Benoit Claise, Bert
   Greevenbosch, Ulrich Herberg, James Nguyen, Anuj Sehgal, Zach Shelby,
   and Peter van der Stok.

   The editors would like to thank the reviewers and the participants on
   the Coman maillist for their valuable contributions and comments.








































Ersue, et al.            Expires April 24, 2014                [Page 44]

Internet-Draft         Constrained Mgmt: PS, Rqmts          October 2013


8.  References

8.1.  Normative References

8.2.  Informative References

   [RFC6632]  Ersue, M. and B. Claise, "An Overview of the IETF Network
              Management Standards", RFC 6632, June 2012.

   [I-D.ietf-lwig-terminology]
              Bormann, C., Ersue, M., and A. Keranen, "Terminology for
              Constrained Node Networks", draft-ietf-lwig-terminology-05
              (work in progress), July 2013.

   [I-D.ietf-core-coap]
              Shelby, Z., Hartke, K., and C. Bormann, "Constrained
              Application Protocol (CoAP)", draft-ietf-core-coap-18
              (work in progress), June 2013.

   [I-D.ietf-roll-terminology]
              Vasseur, J., "Terms used in Ruting for Low power And Lossy
              Networks", draft-ietf-roll-terminology-13 (work in
              progress), October 2013.

   [M2MDEVCLASS]
              Open Mobile Alliance, "OMA M2M Device Classification
              v1.0", October 2012, <http://
              technical.openmobilealliance.org/Technical/
              release_program/m2m_Device_class_v1_0.aspx>.

   [EU-IOT-A]
              EU Commission Seventh Framework Programme, "EU FP7 Project
              Internet-of-Things Architecture", <http://www.iot-a.eu/>.

   [EU-SENSEI]
              EU Commission Seventh Framework Programme, "EU Project
              SENSEI", <http://www.sensei-project.eu/>.

   [EU-FI-WARE]
              EU Commission Future Internet Public Private Partnership
              (FI-PPP), "EU Project Future Internet-Core Platform",
              <http://www.iot-butler.eu/>.

   [EU-IOT-BUTLER]
              EU Commission Seventh Framework Programme, "EU FP7 Project
              Butler Smartlife", <http://www.iot-butler.eu/>.

   [COM-US]   Ersue, M., "Constrained Management: Use Cases",



Ersue, et al.            Expires April 24, 2014                [Page 45]

Internet-Draft         Constrained Mgmt: PS, Rqmts          October 2013


              draft-ersue-coman-use-cases (work in progress),
              October 2013.

















































Ersue, et al.            Expires April 24, 2014                [Page 46]

Internet-Draft         Constrained Mgmt: PS, Rqmts          October 2013


Appendix A.  Related Development in other Bodies

   Note that over time the summary on the related work in other bodies
   might become outdated.

A.1.  ETSI TC M2M

   ETSI Technical Committee Machine-to-Machine (ETSI TC M2M) aims to
   provide an end-to-end view of M2M standardization, which enables the
   integration of multiple vertical M2M applications.  The main goal is
   to overcome the current M2M market fragmentation and to reuse
   existing mechanisms from telecom standards such as from OMA or 3GPP.

   ETSI Release 1 is functionally frozen.  The main focus is on use
   cases for Smart Metering (Technical Report (TR) 102 691) but it also
   includes eHealth use cases (TR 102 732) and some others.  The Service
   requirements (Technical Standard (TS) 102 689) derived from the use
   cases, and the functional architecture specification (TS 102 690),
   will together define the M2M platform.  The architecture consists of
   Service Capabilities (SC), which are basic functional building blocks
   for building the M2M platform.

   Smart Metering is seen as the important showcase for M2M. It is
   believed that the Service Enablers that were defined based on the
   work done for Smart Metering and eHealth segments will also allow the
   building of other services like vending machines, alarm systems etc.

   The functional architecture includes following management-related
   definitions:

   o  Network Management Functions: consists of all functions required
      to manage the Access, Transport and Core networks: these include
      Provisioning, Supervision, Fault Management, etc.

   o  M2M Management Functions: consists of functions required to manage
      generic functionalities of M2M Applications and M2M Service
      Capabilities in the Network and Applications Domain.  The
      management of the M2M Devices and Gateways may use specific M2M
      Service Capabilities.

   The Release 2 work of ETSI TC M2M has started beginning of 2012.
   Following is a list of networking- and management-related topics
   under work:

   o  Interworking with 3GPP networks.  This is a new work item, and no
      discussion has been held on technical details.  The intent is to
      define which ETSI TC M2M functions are applicable when 3GPP NW is
      used as transport.  It is possible that this work would also cover



Ersue, et al.            Expires April 24, 2014                [Page 47]

Internet-Draft         Constrained Mgmt: PS, Rqmts          October 2013


      details on how to use 3GPP interfaces, e.g. those defined in the
      SIMTC work, but also for charging and policy control.

   o  Creating a Semantic Model or Data Abstraction layer for vertical
      industries and interworking.  This would provide some high level
      information description that would be usable for interworking with
      local networks (e.g.  ZigBee), and also for verticals, and it
      would allow the ETSI Service Enablement layer to also understand
      the data, instead of being just a bit storage and bit pipe.  All
      technical details are still under discussion, but it has been
      agreed that a function for this exists in the architecture at
      least for interworking.

A.2.  OASIS

   Developments in OASIS related to management of constrained networks
   are following:

   o  The Energy Interoperation TC works to define interaction between
      Smart Grids and their end nodes, including Smart Buildings,
      Enterprises, Industry, Homes, and Vehicles.  The TC develops data
      and communication models that enable the interoperable and
      standard exchange of signals for dynamic pricing, reliability, and
      emergencies.  The TC's agenda also extends to the communication of
      market participation data (such as bids), load predictability, and
      generation information.  The first version of the Energy
      Interoperation specification is in final review.

   o  OASIS Open Data Protocol (OData) aims to simplify the querying and
      sharing of data across disparate applications and multiple
      stakeholders for re-use in the enterprise, Cloud, and mobile
      devices.  As a REST-based protocol, OData builds on HTTP, AtomPub,
      and JSON using URIs to address and access data feed resources.  It
      enables information to be accessed from a variety of sources
      including (but not limited to) relational databases, file systems,
      content management systems, and traditional Web sites.

   o  Open Building Information Exchange (oBIX) aims to enable the
      mechanical and electrical control systems in buildings to
      communicate with enterprise applications, and to provide a
      platform for developing new classes of applications that integrate
      control systems with other enterprise functions.  Enterprise
      functions include processes such as Human Resources, Finance,
      Customer Relationship Management (CRM), and Manufacturing.







Ersue, et al.            Expires April 24, 2014                [Page 48]

Internet-Draft         Constrained Mgmt: PS, Rqmts          October 2013


A.3.  OMA

   OMA is currently working on Lightweight M2M Enabler, OMA Device
   Management (OMA DM) Next Generation, and a white paper on M2M Device
   Classification.

   The Lightweight M2M Enabler covers both M2M device management and
   service management for constrained devices.  In the case of less
   constrained devices, OMA DM Next Generation Enabler may be more
   appropriate.  OMA DM is structured around Management Objects (MO),
   each specified for a specific purpose.  There is also ongoing work
   with various other MOs such as the Gateway Management Object (GwMO).
   A draft for the "Lightweight M2M Requirements" is available.

   OMA Lightweight M2M and OMA DM Next Generation are important to M2M
   device management, provisioning and service managements in both the
   protocol and management objects.  OMA Lightweight M2M work seems to
   have grown from its original scope of being targeted for very simple
   devices only, i.e. such that could not handle all those protocols
   that ETSI M2M requires.

   The white paper on the M2M Device Classification [M2MDEVCLASS]
   provides an M2M device classification framework based on the
   horizontal attributes (e.g., wide or local area communication
   interface, IP stack, I/O capabilities) of interest to communication
   service providers and M2M service providers, independent of vertical
   markets, such as smart grid, connected cars, e-health, etc.  The
   white paper can be used as a tool to analyze the applicability of
   existing requirements and specifications developed by OMA and other
   cooperative standards development organizations.

A.4.  IPSO Alliance

   IPSO Alliance developed a profile for Device Functions supporting
   devices such as sensors with a limited user interface, where the
   configuration of even basic parameters is impossible to do manually.
   This is a challenge especially for consumer devices that are managed
   by non-professional users.  The configuration of a web service
   application running on a constrained device goes beyond the
   autoconfiguration of the IP stack and local information (e.g. proxy
   address).  Constrained devices need additionally service provider and
   user account related configuration, such as an address/locator and
   the username for a web server.

   IPSO discusses the use cases and requirements for user friendly
   configuration of such information on a constrained device, and
   specifies how IPSO profile Device Function Set can be used in the
   process.  It furthermore defines a standard format for the basic



Ersue, et al.            Expires April 24, 2014                [Page 49]

Internet-Draft         Constrained Mgmt: PS, Rqmts          October 2013


   application configuration information.


















































Ersue, et al.            Expires April 24, 2014                [Page 50]

Internet-Draft         Constrained Mgmt: PS, Rqmts          October 2013


Appendix B.  Related Research Projects

   o  The EU project IoT-A (Internet-of-Things Architecture) develops an
      architectural reference model together with the definition of an
      initial set of key building blocks.  These enable the integration
      of IoT into the service layer of the Future Internet, and realize
      a novel resolution infrastructure, as well as a network
      infrastructure that allows the seamless communication flow between
      IoT devices and services.  The development includes a conceptual
      model of a smart object as well as a basic Internet of Things
      reference model defining the interaction and communication between
      IoT devices and relevant entities.  The requirements document
      includes also network and information management requirements (see
      [EU-IOT-A]).

   o  The EU project SENSEI specified the document on 'End to End
      Networking and Management' for Wireless Sensor and Actuator
      Networks.  This report presents several research results carried
      out in SENSEI's tasks related to End-to-End Networking and
      Management.  Particular analyses have been addressed related to
      naming and addressing of resources, management of resources,
      resource plug and play, resource level mobility and traffic
      modelling.  The detailed analysis on each of these topics is
      intended to identify possible gaps between their specific
      mechanisms and the functional requirements in the SENSEI reference
      architecture (see [EU-SENSEI]).

   o  The EU project FI-WARE is developing the Things Management GE
      (generic enabler), which uses a data model derived from the OMA DM
      NGSI data model.  Using the abstraction level of things which
      include non-technical things like rooms, places and people, Things
      Management GE aims to discover and look up IoT resources that can
      provide information about things or actuate on these things.  The
      system aimes to manage the dynamic associations between IoT
      resources and things in order to allow internal components as well
      as external applications to interact with the system using the
      thing abstraction as the core concept (see [EU-FI-WARE]).

   o  EU project BUTLER Smart Life discusses different IoT management
      aspects and collects requirements for smart life use cases (e.g.
      smart home or smart city) mainly from service management pov. (see
      [EU-IOT-BUTLER]).









Ersue, et al.            Expires April 24, 2014                [Page 51]

Internet-Draft         Constrained Mgmt: PS, Rqmts          October 2013


Appendix C.  Open issues

   o  Section 4 on the management requirements, as the core section in
      the document, needs further consolidation.















































Ersue, et al.            Expires April 24, 2014                [Page 52]

Internet-Draft         Constrained Mgmt: PS, Rqmts          October 2013


Appendix D.  Change Log

D.1.  draft-ersue-constrained-mgmt-03 -
      draft-ersue-coman-probstate-reqs-00

   o  Reduced the terminology section for terminology addressed in the
      LWIG terminology draft.  Referenced the LWIG terminology draft.

   o  Checked and aligned all terminology against the LWIG terminology
      draft.

   o  Moved section 1.4.  Constrained Device Deployment Options and
      section 3.  Use Cases to the companion document [COM-US].

   o  Renamed Section 1.3.  Class of Networks in Focus to "Network Types
      in Focus" and removed abbreviations C0, C1 and C2 for network
      classes as they have not been used.

   o  Changed requirement priority classes to be High, Medium and Low.

   o  Changed requirement types to be Functional and Non-Functional and
      added text to explain the requirement types.

   o  Reformulation of some text parts for more clarity.

D.2.  draft-ersue-constrained-mgmt-02-03

   o  Extended the terminology section and removed some of the
      terminology addressed in the new LWIG terminology draft.
      Referenced the LWIG terminology draft.

   o  Moved Section 1.3. on Constrained Device Classes to the new LWIG
      terminology draft.

   o  Class of networks considering the different type of radio and
      communication technologies in use and dimensions extended.

   o  Extended the Problem Statement in Section 2. following the
      requirements listed in Section 4.

   o  Following requirements, which belong together and can be realized
      with similar or same kind of solutions, have been merged.

      *  Distributed Management and Peer Configuration,

      *  Device status monitoring and Neighbor-monitoring,





Ersue, et al.            Expires April 24, 2014                [Page 53]

Internet-Draft         Constrained Mgmt: PS, Rqmts          October 2013


      *  Passive Monitoring and Reactive Monitoring,

      *  Event-driven self-management - Self-healing and Periodic self-
         management,

      *  Authentication of management systems and Authentication of
         managed devices,

      *  Access control on devices and Access control on management
         systems,

      *  Management of Energy Resources and Data models for energy
         management,

      *  Software distribution (group-based firmware update) and Group-
         based provisioning.

   o  Deleted the empty section on the gaps in network management
      standards, as it will be written in a separate draft.

   o  Added links to mentioned external pages.

   o  Added text on OMA M2M Device Classification in appendix.

D.3.  draft-ersue-constrained-mgmt-01-02

   o  Extended the terminology section.

   o  Added additional text for the use cases concerning deployment
      type, network topology in use, network size, network capabilities,
      radio technology, etc.

   o  Added examples for device classes in a use case.

   o  Added additional text provided by Cao Zhen (China Mobile) for
      Mobile Applications and by Peter van der Stok for Building
      Automation.

   o  Added the new use cases 'Advanced Metering Infrastructure' and
      'MANET Concept of Operations in Military'.

   o  Added the section 'Managing the Constrainedness of a Device or
      Network' discussing the needs of very constrained devices.

   o  Added a note that the requirements in Section 3 need to be seen as
      standalone requirements and the current document does not
      recommend any profile of requirements.




Ersue, et al.            Expires April 24, 2014                [Page 54]

Internet-Draft         Constrained Mgmt: PS, Rqmts          October 2013


   o  Added Section 3 on the detailed requirements on constrained
      management matched to management tasks like fault, monitoring,
      configuration management, Security and Access Control, Energy
      Management, etc.

   o  Solved nits and added references.

   o  Added Appendix A on the related development in other bodies.

   o  Added Appendix B on the work in related research projects.

D.4.  draft-ersue-constrained-mgmt-00-01

   o  Splitted the section on 'Networks of Constrained Devices' into the
      sections 'Network Topology Options' and 'Management Topology
      Options'.

   o  Added the use case 'Community Network Applications' and 'Mobile
      Applications'.

   o  Provided a Contributors section.

   o  Extended the section on 'Medical Applications'.

   o  Solved nits and added references.


























Ersue, et al.            Expires April 24, 2014                [Page 55]

Internet-Draft         Constrained Mgmt: PS, Rqmts          October 2013


Authors' Addresses

   Mehmet Ersue (editor)
   Nokia Solutions and Networks

   Email: mehmet.ersue@nsn.com


   Dan Romascanu
   Avaya

   Email: dromasca@avaya.com


   Juergen Schoenwaelder
   Jacobs University Bremen

   Email: j.schoenwaelder@jacobs-university.de

































Ersue, et al.            Expires April 24, 2014                [Page 56]

