


Network Working Group                                           T. Lemon
Internet-Draft                                                   Nominum
Intended status: Standards Track                           March 6, 2012
Expires: September 7, 2012


      Populating the DNS Reverse Tree for DHCP Delegated Prefixes
                     draft-lemon-dhc-dns-pd-00.txt

Abstract

   This document describes three alternatives for populating the DNS
   reverse tree for prefixes delegated using DHCP, and provides
   mechanisms for implementing each alternative.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 7, 2012.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2012 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.





Lemon                   Expires September 7, 2012               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft         DNS for Delegated Prefixes             March 2012


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Methods for populating the reverse tree  . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     3.1.  Site-managed reverse tree  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     3.2.  Provider-managed reverse tree  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     3.3.  Provider-managed spoofed reverse tree  . . . . . . . . . .  5
     3.4.  Other solutions not documented here  . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   4.  Negotiating the reverse tree population method . . . . . . . .  7
   5.  Configuring a site-managed reverse tree  . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     5.1.  Requesting Router Behavior . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     5.2.  Delegating Router Behavior . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   6.  Configuring a provider-managed reverse tree  . . . . . . . . . 12
     6.1.  Requesting Router Behavior . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     6.2.  Delegating Router Behavior . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   7.  Configuring a spoofed reverse tree . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   8.  Configuring no reverse tree  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   9.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   10. IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   11. Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
   Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18





























Lemon                   Expires September 7, 2012               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft         DNS for Delegated Prefixes             March 2012


1.  Introduction

   When a site is numbered using DHCP prefix delegation [RFC3633], there
   are three ways of populating the Domain Name System [RFC1035] reverse
   tree.  Which mechanism is chosen depends on the capabilities of the
   site's DNS infrastructure, if any, on the capabilities and policies
   of the service provider, and on the preferences of the site
   administration.

   This document does not take a position on which mechanism, if any, is
   best for populating the reverse tree, but simply documents each of
   the possible mechanisms for doing so, and provides a means whereby
   site administrators and service providers can negotiate the mechanism
   whereby the reverse tree for a particular site will be populated.





































Lemon                   Expires September 7, 2012               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft         DNS for Delegated Prefixes             March 2012


2.  Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].














































Lemon                   Expires September 7, 2012               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft         DNS for Delegated Prefixes             March 2012


3.  Methods for populating the reverse tree

   There are three common methods of populating the reverse tree for a
   delegated prefix: delegation, dynamic dns, and zone spoofing.  In
   addition, of course, it is possible to leave the reverse tree
   unpopulated.

3.1.  Site-managed reverse tree

   To populate the reverse tree by delegation, the site administrator
   must provide a DNS authoritative name server for the delegated zone.
   The site administrator must communicate the IP address of the
   authoritative name server to the service provider.  The service
   provider must then add a delegation for that zone using the IP
   address or addresses of the DNS authoritative servers provided by the
   site administrator.

3.2.  Provider-managed reverse tree

   To populate the reverse tree using DNS updates, the service provider
   must provide an authoritative name server for the zone.  The site
   administrator must provide a key to the service provider that can be
   used to authenticate DNS updates.  The site administrator must then
   provide a mechanism whereby DNS updates will automatically be
   generated, using the provided key, whenever IP addresses are
   allocated within the delegated prefix.

3.3.  Provider-managed spoofed reverse tree

   In some cases the site administrator may not be willing or able to
   populate a reverse tree.  However, the service provider may wish to
   provide meaningful answers to reverse zone queries for the delegated
   zone.  It's not possible to populate the delegated zone: a fully
   populated zone for a /64 would require 1.8x10^19 names.  However, the
   names in such a zone would never change; consequently it is possible
   for a name server to spoof the zone contents, constructing answers
   for queries against any name within the zone on the fly.  Because the
   contents of the zone never change, the zone can have a consistent
   authority record.

3.4.  Other solutions not documented here

   It's worth noting that there are several other ways that the zone for
   a delegated prefix could be populated, but we are not covering these
   mechanisms because they seem more difficult to implement and deploy.
   For instance, nodes configured with addresses within a delegated
   prefix could issue their own DNS updates to an authoritative server
   operated by the service provider.  The problem of key management in



Lemon                   Expires September 7, 2012               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft         DNS for Delegated Prefixes             March 2012


   this case becomes intractable, however.

   It would also be possible for the site to have its own key management
   infrastructure, and for some agent on the requesting router to act as
   an intermediary in updating a zone maintained by the service
   provider.  However, this is substantially more complicated than
   either of the proposed solutions.

   Another option is to simply not populate the reverse tree.  This is
   an attractive option in the IETF in particular because the reverse
   tree is frequently used for purposes to which it is not suited, and
   some IETF participants believe that in order to discourage these
   applications, it's better simply to not populate the reverse tree.
   This document takes no position on this question, but does offer a
   means whereby the site administrator can indicate that the reverse
   tree should not be populated.



































Lemon                   Expires September 7, 2012               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft         DNS for Delegated Prefixes             March 2012


4.  Negotiating the reverse tree population method

   The prefix delegation process is initiated by a requesting router.
   If a delegating router chooses to delegate a prefix to the requesting
   router, it replies with a prefix.  The requesting router may receive
   responses from more than one delegating router, and may choose one or
   more such delegated prefixes.  For delegating routers whose offer is
   accepted, the requesting router sends a request for the offered
   address; at this point the delegating router commits the delegation
   to stable storage and sends a confirmation to the requesting router.

   The messages used to complete this transaction are the DHCP Discover,
   DHCP Advertise, DHCP Request and DHCP Reply messages, respectively.
   The negotiation as to how the reverse tree will be populated
   piggybacks on this four-message process.

   In the DHCP Discover message, the requesting router indicates the
   site administrator's preference for how the reverse tree for the
   delegated prefix will be populated.  It does this by including, in
   each IA_PD option it sends, a Prefix Delegation Zone Preference
   option (PDZP) containing one or more preference codes.  These codes
   are listed in order of preference with the most preferred mechanism
   first.  A requesting router that includes a PDZP option MUST send an
   Option Request option (ORO) that requests the Prefix Delegation Zone
   Method (PDZM) option.

   If the delegating router chooses not to delegate a prefix to the
   requesting router, no special action need be taken in response to the
   PDZP option.  The remainder of this section describes what happens if
   the delegating router chooses to delegate a prefix to the requesting
   router.

   Delegating routers that implement this specification can be
   configured with a list of supported reverse tree population methods.
   When a requesting router receives an IA_PD option that includes a
   PDZP option, if it has been configured with a reverse tree population
   method list, it iterates across the list of methods in the PDZP
   option.  For each entry in the PDZP option, the requesting router
   tests to see if that method has been configured by the site
   administrator as being supported.  If the method is on the list, the
   iteration stops at this point.

   Upon completion of this iteration, if a method was found in the PDZA
   that is supported by the delegating router, that is the method that
   will be used to populate the reverse tree for the delegated zone.
   The delegating router constructs a PDZM option indicating that this
   method will be used and includes this in the DHCP Advertise message.




Lemon                   Expires September 7, 2012               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft         DNS for Delegated Prefixes             March 2012


   If no supported method was found, this means that the service
   provider will not cooperate with the site administrator in populating
   the reverse tree.  The delegating router indicates that this is the
   case by not including a PDZM option in the DHCP Advertise message..

   The requesting router may receive one or more DHCP Advertise messages
   containing delegated prefixes.  The requesting router MUST silently
   discard any DHCP Advertise message containing a PDZM option that
   indicates a method that was not listed in the PDZP option sent in the
   DHCP Discover message.

   The requesting router may then choose to respond to one or more of
   the remaining DHCP Advertise messages, if any.  The lack of a PDZM
   option indicates either that the delegating router does not implement
   DNS for delegated prefixes, or that it is not configured to support
   DNS for delegated prefixs.  The requesting router MAY prefer DHCP
   Advertise messages containing PDZM options over DHCP Advertise
   messages that do not contain PDZM options.

   When responding to any DHCP Advertise messages containing PDZM
   options, the requesting router MUST include a PDZM option containing
   the same method indicated in the received PDZM option.

   Each delegating router that receives a DHCP Request message
   containing a PDZM option MUST check the method indicated in the PDZM
   option is supported; if not, the delegating router MUST silently
   discard the DHCP Request option.

   The requesting and delegating routers should follow the same
   procedure specified for the DHCP Request/DHCP Reply sequence whenever
   a DHCP Renew or DHCP Rebind is sent and a DHCP reply sent in
   response, if that response renews the delegated prefix.  In the case
   that the response does not renew the prefix, the delegating router
   MUST NOT send a PDZM in the IA_PD option.

















Lemon                   Expires September 7, 2012               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft         DNS for Delegated Prefixes             March 2012


5.  Configuring a site-managed reverse tree

   If the PDZM option returned by the delegating router in the DHCP
   Advertise message specifies the Site Managed method, the requesting
   router must arrange to set up one or more authoritative name servers
   that will provide service for the zone or zones that correspond to
   the delegated prefix.  It must also communicate to the delegating
   router the IP address or addresses of these servers.

5.1.  Requesting Router Behavior

   The requesting router MUST include a Prefix Delegation Zone Server
   (PDZS) option in each IA_PD in the DHCP Request message, which
   includes zero or more IP addresses of authoritative name servers for
   the delegated zone.  IPv4 addresses MUST be represented as IPv4-
   Embedded IPv6 addresses using the Well-Known prefix [RFC6052].

   Authoritative name service for these zones may be provided by any or
   all of the following three types of authoritative name servers:

   o  An authoritative name server running on a node that has an IP
      address known to the requesting router that is not obtained from
      the prefix being delegated.

   o  An authoritative name server running on the requesting router.

   o  An authoritative name server running on a node that will obtain
      its only IP address from the prefix being delegated.

   In the first case, it is possible that the reverse zone for the
   delegated prefix is already configured on the authoritative name
   server.  In this case, the requesting router SHOULD include the IP
   address of the delegated zone in the PDZS option.

   However, if the prefix is being delegated for the first time, the
   delegating router will not have had an opportunity to configure it
   prior to sending the DHCP Request message.  In this case, the
   delegating router SHOULD NOT include the IP Address of this name
   server in the PDZS option that's send in the DHCP Request message;
   instead, it should send a DHCP Renew once the authoritative server
   has been configured, and list the server's IP address in the PDZS
   option in the DHCP Renew message.

   In the second case, the requesting router may already have an IP
   address, and may be able to configure the authoritative server for
   the delegated zone before sending the DHCP Request.  In this case,
   the requesing router SHOULD include its own IP address in the PDZS
   option in the DHCP Request message.



Lemon                   Expires September 7, 2012               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft         DNS for Delegated Prefixes             March 2012


   If the requesting router does not have an IP address at this time, it
   SHOULD send a DHCP Renew message containing a PDZS option that lists
   all the authoritative servers for the reverse zone or zones for the
   delegated prefix after it has an IP address and has configured the
   authoritative servers.

   If the authoritative name server is running on a node that will
   configure its IP address from the delegated prefix, this name server
   cannot even be configured until it has an IP address.  The process of
   configuring this name server is beyond the scope of the document;
   however, once the name server has been configured, the requesting
   router SHOULD send a DHCP Renew message for the delegated prefix with
   an IA_PD containing a PDZS option that lists the IP address of this
   name server.

   In general, if there are any globally-reachable name servers that are
   authoritative for the zone or zones that provide the reverse tree for
   the delegated prefix at the time that the DHCP Request message is
   sent, the requesting router should list the IP addresses of these
   name servers in the PDZS option in the associated IA_PD option in the
   DHCP Request message.

   If new globally-reachable name servers that are authoritative for the
   reverse zone or zones become available after the DHCP Request has
   been sent and the DHCP Reply received, the requesting router SHOULD
   send a DHCP Renew message containing an IA_PD for the delegated
   prefix and a PDZS option listing the name servers for that prefix
   that have come online.  The requesting router SHOULD be aware of all
   outstanding name server configuration processes and minimize the
   number of DHCP Renew message sent.

   When a requesting router sends a DHCP Renew or DHCP Rebind message to
   renew a delegated prefix, if a site-managed reverse tree was
   successfully configured, the requesting router MUST send a PDZM
   option containing the same method sent in the original DHCP Request
   message.  The requesting router MUST also send a PDZS option that
   contains one or more IP addresses for authoritative servers for the
   reverse tree for the delegated prefix.

5.2.  Delegating Router Behavior

   When a delegating router receives a valid DHCP Request message
   containing an IA_PD that contains both a PDZM option indicating the
   Site Managed method and a PDZS option containing at least one IP
   address, it compares the IP addresses in the PDZM option to any
   previous record it may have for that delegation.  If the contents of
   the PDZM option differ from the previous record, or if there is no
   previous record, the delegating router MUST issue a DNS Update to add



Lemon                   Expires September 7, 2012              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft         DNS for Delegated Prefixes             March 2012


   a delegation to the parent zone of the reverse tree zone for the
   delegated prefix.

   In the event that the PDZS option contains zero IP addresses, the
   delegating router does not update the zone.

   If the delegated prefix must be represented as more than one zone,
   the delegating router adds delegations to the parent zone for each
   such zone.

   When a delegating router receives a DHCP Renew or DHCP Rebind message
   for a prefix it delegated and elects to renew the prefix, it MUST
   check its record for that prefix to see if a delegation exists.  If
   the contents of the PDZS differ from the recorded list of
   authoritative name servers for that prefix, the delegating router
   MUST update the parent zone with the new delegations.

   When a delegating router receives a DHCP Renew or DHCP Rebind message
   for a prefix it delegated, and elects not to renew the delegation,
   the delegating router MUST check to see if it has a site-managed
   reverse tree configuration for that pprefix.  If it does, it must
   update the parent zone to remove any delegations that were added, and
   update its record for the delegated prefix to indicate that no site-
   managed reverse tree configuration for that prefix is present.

   When a delegated prefix expires without being renewed by the
   requesting router, the same procedure should be followed to update
   the parent zone.























Lemon                   Expires September 7, 2012              [Page 11]

Internet-Draft         DNS for Delegated Prefixes             March 2012


6.  Configuring a provider-managed reverse tree

   If the PDZM returned by a delegating router in the DHCP Advertise
   message specifies the Provider Managed method, the delegating router
   must arrange to set up a reverse zone for the delegated prefix.  The
   requesting router must communicate a key to the delegating router
   that can be used to secure updates to the reverse zone.

6.1.  Requesting Router Behavior

   In order to update the provider-managed reverse zone, the requesting
   router must provide a key to the delegating router.  Because DHCP
   does not provide confidentiality, this key must be the public half of
   a private key.

   Typically sites that wish to populate their reverse tree with
   meaningful information maintain a site-specific or company-wide DNS
   zone.  In order to update the reverse zone, the site administrator
   must publish a SIG(0) key in this zone.  The requesting router MUST
   include a Prefix Delegation SIG(0) Key FQDN (PDSKF) option in the
   DHCP Request message and any subsequent DHCP Renew messages.  It must
   use the private half of the SIG(0) key in any DNS updates to the
   reverse zone.

6.2.  Delegating Router Behavior

   There are two cases that the delegating router needs to handle: the
   case where the prefix being delegated was previously delegated to the
   same requesting router, and the case where it was not.

   In the case where the prefix was previously delegated to the same
   requesting router, the delegating router need take no action to
   populate the zone, because it should already be populated.

   In the case where the prefix was previously delegated to a different
   requesting router, the delegating router MUST remove the old zone
   information from the master authoritative name server for the zone.

   In this case, and in the case where no previous delegation had been
   done, the delegating router must then configure a new reverse zone on
   the master server.

   In any case, the delegating router must configure the reverse zone so
   that it can be updated using the SIG(0) key stored on the name
   provided by the requesting router in the PDSKF option.






Lemon                   Expires September 7, 2012              [Page 12]

Internet-Draft         DNS for Delegated Prefixes             March 2012


7.  Configuring a spoofed reverse tree

   A spoofed reverse tree can be configured either unilaterally by the
   service provider or upon request of the site administrator.  The site
   administrator would list this as an option to indicate a preference
   for a spoofed reverse tree over no reverse tree; the choice doesn't
   make any sense otherwise.

   Generally speaking, the service provider has the option of either
   setting up spoofed zones on demand, or setting them up when
   requested.  If the service provider only offers spoofed zones, it
   makes some sense to set them up in advance; otherwise they should be
   set up whenever a prefix is delegated to a particular requesting
   router for the first time.

   In some cases the site administration may request a spoofed zone
   because they do not wish to populate the reverse tree, but wish for
   it to appear populated.  A service provider may support this option
   in addition to the site-managed option, the provider-managed option,
   and the no zone option.  In this case, when a prefix is delegated to
   a new router for the first time, there may be an old zone configured
   differently.  In this case, the delegated router MUST remove the old
   zone configuration before setting up the spoofed zone.




























Lemon                   Expires September 7, 2012              [Page 13]

Internet-Draft         DNS for Delegated Prefixes             March 2012


8.  Configuring no reverse tree

   A service provider may choose to simply not populate reverse trees
   for delegated prefixes.  This is a desirable option in the sense that
   it minimizes the work required to support the reverse DNS tree, and
   avoids creating spoofed nonsense records.  The service provider may
   also simply offer it as an option for sites that prefer not to have a
   populated reverse tree.

   In this case, if the non-populated reverse tree is an option, and the
   prefix had previously been delegated to a different router, the
   delegating router must remove any previously-existing zone for the
   delegated prefix.






































Lemon                   Expires September 7, 2012              [Page 14]

Internet-Draft         DNS for Delegated Prefixes             March 2012


9.  Security Considerations


















































Lemon                   Expires September 7, 2012              [Page 15]

Internet-Draft         DNS for Delegated Prefixes             March 2012


10.  IANA Considerations


















































Lemon                   Expires September 7, 2012              [Page 16]

Internet-Draft         DNS for Delegated Prefixes             March 2012


11.  Normative References

   [RFC1035]  Mockapetris, P., "Domain names - implementation and
              specification", STD 13, RFC 1035, November 1987.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC3315]  Droms, R., Bound, J., Volz, B., Lemon, T., Perkins, C.,
              and M. Carney, "Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol for
              IPv6 (DHCPv6)", RFC 3315, July 2003.

   [RFC3633]  Troan, O. and R. Droms, "IPv6 Prefix Options for Dynamic
              Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP) version 6", RFC 3633,
              December 2003.

   [RFC6052]  Bao, C., Huitema, C., Bagnulo, M., Boucadair, M., and X.
              Li, "IPv6 Addressing of IPv4/IPv6 Translators", RFC 6052,
              October 2010.
































Lemon                   Expires September 7, 2012              [Page 17]

Internet-Draft         DNS for Delegated Prefixes             March 2012


Author's Address

   Ted Lemon
   Nominum
   2000 Seaport Blvd
   Redwood City, CA  94063
   USA

   Phone: +1 650 381 6000
   Email: mellon@nominum.com









































Lemon                   Expires September 7, 2012              [Page 18]

