


Network Virtualization Overlays Working                          D. Wang
Group                                                              Q. Wu
Internet-Draft                                                    Huawei
Intended status: Standards Track                           June 28, 2013
Expires: December 30, 2013


Proposed Control Plane requirements for Network Virtualization Overlays
                        draft-wu-nvo3-nve2nve-06

Abstract

   This document looks at control plane aspect related to both tenant
   system to NVE control interface and NVE to Network Virtualization
   Authority (NVA) control interface NVE use to enable communication
   between tenant systems and focuses on NVE to NVA control interface,
   which is complementary to [draft-kreeger-nvo3-hypervisor-nve-cp] that
   describes the high level control plane requirements related to the
   interaction between tenant system and NVE when the two entities are
   not co-located on the same physical device.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 30, 2013.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect



Wang & Wu               Expires December 30, 2013               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                   NVE2NVA                       June 2013


   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Conventions Used in this Document  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  NVO3 Control Plane Overview  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   4.  Tenant system information entry at the NVE and Network
       Virtualization Authority . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     4.1.  Tenant system information entry fields relationship  . . .  7
     4.2.  Forwarding functionality at the tenant system  . . . . . .  8
   5.  NVE to NVA Control Plane Protocol Functionality  . . . . . . . 11
     5.1.  NVE to VN connect/disconnect notification  . . . . . . . . 11
     5.2.  Advertisement of Inner-outer address mapping
           associated with tenant system  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     5.3.  Tenant system information distribution . . . . . . . . . . 12
     5.4.  VN context moving  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   6.  Hypervisor-to-NVE Control Plane Protocol Functionality . . . . 14
     6.1.  Associate the NVE with VN context  . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
     6.2.  Localized forwarding at the same local NVE . . . . . . . . 14
   7.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   8.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   9.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
     9.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
     9.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
   Appendix A.  Change Log  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
     A.1.  draft-wu-nvo3-nve2nve-06 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
     A.2.  draft-wu-nvo3-nve2nve-05 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
     A.3.  draft-wu-nvo3-nve2nve-04 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20

















Wang & Wu               Expires December 30, 2013               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                   NVE2NVA                       June 2013


1.  Introduction

   In [I.D-ietf-nvo3-overlay-problem-statement], two control planes are
   identified to realize an overlay solution:

   o  NVE to Network Virtualization Authority (NVA) control plane.

   o  Tenant system to NVE control plane.

   Where NVE to NVA Control plane is used to deal with address mapping
   dissemination and Tenant System to NVE control plane is used to deal
   with VM attachment and detachment.

   In [I.D-ietf-nvo3-framework], three control plane components are
   defined to build these two control planes and provide the following
   capabilities:

   o  Auto-provision/service discovery

   o  Address advertisement

   o  Tunnel management

   In [I.D-fw-nvo3-server2vcenter],the control interface between NVE and
   the Oracle backend system or Network Virtualization Authority (NVA)
   is defined to provide the following capabilities:

   o  Enforce the network policy for each VM in the path from the NVE
      Edge associated with VM to the Tenant End System.

   o  Populate forwarding table in the path from the NVE Edge associated
      with VM to the Tenant End System in the data center.

   o  Populate mapping table in each NVE Edge that is in the virtual
      network across data centers under the control of the Director.

   This document focuses on control plane aspect related to both tenant
   system to NVE control interface and NVE to Oracle control interface
   NVE use to enable communication between tenant systems, which is
   complementary to [draft-kreeger-nvo3-hypervisor-nve-cp] that
   describes the high level control plane requirements related to the
   interaction between tenant system and NVE when the two entities are
   not co-located on the same physical device.








Wang & Wu               Expires December 30, 2013               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                   NVE2NVA                       June 2013


2.  Conventions Used in this Document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC2119 [RFC2119].

   Tenant System:

      A physical or virtual system that can play the role of a host, or
      a forwarding element such as a router, switch, firewall, etc.  It
      belongs to a single tenant and connects to one or more VNs of that
      tenant.

   vNIC:

      A vNIC is similar to a physical NIC.  Each virtual machine has one
      or more vNIC adapters that it uses to communicate with both the
      virtual and physical networks.  Each vNIC has its own MAC address
      and can be assigned one or more IP addresses just like a NIC found
      in a non virtualized machine.































Wang & Wu               Expires December 30, 2013               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                   NVE2NVA                       June 2013


3.  NVO3 Control Plane Overview

                                  ,---------.
                                ,'  Backend  `.
                               (      NVA       )
                                `.           ,'
                                  `-+------+'
                                  |         |
                             .--..--. .--. ..
                            (    '           '.--.
                         .-.'        L3          '
                        (          Overlay       )
                         (                     '-'
                              .'--'._.'.-._.'.-._)
                             //                \\
                     +------+              +-------+
                   .-|NVE X |              | NVE Y |
                 (   +------+--.         ( +-------+.--.
               .-.'              '     .-.'              '
              (    DC Site X     )    (    DC Site Y     )
               (             .'-'      (             .'-'
                '--'._.'.    )          '--'._.'.    )
                        '--'              /     '--'
                     /     \             /       \
                  __/_      \           /_       _\__
           '--------'   '--------'   '--------'   '--------'
           : Tenant :   : Tenant :   : Tenant :   : Tenant :
           : SystemA:   : SystemB:   : SystemC:   : SystemD:
           '--------'   '--------'   '--------'   '--------'

               Figure 1: Example NVO3 control plane Overview




















Wang & Wu               Expires December 30, 2013               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                   NVE2NVA                       June 2013


4.  Tenant system information entry at the NVE and Network
    Virtualization Authority

   Every NVE pair( local NVE and remote NVE ) associated with the tenant
   system MUST maintain at least one mapping table entry for each
   currently attached tenant system (In the case where TS has multiple
   tenant system interfaces, there may have multiple mapping table entry
   corresponding to one TS).  In addition, the Network Virtualization
   Authority may also maintain a mapping table entry for each currently
   attached tenant system or each newly joined NVE.  Each mapping table
   entry corresponds to the Tenant system connection to each VN or one
   Tenant system interface and conceptually may contain all or a sub set
   of the following fields:

   o  The tunnel interface identifier (tunnel-if-id) of the tunnel
      between the remote NVE and the local NVE where the tenant system
      is currently attached.  The tunnel interface identifier is
      acquired during the tunnel creation.

   o  The MAC address of the attached TS.  This MAC address is obtained
      from auto-discovery protocol between Tenant System and its local
      NVE.

   o  The IP address of the attached TS.  This IP address is obtained
      from auto-discovery protocol between Tenant System and its local
      NVE.

   o  The logical interface identifier (e.g., VLAN ID, internal vSwitch
      Interface ID connected to a Tenant System) of the access link
      between the tenant system and the local NVE.  This field is
      required to associate Tenant System with local NVE if local NVE is
      an external NVE to Tenant system.  It is internal to the local NVE
      and is also used to associate the tunnel to the access link where
      the tenant system is attached.

   o  The MAC address of the local/remote NVE associated with the tenant
      system.

   o  The IP address of the local/remote NVE associated with the tenant
      system.

   o  The Identifier of VN context (VNID).  This Identifier is obtained
      from auto-discovery protocol between Tenant System and its local
      NVE.

   o  Lifetime of NVEs to keep table entries when pushed to or pulled
      from NVAs.  While the table entries are pushed to NVA, they should
      be given a relatively long lifetime.  Otherwise, they should be



Wang & Wu               Expires December 30, 2013               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                   NVE2NVA                       June 2013


      given a relatively short lifetime.

   o  The operation code of tenant system.  The operations includes
      shutdown, migration, startup, etc., which can be detected by the
      NVE on the access link between tenant system and the NVE.

4.1.  Tenant system information entry fields relationship

   One Tenant system is corresponding to one VM.  Each Tenant System
   that is virtual system may have multiple vNIC adapters that it uses
   to communicate with both the virtual and physical networks. vNIC the
   tenant system has should belong to a single tenant.  Each vNIC must
   be assigned with one unique MAC address. vNIC MAC address may be
   modified or assigned with a new MAC address at some time.  When
   multiple vNICs hosted in the same VM connect to multiple VNs, it is
   allowed that some of these vNICs may connect to different VNs through
   the same NVE.

   Each tenant system uses TSI to interface with VNI at the NVE via VAP.
   Each TSI can be identified by an identifier which the tenant system
   assigns to the TSI.  Each VAP can be identified by the logical
   interface identifiers (e.g., VLAN ID, internal vSwitch Interface ID
   connected to a VM)which the NVE assigns to the VAP.  In order to
   establish the network connection between tenant system and NVE and
   associate tenant system and NVE with the same VN, VNID should be used
   to correlate one TSI to one VAP that belong to the same VNI.

                +-------------------------+
                |                         |
                |    VM (Tenant System)   |
                |                         |
                +-+-----+-----+-------+---+
                  |     |     |       |
                  |     |     |       |
                  |     |     |       |
                  +     +     +   ... +
                vNIC1 vNIC2  vNIC3
                  |     |     |
                  |     |     |
                  |     |     |
                  |     |     |
                 VN1    |    VN4
                        |
                  |-----+--+
                  |        |
                  |        |
                 VN2     VN3




Wang & Wu               Expires December 30, 2013               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                   NVE2NVA                       June 2013


         Tenant System Interfaces(TSI):
         TSIa [VNID1,MAC addr1]corresponding to vNIC1

         TSIb [VNID2,MAC addr2]corresponding to vNIC2
         TSIc [VNID3,MAC addr3]corresponding to vNIC2

         TSId [VNID4,MAC addr4]corresponding to vNIC3

                  Figure 2. Tenant System information Hierarchy


        +-------------------------+
        |                         |
        |          NVE            |
        |                         |
        |VNI1  VNI2  VNI3    VNIx |

        +-+-----+-----+-------+---+
          |     |     |       |
          |     |     |       |
         VAP1  VAP2  VAP3     |
          +     +     +   ... +
          |     |     |
          |     |     +--------+
          |     |              |
          |     |              |
          |     |              |
         TSIa  TSIb           TSIc
       +--|-----|--+     +-----+-----+
       |           |     |           |
       |  Tenant   |     |  Tenant   |
       |  System1  |     |  System2  |
       |           |     |           |
       +-----------+     +-----------+

         Figure 3.  Interfaces between Tenant system and NVE


4.2.  Forwarding functionality at the tenant system

   When the tenant system A plays the role of forwarding functionality
   to connect two VNs, the following three cases should be considered.

      (a) Both two VNs support Layer 3 forwarding;

      (b) Both two VNs support layer 2 forwarding;





Wang & Wu               Expires December 30, 2013               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                   NVE2NVA                       June 2013


      (c) One VN supports Layer3 forwarding and the other VN supports
      layer 2 forwarding;

   For (a), tenant system A or external system that is close to tenant
   system A should support layer 3 forwarding functionality.  When
   source tenant system in one VN communicates with destination tenant
   system in another VN through the tenant system A, if tenant system A
   support layer 3 forwarding, the tenant system A should forward IP
   packets on the behalf of source Tenant System and destination tenant
   system irrespective of data plane encapsulation format(e.g., VXLAN or
   NVGREW, MPLS over GRE).  If two VNs use different data plane
   encapsulation format, tenant system A should also support converting
   one data plane encapsulation format into another.  If tenant system A
   doesn't support layer 3 forwarding, the external system that is close
   to tenant system A should associate TSI to local NVE using
   information like VNID, TS MAC address and VLAN tag information and
   forward IP packets on the behalf of source tenant system and
   destination tenant system.

   For (b), tenant system A vNIC or external system that is close to
   tenant system A should support layer 2 forwarding functionality.
   When source tenant system in one VN communicates with destination
   tenant system in another VN through the tenant system A, if tenant
   system A support layer 2 forwarding, the tenant system A should know
   which tenant systems connecting to itself are allowed for layer 2
   forwarding and then forward layer 2 frames on the behalf of source
   Tenant System and destination tenant system based on forwarding
   allowed list.  If two layer 2 VNs support different data plane
   encapsulation format, the tenant system A should also support
   converting one data plane encapsulation format to another.  If tenant
   system A doesn't support layer 2 forwarding, the external system that
   is close to tenant system A should associate TSI to local NVE using
   information like VNID, TS MAC address and VLAN tag information and
   forward layer 2 frames on the behalf of source tenant system and
   destination tenant system.

   For (c), tenant system A or external system that is close to tenant
   system A should support both layer 2 forwarding and layer 3
   forwarding.  When source tenant systems in layer 2 VN communicates
   with destination tenant system in layer 3 VN through the tenant
   system A, if tenant system A support both layer 2 and layer 3
   forwarding the tenant system A should support translating layer 2
   frame into layer 3 packet and forward traffic between layer 2 VN and
   layer 3 VN.  If two VNs support different data plane encapsulation
   format, the tenant system A should also support converting one data
   plane encapsulation format to another.  If tenant system A doesn't
   support layer 2 forwarding or layer3 forwarding, the external system
   that is close to tenant system A should associate TSI to local NVE



Wang & Wu               Expires December 30, 2013               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft                   NVE2NVA                       June 2013


   using information like VNID,TS MAC address and VLAN tag information
   and forward traffic on the behalf of source tenant system and
   destination tenant system.

   When the tenant system A plays the role of interconnection
   functionality to connect between VN and Non-VN, suppose source tenant
   system in one VN communicates with destination end device in Non-VN
   environment through the tenant system A, the tenant system A acts as
   NVO3 GW between VN and Non-VN in this case peering with other
   Gateways and should be explicitly configured with a list of
   destination MAC addresses that allows passed to the Non-VN
   environment and perform translation between VNID and Non-VN label
   when forwarding traffic between VN interface and Non-VN interface.
   For outgoing frames on VN connected interface, the tenant system A
   decapsulates NVO3 outer header and forwards the inner frame to Non-VN
   environment based on configured allowed list.  For incoming frames on
   non-VN connected interface(e.g.,WAN interface), the tenant system A
   should map the incoming frames from end device to specific VN based
   on inner Ethernet frame information (e.g., VLAN ID).  The mapping
   table is setup at the tenant system A to perform VNID lookup in VN
   and label lookup in the Non-VN environment.






























Wang & Wu               Expires December 30, 2013              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft                   NVE2NVA                       June 2013


5.  NVE to NVA Control Plane Protocol Functionality

   The core functional entities for NVE to NVA Control plane
   infrastructure are the NVE and Network Virtualization Authority.  The
   Network Virtualization Authority is responsible for maintaining the
   tenant system reachability state and is the topological anchor point
   for the Tenant system information (e.g., Tenant system MAC address,IP
   address,VN Name,VNID, local NVE addresses, remote NVE addresses).
   There can be multiple NVAs in a VN each serving a different group of
   tenant system.  The NVE is the entity that performs the inner-outer
   address mapping and VN Name to VNID mapping management on the request
   of NVE, and it resides on the NVE or an external network device
   separately from NVE.  The NVE is responsible for detecting the tenant
   system operations(e.g.,Shutdown, Migration, Startup) on the access
   link between tenant system and NVE and for advertise VN context
   information associated with tenant system to NVA.

5.1.  NVE to VN connect/disconnect notification

   When a tenant system connects to one VN by attaching to a local NVE,
   The tenant system should also inform the attached local NVE which VN
   context the tenant system belong to. the local NVE should also be
   added into VN context together with tenant system information and
   report VN membership to Network Virtualization Authority (NVA).  This
   helps Network Virtualization Authority know to which NVE a group of
   the tenant systems are attached or current location of these tenant
   systems.  When the last tenant system is disconnected to one VN
   through one local NVE, this local NVE should also be removed from VN
   context.  This should also be updated to Network Virtualization
   Authority and let Network Virtualization Authority know that there
   are no tenant system associated with that NVE.

5.2.  Advertisement of Inner-outer address mapping associated with
      tenant system

   In order to enable tenant system A to communicate with any tenant
   system that is not under the same local NVE, the inner-outer address
   mapping(Destination Tenant system L2/L3 address to remote
   NVE(i.e.,egress tunnel endpoint)) that maps a final destination
   address to the proper tunnel should be distributed to all the remote
   NVEs that belong to the same VN even though there is no tenant system
   which communicates with tenant system A behind that remote NVE.
   Alternatively, the inner-outer address mapping can be distributed to
   the NVA and then NVA advertise inner-outer address mapping to the
   corresponding remote NVE according to VN membership established using
   NVE connect/disconnect to VN notification.  When NVA is embedded
   within NVE, there is no need for a standardized protocol between the
   NVE and NVA, as the interaction is implemented via software on a



Wang & Wu               Expires December 30, 2013              [Page 11]

Internet-Draft                   NVE2NVA                       June 2013


   single device.  For inner-outer address mapping distribution to NVE,
   in one approach, BGP protocol can be used to advertise such mapping
   information, alternatively, each NVE may push inner-outer mapping to
   the Network Virtualization Authority using NVE connect/disconnect to
   VN notification or other NVE-to-NVA protocol.

5.3.  Tenant system information distribution

   Data plane learning can be used to build mapping table without need
   for control plane protocol.  However it requires each data packet to
   be flooded to the whole VN.  In order to eliminate flooding
   introduced by data plane learning, a control protocol is needed to
   provide inner-outer address mapping and other information associated
   with tenant system from NVA to the corresponding NVE.  For tenant
   system information distribution, one approach is the tenant system
   information is pushed by NVA to the NVE.  If the destination packet
   over the logical tunnel arriving at the NVE can't be found in its
   inner-outer mapping table that are pushed down from the NVA, the NVA
   could be configured to simply drop the data frame, or flood it to all
   other remote NVE that belong to the same VN if NVE knows VN
   membership.  If an NVE lost its connectivity to its NVA, it MUST
   ignore any Pushed data from the NVA because the pushed data may be
   outdated or not valid.  When there might have multiple NVA holding
   the mapping information for the tenant systems in the VN and push the
   same tenant system information to the same NVE(i.e., conflict
   occurs), the destination packet can be tagged with different
   priority,higher priority data take precedence.

   Alternatively, NVE can send pull request to NVA for the tenant system
   information.  Each Pull request can have multiple queries for
   different Tenant Systems.  The pull request can be triggered by An
   edge node (NVE) receives an ingress data frame with a destination
   whose attached edge (NVE) is unknown, or the edge node (NVE) receives
   an ingress ARP/ND request for a target whose link address (MAC) or
   attached edge (NVE) is unknown.  If the NVA can be configured to
   prohibite some NVEs to get tenant system information from NVA or the
   NVA may not have entry matching tenant system information asked by
   NVE.  Then NVA can indicate in the pull response that the target
   being queried is not available or NVE is not allowed to access
   information,otherwise, the NVE should return the valid inner-outer
   address mapping with the valid timer indicating how long the entry
   can be cached by the edge (NVE).  While waiting for query response
   from NVA, the NVE has to buffer the subsequent data packets with
   destination address to the same target.  The buffer could overflow
   before the NVE gets the response from NVA.  If no response is
   received to a NVA within a configurable timeout, the request should
   be re-transmitted up to a configurable number of times.  When NVE
   caching entry pulled from NVA is expired,both NVE and NVA should



Wang & Wu               Expires December 30, 2013              [Page 12]

Internet-Draft                   NVE2NVA                       June 2013


   remove invalid NVE caching entry.  When one tenant system is detached
   from one NVE and move to another, the inner-out address mapping
   established in the pervious NVE is not valid.  In such cases, the
   inner-outer address mapping should be removed from the previous NVE
   and the new inner-outer mapping should be created at the new NVE to
   which the tenant system is currently attached.  Such inner-outer
   mapping should be updated at NVA.  If an NVE lost its connectivity to
   its NVA, the cached entry should be removed from the NVE to which the
   tenant system is currently attached.

5.4.  VN context moving

   In some cases, one tenant system may be detached from one NVE and
   move to another NVE.  In such cases, the VN context should be moved
   from the NVE to which the tenant system was previously attached to
   the new NVE to which the tenant system is currently attached.  In
   order to achieve this, the per tenant system VN context including VN
   profile can be maintained at the Network Virtualization Authority and
   be retrieved at the new place based on the VN Identifier (VNID). 6.
   Hypervisor-to-NVE Control Plane Protocol Functionality































Wang & Wu               Expires December 30, 2013              [Page 13]

Internet-Draft                   NVE2NVA                       June 2013


6.  Hypervisor-to-NVE Control Plane Protocol Functionality

6.1.  Associate the NVE with VN context

   The VN context includes a set of configuration attributes defining
   access and tunnel policies and (L2 and/or L3) forwarding functions.
   When a Tenant System is attached to a local NVE, a VN network
   instance should be allocated to the local NVE.  The tenant system
   should be associated with the specific VN context using virtual
   Network Instance(VNI).  The tenant system should also inform the
   attached local NVE which VN context the tenant system belong to.
   Therefore the VN context can be bound with the data path from the
   tenant system to the local NVE and the tunnel from local NVE
   associated with the tenant system and all the remote NVEs that belong
   to the same VN as the local NVE.  For the data path from the tenant
   system and the local NVE, the network policy can be installed on the
   underlying switched network and forwarding tables also can be
   populated to each network elements in the underlying network based on
   the specific VNI associated with the tenant system.  For the tunnel
   from local NVE to the remote NVEs, the traffic engineering
   information can be applied to each tunnel based on VNI associated
   with the tenant system.

6.2.  Localized forwarding at the same local NVE

   In some cases, two tenant systems may be attached to the same local
   NVE.  In order to allow the NVE to locally forward traffic between
   two tenant systems that are attached to the same NVE, the inner-outer
   address mapping that maps a final destination address to the proper
   tunnel should be populated at the local NVE.

   In some cases, two tenant systems may connect to the different VNs
   through the same interconnection functionality (Data Center Gateway),
   in order to allow two tenant systems communication between two VNs,
   the mapping table that maps a final destination address to the proper
   tunnel should also be populated in both NVE associated with two
   communicated tenant system and the interconnection functionality
   associated corresponding NVE.In this case, the interconnection
   functionality may trigger both NVE associated with two tenant system
   to establish tunnel directly and allow traffic between these two
   tenant systems bypass itself.










Wang & Wu               Expires December 30, 2013              [Page 14]

Internet-Draft                   NVE2NVA                       June 2013


7.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no actions for IANA.
















































Wang & Wu               Expires December 30, 2013              [Page 15]

Internet-Draft                   NVE2NVA                       June 2013


8.  Security Considerations

   TBC.
















































Wang & Wu               Expires December 30, 2013              [Page 16]

Internet-Draft                   NVE2NVA                       June 2013


9.  References

9.1.  Normative References

   [I.D-ietf-nvo3-framework]
              Lasserre, M., "Framework for DC Network Virtualization",
              ID draft-ietf-nvo3-framework-00, September 2012.

   [I.D-ietf-nvo3-overlay-problem-statement]
              Narten, T., "Problem Statement: Overlays for Network
              Virtualization",
              ID draft-ietf-nvo3-overlay-problem-statement-02,
              Feburary 2013.

   [I.D-kreeger-nvo3-hypervisor-nve-cp]
              Kreeger, L., "Network Virtualization Hypervisor-to-NVE
              Overlay Control Protocol Requirements",
              ID draft-kreeger-nvo3-hypervisor-nve-cp-01, Feburary 2013.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", March 1997.

9.2.  Informative References

   [I.D-fw-nvo3-server2vcenter]
              Wu, Q. and R. Scott, "Network Virtualization
              Architecture", ID draft-fw-nvo3-server2vcenter-01,
              January 2013.























Wang & Wu               Expires December 30, 2013              [Page 17]

Internet-Draft                   NVE2NVA                       June 2013


Appendix A.  Change Log

   Note to the RFC-Editor: please remove this section prior to
   publication as an RFC.

A.1.  draft-wu-nvo3-nve2nve-06

   The following are the major changes to previous version :

   o  Remove section 7.

   o  Add new subsection 5.1 to discuss NVE to VN connect/disconnect
      notification.

   o  Add new subsection 5.2 to discuss Inner-outer address mapping
      associated with tenant system advertisement.

   o  Add new subsection 5.3 to discuss Tenant system information
      distribution.

   o  Add new subsection 6.1 to discuss Associate the NVE with VN
      context.

   o  Add new subsection 6.1 to discuss localized forwarding at the same
      local NVE.

A.2.  draft-wu-nvo3-nve2nve-05

   The following are the major changes to previous version :

   o  Remove distintion between pNIC and vNIC and restrict tenant system
      to the one that is virtual system and has vNICs

   o  Add one new figure and Using VAP and TSI to establish association
      between tenant system and NVE that belong to the same VN.

   o  Delete Oracle Backend System term.

   o  Replace interconnection functionality with forwarding
      functionality.

A.3.  draft-wu-nvo3-nve2nve-04

   The following are the major changes to previous version :

   o  Rewording some vNICs in the document with TSI.





Wang & Wu               Expires December 30, 2013              [Page 18]

Internet-Draft                   NVE2NVA                       June 2013


   o  Clarify the relation between VM,Tenant System,TSI and distinguish
      network, network elements from identifier for network or network
      elements.

   o  Distinguish pNIC from vNIC.

   o  Using TSI Identifier to identify each TSI

   o  Support multiple TSI for multiple simutaneous connection and using
      BID to distinguish different TSI belong to the same vNIC.









































Wang & Wu               Expires December 30, 2013              [Page 19]

Internet-Draft                   NVE2NVA                       June 2013


Authors' Addresses

   Danhua Wang
   Huawei
   101 Software Avenue, Yuhua District
   Nanjing, Jiangsu  210012
   China

   Email: wangdanhua@huawei.com


   Qin Wu
   Huawei
   101 Software Avenue, Yuhua District
   Nanjing, Jiangsu  210012
   China

   Email: bill.wu@huawei.com

































Wang & Wu               Expires December 30, 2013              [Page 20]

