A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3457

        Title:      Requirements for IPsec Remote Access Scenarios
        Author(s):  S. Kelly, S. Ramamoorthi
        Status:     Informational
        Date:       January 2003
        Mailbox:    scott@hyperthought.com, sankarr@juniper.net
        Pages:      31
        Characters: 75167
        Updates/Obsoletes/SeeAlso:    None

        I-D Tag:    draft-ietf-ipsra-reqmts-05.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3457.txt


IPsec offers much promise as a secure remote access mechanism.
However, there are a number of differing remote access scenarios,
each having some shared and some unique requirements.  A thorough
understanding of these requirements is necessary in order to
effectively evaluate the suitability of a specific set of mechanisms
for any particular remote access scenario.  This document enumerates
the requirements for a number of common remote access scenarios.

This document is a product of the IPSEC Remote Access (IPSRA) Working
Group of the IETF.

This memo provides information for the Internet community.  It does
not specify an Internet standard of any kind.  Distribution of this
memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.
