


Network Working Group                                  P. Mohapatra, Ed.
Internet-Draft                                             Cisco Systems
Intended status: Standards Track                         J. Scudder, Ed.
Expires: September 9, 2010                                  D. Ward, Ed.
                                                        Juniper Networks
                                                            R. Bush, Ed.
                                         Internet Initiative Japan, Inc.
                                                         R. Austein, Ed.
                                             Internet Systems Consortium
                                                           March 8, 2010


                      BGP Prefix Origin Validation
                  draft-pmohapat-sidr-pfx-validate-04

Abstract

   A BGP route associates an address prefix with a set of autonomous
   systems (AS) that identify the interdomain path the prefix has
   traversed in the form of BGP announcements.  This set is represented
   as the AS_PATH attribute in BGP and starts with the AS that
   originated the prefix.  To help reduce well-known threats against BGP
   including prefix mis-announcing and monkey-in-the-middle attacks, one
   of the security requirements is the ability to validate the
   origination AS of BGP routes.  More specifically, one needs to
   validate that the AS number claiming to originate an address prefix
   (as derived from the AS_PATH attribute of the BGP route) is in fact
   authorized by the prefix holder to do so.  This document describes a
   simple validation mechanism to partially satisfy this requirement.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.




Mohapatra, et al.       Expires September 9, 2010               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft        BGP Prefix Origin Validation            March 2010


   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 9, 2010.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the BSD License.

   This document may contain material from IETF Documents or IETF
   Contributions published or made publicly available before November
   10, 2008.  The person(s) controlling the copyright in some of this
   material may not have granted the IETF Trust the right to allow
   modifications of such material outside the IETF Standards Process.
   Without obtaining an adequate license from the person(s) controlling
   the copyright in such materials, this document may not be modified
   outside the IETF Standards Process, and derivative works of it may
   not be created outside the IETF Standards Process, except to format
   it for publication as an RFC or to translate it into languages other
   than English.




















Mohapatra, et al.       Expires September 9, 2010               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft        BGP Prefix Origin Validation            March 2010


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.1.  Requirements Language  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.  Prefix-to-AS Mapping Database  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Changes to the BGP Decision Process  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     3.1.  Policy Control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   4.  Route Aggregation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   5.  Interaction with Local Cache . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   6.  Deployment Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   7.  Contributors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   8.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   9.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   10. Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   11. References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     11.1. Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     11.2. Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10

































Mohapatra, et al.       Expires September 9, 2010               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft        BGP Prefix Origin Validation            March 2010


1.  Introduction

   A BGP route associates an address prefix with a set of autonomous
   systems (AS) that identify the interdomain path the prefix has
   traversed in the form of BGP announcements.  This set is represented
   as the AS_PATH attribute in BGP and starts with the AS that
   originated the prefix.  To help reduce well-known threats against BGP
   including prefix mis-announcing and monkey-in-the-middle attacks, one
   of the security requirements is the ability to validate the
   origination AS of BGP routes.  More specifically, one needs to
   validate that the AS number claiming to originate an address prefix
   (as derived from the AS_PATH attribute of the BGP route) is in fact
   authorized by the prefix holder to do so.  This document describes a
   simple validation mechanism to partially satisfy this requirement.

   The Resource Public Key Infrastructure (RPKI) describes an approach
   to build a formally verifyable database of IP addresses and AS
   numbers as resources.  The overall architecture of RPKI as defined in
   [I-D.ietf-sidr-arch] consists of three main components:

   o  A public key infrastructure (PKI) with the necessary certificate
      objects,

   o  Digitally signed routing objects,

   o  A distributed repository system to hold the objects that would
      also support periodic retrieval.

   The RPKI system is based on resource certificates that define
   extensions to X.509 to represent IP addresses and AS identifiers
   [RFC3779], thus the name RPKI.  Route Origin Authorizations (ROA)
   [I-D.ietf-sidr-roa-format] are separate digitally signed objects that
   define associations between ASes and IP address blocks.  Finally the
   repository system is operated in a distributed fashion through the
   IANA, RIR hierarchy, and ISPs.

   In order to benefit from the RPKI system, it is envisioned that
   relying parties either at AS or organization level obtain a local
   copy of the signed object collection, verify the signatures, and
   process them.  The cache must also be refreshed periodically.  The
   exact access mechanism used to retrieve the local cache is beyond the
   scope of this document.

   Individual BGP speakers can utilize the processed data contained in
   the local cache to validate BGP announcements.  The protocol details
   to retrieve the processed data from the local cache to the BGP
   speakers is beyond the scope of this document (refer to
   [I-D.ymbk-rpki-rtr-protocol] for such a mechanism).  This document



Mohapatra, et al.       Expires September 9, 2010               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft        BGP Prefix Origin Validation            March 2010


   proposes a simple modification to the BGP decision process that makes
   use of the processed data from signed objects and validates prefix
   origination of received BGP UPDATE messages.

   Note that the complete path attestation against the AS_PATH attribute
   of a route is outside the scope of this document.

   Although RPKI provides the context for this draft, it is equally
   possible to use any other database which is able to map prefixes to
   their authorized origin ASes.  Each distinct database will have its
   own particular operational and security characteristics; such
   characteristics are beyond the scope of this document.

1.1.  Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].


2.  Prefix-to-AS Mapping Database

   In loading the validated objects from the local cache to the BGP
   speaker, the BGP speaker will store this data in the form of a
   database that maintains the relationship between prefixes and the
   corresponding set of authorized origin ASes.  The primary key for
   this database is a prefix set represented as (IP prefix)/[min.
   length, max. length].  The value stored against each prefix set is
   the set of AS numbers that is assigned or sub-allocated the
   corresponding IP address block.  An AS may originate more than one
   prefix set.  Thus, multiple prefix sets in the database may contain
   the same origin AS(es).

   Whenever UPDATEs are received from peers, a BGP speaker is expected
   to perform a lookup in this database for each of the prefixes in the
   UPDATE message.  To aid with better description, we define terms
   "UPDATE prefix" and "UPDATE origin AS number" to denote the values
   derived from the received UPDATE message, and "database prefix set"
   and "database origin AS number set" to mean the values derived from
   the database lookup.  Note that in the presence of overlapping
   prefixes, the database lookup against the "UPDATE prefix" may yield
   multiple matches.

   The following are the different types of results expected from such a
   lookup operation:

   o  If the "UPDATE prefix" finds no matching or covering prefixes in
      the database (i.e. the "UPDATE prefix" is not a sub-block of any



Mohapatra, et al.       Expires September 9, 2010               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft        BGP Prefix Origin Validation            March 2010


      of the database prefixes), the lookup result is returned as "not
      found".  Due to incremental deployment model of the RPKI
      repository, it is expected that a complete registry of all IP
      address blocks and their AS associations is not available at a
      given point of time.

   o  If there are "database prefix sets" that cover the "UPDATE
      prefix", and one of them has the "UPDATE origin AS number" in the
      "database origin AS number sets", then the lookup result is
      returned as "valid".

   o  If there are "database prefix sets" which cover the "UPDATE
      prefix", but none of them has the "UPDATE origin AS number" in the
      "database origin AS number set", then the lookup result is
      returned as "invalid".

   Depending on the lookup result, we define a property for each "UPDATE
   prefix", called the "validity state" of the prefix.  It can assume
   the following values:

                  +-------+-----------------------------+
                  | Value | Meaning                     |
                  +-------+-----------------------------+
                  |   0   | Lookup result = "valid"     |
                  |   1   | Lookup result = "not found" |
                  |   2   | Lookup result = "invalid"   |
                  +-------+-----------------------------+

   Note that all the routes, regardless of their "validity state" will
   be stored in the local BGP speaker's Adj-RIB-In.

   Following is a sample pseudo code for prefix validation function:



















Mohapatra, et al.       Expires September 9, 2010               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft        BGP Prefix Origin Validation            March 2010


   //Input are the variables derived from a BGP UPDATE message
   //that need to be validated.
   input = {bgp_prefix, masklen, origin_as};

   //Initialize result to "not found" state
   result = BGP_PFXV_STATE_NOT_FOUND;

   //pfx_validate_table organizes all the ROA entries retrieved
   //from RPKI cache based on the IP address and the minLength
   //field. There can be multiple such entries that match the
   //input. Iterate through all of them.
   entry = next_lookup_result(pfx_validate_table,
                              input.bgp_prefix, input.masklen);

   while (entry != NULL) {
       prefix_exists = TRUE;

       //Each entry stores multiple records sorted by the ROA
       //maxLength field. i.e. there can be multiple ROA records
       //with the same IPaddress and minLength fields, but different
       //maxLength field. Iterate through all records of the entry
       //to check if there is one range that matches the input.
       record = next_in_entry_record_list(entry);
       while (record != NULL) {
           if (input.masklen <= record->max_length) {
               if (input.origin_as == record->origin_as) {
                   result = BGP_PFXV_STATE_VALID;
                   return (result);
               }
           }
       }
   }

   //If pfx_validate_table contains one or more prefixes that
   //match the input, but none of them resulted in a "valid"
   //outcome since the origin_as did not match, return the
   //result state as "invalid". Else the initialized state of
   //"not found" applies to this validation operation.
   if (prefix_exists == TRUE) {
       result = BGP_PFXV_STATE_INVALID;
   }

   return (result);








Mohapatra, et al.       Expires September 9, 2010               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft        BGP Prefix Origin Validation            March 2010


3.  Changes to the BGP Decision Process

   If a BGP router supports prefix validation and is configured to do
   so, the validation check MUST be performed prior to any of the steps
   defined in the decision process of [RFC4271].  The validation step is
   stated as follows:

      When comparing a pair of routes for a BGP destination, if both
      routes are received via EBGP and have had their "validity state"
      computed, the route with the lowest "validity state" value is
      preferred.  As prefix validation procedures are not performed on
      IBGP learnt routes, their "validity state" is not computed and
      compared.  Refer to Section 6 for IBGP considerations.

   In all other respects, the decision process remains unchanged.

3.1.  Policy Control

   It MUST be possible to enable or disable the validation step as
   defined in Section 3 through configuration.  The default SHOULD be
   for the validation step to be enabled.  An implementation MAY also
   support disabling validation for a subset of prefixes or for routes
   received from a particular EBGP peer.  The validity state of such
   routes for which validation is disabled MUST be set to "not found".

   It MUST be possible to exclude routes from the BGP decision process
   based on their validation state.  In particular it is anticipated
   that it will be desirable to exclude routes from consideration when
   their validation state is "invalid"; however it may also be desirable
   to exclude routes whose validation state is "not found" as well.  The
   default SHOULD be to exclude routes whose validation state is
   "invalid".

   An implementation MAY provide configuration knobs to match on the
   validity state of a prefix or path and set certain attributes.


4.  Route Aggregation

   When an UPDATE message carries AGGREGATOR attribute, the "UPDATE
   origin AS number" is set to the value encoded in the AGGREGATOR
   instead of being derived from the AS_PATH attribute.


5.  Interaction with Local Cache

   Each BGP speaker supporting prefix validation as described in this
   document is expected to communicate with one or multiple local caches



Mohapatra, et al.       Expires September 9, 2010               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft        BGP Prefix Origin Validation            March 2010


   that store a database of RPKI signed objects.  The protocol
   mechanisms used to fetch the data and store them locally at the BGP
   speaker is beyond the scope of this document (please refer
   [I-D.ymbk-rpki-rtr-protocol]).  Irrespective of the protocol, the
   prefix validation algorithm as outlined in this document is expected
   to function correctly in the event of failures and other timing
   conditions that may result in an empty and/or partial prefix-to-AS
   mapping database.  Indeed, if the (in-PoP) cache is not available and
   the mapping database is empty on the BGP speaker, all the lookups
   will result in "not found" state and the prefixes will be advertised
   to rest of the network (unless restricted by policy configuration).
   Similarly, if BGP UPDATEs arrive at the speaker while the fetch
   operation from the cache is in progress, some prefix lookups will
   also result in "not found" state.  The implementation is expected to
   handle these timing conditions and re-validate the prefixes once the
   fetch operation is complete (in an event-driven manner).


6.  Deployment Considerations

   It is critical that IBGP speakers within an AS have a consistent
   routing view of the BGP destinations and do not make conflicting
   decisions regarding the BGP best path selection that might cause
   forwarding loops.  Thus, the best practice in BGP deployment does not
   run any policy on IBGP sessions which could potentially create an
   inconsistent view.  Going by the same rules, the prefix validation
   procedures MUST NOT be performed on IBGP learnt routes in an AS.  As
   a general principle, prefix validation SHOULD be executed on EBGP
   boundaries.  An implementation MAY (based on local configuration)
   provide support to carry the prefix validation result in standard
   communities or extended communities while advertising to IBGP for
   monitoring and debug purposes.  In some cases, it may be desirable to
   run the validation on centralized route servers within an AS to
   offload the computation.  Care should be taken to ensure routing
   consistency in such cases.

   During gradual transition phase of an autonomous system to support
   prefix validation, if some edge routers support validation and some
   don't, it is possible to get into a situation where an invalid path
   is preferred over a valid path.  This happens when an edge router
   does not support prefix validation and receives an invalid path from
   its EBGP peer and transparently announces that to the IBGP mesh.  The
   same situation can also arise in an environment where all edge
   routers are migrated to support prefix validation due to asynchronous
   nature of the RPKI cache updates.  For example, the correct validity
   state of a prefix may have been updated by the cache on one edge
   router, but not another.  However, this is a transient phenomenon and
   self-correcting.



Mohapatra, et al.       Expires September 9, 2010               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft        BGP Prefix Origin Validation            March 2010


7.  Contributors

      Rex Fernando rex@cisco.com
      Cisco Systems

      Miya Kohno mkohno@juniper.net
      Juniper Networks

      Shin Miyakawa miyakawa@nttv6.jp
      Taka Mizuguchi
      Tomoya Yoshida
      NTT Communications

      Russ Housley housley@vigilsec.com
      Vigil Security

      Junaid Israr jisra052@uottawa.ca
      Mouhcine Guennoun mguennou@uottawa.ca
      Hussein Mouftah mouftah@site.uottawa.ca
      University of Ottawa School of Information Technology and
      Engineering(SITE) 800 King Edward Avenue, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada,
      K1N 6N5


8.  Acknowledgements

   Junaid Israr's contribution to this specification is part of his PhD
   research work and thesis at University of Ottawa, Canada.


9.  IANA Considerations


10.  Security Considerations

   Although this specification discusses one portion of a system to
   validate BGP routes, it should be noted that it relies on a database
   (RPKI or other) to provide validation information.  As such, the
   security properties of that database must be considered in order to
   determine the security provided by the overall solution.  If
   "invalid" routes are blocked as this specification suggests, the
   overall system provides a possible denial-of-service vector, for
   example if an attacker is able to inject one or more spoofed records
   into the validation database which lead a good route to be declared
   invalid.  In addition, this system is only able to provide limited
   protection against a determined attacker -- the attacker need only
   prepend the "valid" source AS to a forged BGP route announcement in
   order to defeat the protection provided by this system.  This



Mohapatra, et al.       Expires September 9, 2010              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft        BGP Prefix Origin Validation            March 2010


   mechanism does not protect against "AS in the middle attacks" or
   provide any path validation.  It only attempts to verify the origin.
   In general, this system should be thought of more as a protection
   against misconfiguration than as true "security" in the strong sense.


11.  References

11.1.  Normative References

   [I-D.ietf-sidr-arch]
              Lepinski, M. and S. Kent, "An Infrastructure to Support
              Secure Internet Routing", draft-ietf-sidr-arch-09 (work in
              progress), October 2009.

   [I-D.ietf-sidr-roa-format]
              Lepinski, M., Kent, S., and D. Kong, "A Profile for Route
              Origin Authorizations (ROAs)",
              draft-ietf-sidr-roa-format-06 (work in progress),
              October 2009.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC3779]  Lynn, C., Kent, S., and K. Seo, "X.509 Extensions for IP
              Addresses and AS Identifiers", RFC 3779, June 2004.

   [RFC4271]  Rekhter, Y., Li, T., and S. Hares, "A Border Gateway
              Protocol 4 (BGP-4)", RFC 4271, January 2006.

11.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.ymbk-rpki-rtr-protocol]
              Bush, R. and R. Austein, "The RPKI/Router Protocol",
              draft-ymbk-rpki-rtr-protocol-04 (work in progress),
              July 2009.


Authors' Addresses

   Pradosh Mohapatra (editor)
   Cisco Systems
   170 W. Tasman Drive
   San Jose, CA  95134
   USA

   Email: pmohapat@cisco.com




Mohapatra, et al.       Expires September 9, 2010              [Page 11]

Internet-Draft        BGP Prefix Origin Validation            March 2010


   John Scudder (editor)
   Juniper Networks
   1194 N. Mathilda Ave
   Sunnyvale, CA  94089
   USA

   Email: jgs@juniper.net


   David Ward (editor)
   Juniper Networks
   1194 N. Mathilda Ave
   Sunnyvale, CA  94089
   USA

   Email: dward@juniper.net


   Randy Bush (editor)
   Internet Initiative Japan, Inc.
   5147 Crystral Springs
   Bainbridge Island, Washington  98110
   USA

   Email: randy@psg.com


   Rob Austein (editor)
   Internet Systems Consortium
   950 Charter Street
   Redwood City, CA  94063
   USA

   Email: sra@isc.org

















Mohapatra, et al.       Expires September 9, 2010              [Page 12]


