



Internet Engineering Task Force                                   Y. Yin
Internet-Draft                                                  S. Jiang
Intended status: Informational                                    G. Yan
Expires: April 24, 2014                     Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd
                                                        October 21, 2013


                    IP Flow Path Trace Requirements
                 draft-yin-tsvwg-ipflow-pathtrace-ps-01

Abstract

   This document describes the requirements of IP flow path trace.
   Network administrators need to get the real IP flow path information,
   of which a specific IP flow goes through heterogeneous network
   environments.  It is also desired for more information relevant to
   the IP flow path.  Based on the information, network administrators
   can locate possible faults of the network quickly or optimize network
   resource for better network performance.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 24, 2014.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must



Yin, et al.              Expires April 24, 2014                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft        Flow Path Trace Requirements          October 2013


   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Conventions Used in This Document . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   3.  Function Requirement for a new IP Flow Path Trace Mechanism .   4
     3.1.  Requirement for path trace across heterogeneous network
           environments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     3.2.  IP flow based path trace requirements . . . . . . . . . .   4
     3.3.  Required information relevant to path . . . . . . . . . .   5
     3.4.  Security requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   4.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   5.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   6.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   7.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7

1.  Introduction

   At present, the Internet Service Providers (ISPs) provides a wide
   variety of services, such as Internet access, lease line, mobile,
   Next Generation Network (NGN), Virtual Private Network (VPN), etc.
   Different service has different quality requirements and the ISPs
   make the Service Level Agreement (SLA) contracts with customers for
   each service.  So when service failure or decline in the quality of
   service happens, the service provider's network administrator must
   locate reasons in the shortest time.

   The current ISP networks may actually be constructed by heterogeneous
   network technologies, such as native IP, Multi-Protocol Label
   Switching (MPLS, [RFC3031]), Pseudo-Wire Emulation Edge to Edge
   (PWE3, [RFC3985]), Virtual Private Lan Service (VPLS, [RFC4762]),
   Layer 2 VPN (L2VPN, [RFC4664]), Layer 3 VPN (L3VPN, [RFC4364]),
   tunnels (such as IPinIP [RFC1853], Generic Packet Tunneling - GRE
   [RFC2473], etc.), translation, etc.  The above mentioned IP services
   may be delivered across these heterogeneous network environments.

   To locate the network fault quickly, IETF has defined the
   corresponding ping and trace functions for each network technology,
   independently.  They are IP ping/trace using Internet Control Message
   Protocol (ICMP) [RFC0792], LSP ping/trace [RFC4379], PW ping/trace,
   [RFC5085], [RFC6073], etc.

   However, none of these technologies are able to gather the trace
   information of all these heterogeneous network environments.



Yin, et al.              Expires April 24, 2014                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft        Flow Path Trace Requirements          October 2013


   Although trace packets, such as ICMP packets, can traverse these
   heterogeneous network environments, it does not record information
   regarding to these heterogeneous intermediate devices at all.  Giving
   the fact, that many of current packets would transmit more than one
   network environments, it is still difficult trace the complete end-
   to-end paths.

   Another issue of these ping/trace functions is path replicability.
   Most of these current ping/trace mechanisms are based on the triple
   of {source IP address, destination IP address, IP protocol number}.
   However, there are many Link Aggregation (LAG) or Equal-Cost Multi-
   Path (ECMP) scenarios in current networks; and many of network
   devices select forwarding interfaces based on the result of hash
   calculation on the quintuple {source IP address, destination IP
   address, source port number, destination port number, IP protocol
   number}. There are other load balancing algorithm, such as
   [I-D.ietf-intarea-flow-label-balancing][], which based on the triple
   of {source IP address, destination IP address, flow label} in IPv6.
   Therefore, the path traced by these ping/trace mechanisms may not be
   replicable by the IP flows at all.  In other word, it is common that
   the real IP flows go through different paths from the result these
   ping/trace functions.

   Furthermore, these current ping/trace mechanisms only provide very
   simple information of path, mainly the addresses of intermediate
   nodes only.  It is far from sufficient information to determine the
   network fault and make dynamic adjustment based on it.  More
   information, such as link bandwidth, link congestion, etc., is
   desired if a better path trace mechanism was going to be designed.

   With the above mentioned issues of current ping/trace mechanisms,
   this document describes requirements for a new path trace mechanism.
   If all these requirements were met, network administrators should be
   able to easily get the real path information which a specific IP
   service flow goes through in the heterogeneous network environments,
   and also can get many more information regarding to intermediate
   devices and links.  Based on the information, network administrators
   can locate the possible faults of the network quickly and may
   optimize network resources better to provide better network
   performance for their customers. .

2.  Conventions Used in This Document









Yin, et al.              Expires April 24, 2014                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft        Flow Path Trace Requirements          October 2013


   L2VPN   Layer-2 Virtual Private Networks
   L3VPN   Layer-3 Virtual Private Networks
   VRF     Virtual Routing and Forwarding
   LAG     Link Aggregation
   ECMP    Equal-Cost Multi-Path


3.  Function Requirement for a new IP Flow Path Trace Mechanism

3.1.  Requirement for path trace across heterogeneous network
      environments

   A new IP flow path trace mechanism should be able to traverse
   heterogeneous network environments and gather the path information of
   intermediate devices and links.  The heterogeneous network
   environments include native IPv4, native IPv6, MPLS, PWE3, VPLS,
   L2VPN, L3VPN, tunnels, translation, etc.

   The new IP flow path trace mechanism should trace an end-to-end path
   or paths, no matter what intermediate network environment may go
   through.  It should gather the information, described in Section 3.3,
   and return them to the initiating node, which is normally the source
   of the end-to-end path.

   The trace function may be trigger by a remote network manage device
   through a management protocol and the trace result may be
   automatically report back to this remote network manage device.
   However, it is independent from the requirements of the IP flow path
   trace mechanism.

3.2.  IP flow based path trace requirements

   Many IP services are managed based on IP flow.  Between two giving
   nodes, there may be more than one IP flows and each IP flow may take
   different path, because the triple {source IP address, destination IP
   address, IP protocol number} are not sufficient to decide the path.

   One of the purposes of the required new IP flow path trace mechanism
   is to trace the real path, which a specific IP service goes through.
   This would enable the network administrator to manage the network
   resource on this specific path in order to provide the best
   performance.

   Therefore, the new required path trace requirements should be IP flow
   based.  With a giving IP flow information, which is identified by the
   quintuple {source IP address, destination IP address, source port
   number, destination port number, IP protocol number} or triple
   {source IP address, destination IP address, flow label} in IPv6, the



Yin, et al.              Expires April 24, 2014                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft        Flow Path Trace Requirements          October 2013


   new IP flow path trace mechanism should trace its end-to-end path or
   all possible paths.

3.3.  Required information relevant to path

   This section describes the information is desired when a new IP flow
   path trace mechanism is designed.

   o  Intermediate node information: the identification information of
      each node which the specific IP flow goes through in the network.
      The information may be IP address, Router ID or MPLS LSR ID of
      each node.

   o  Incoming interface and outgoing interface information: the
      incoming interface information and outgoing interface information
      of each node which the specific IP flow goes through in the
      network.  The information must include the interface's IP address
      and may include interface name information.

   o  MPLS label information: the MPLS forwarding label information if
      the flow goes through MPLS network.  The information should
      include the incoming label and the outgoing label information of
      the LSP.  If VRF or PW are used to bear the IP flow, the
      information should include the incoming label and the outgoing
      label information for the VRF and PW.

   o  Link bandwidth information: the link bandwidth information of the
      incoming interface and outgoing interface of each node which the
      IP flow goes through in the network.  The information should
      include the total bandwidth and the current bandwidth usage ratio.

   o  Link congestion information: the link congestion information of
      the incoming interface and outgoing interface of each node which
      the IP flow goes through in the network.  The information should
      include the indication of congestion or not, further, usage
      information of the Quality of Service (QoS) queue which IP flow
      belongs to.

   o  LAG&ECMP information: if outgoing interface is LAG or exist ECMP,
      the system must be able to accurately determine the load balance
      forwarding choice of the real IP, and also should get the LAG or
      ECMP number information.

   o  Tunnel information: the information whether the IP Flow is
      tunneled and the information regarding to the tunnel.  It may
      include the intermediate devices the tunnel transmits over.





Yin, et al.              Expires April 24, 2014                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft        Flow Path Trace Requirements          October 2013


   o  Translation information: the information how the IP flow has been
      translated by a translation intermediate devices.  It should
      include the mapping information from original address and port to
      translated address and port.

   o  More information: more path trace information may be extended in
      the future so that more information relevant to IP flow path can
      be gathered.

3.4.  Security requirements

   o  Anti-DDOS (Distributed Denial of Service)
      An attacker can launch a number of tracing processes to the
      network nodes, resulting in DDOS attacks.  So the network node
      should implement flow control for the messages of the new tracing
      function to avoid the attack.

   o  Prevention of Network Information Spying Attack
      The tracing function may enable an attacker to collect the
      information of the network, including topology, bandwidth, usage
      rate, etc.  There must mechanisms to prevent such a threat and
      system information leak.

4.  Security Considerations

   The Section 3.4 presents the security consideration/requirements for
   a solution that design to meet the IP flow path trace requirements.

5.  IANA Considerations

   This draft does not request any IANA action.

6.  Acknowledgements

   The authors wish to acknowledge the important contributions of
   Zhenbin Li and Mach Chen.

   This document was produced using the xml2rfc tool [RFC2629].

7.  Informative References

   [I-D.ietf-intarea-flow-label-balancing]
              Carpenter, B., Jiang, S., and W. Tarreau, "Using the IPv6
              Flow Label for Server Load Balancing", draft-ietf-intarea-
              flow-label-balancing-02 (work in progress), October 2013.

   [RFC0792]  Postel, J., "Internet Control Message Protocol", STD 5,
              RFC 792, September 1981.



Yin, et al.              Expires April 24, 2014                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft        Flow Path Trace Requirements          October 2013


   [RFC1853]  Simpson, W., "IP in IP Tunneling", RFC 1853, October 1995.

   [RFC2473]  Conta, A. and S. Deering, "Generic Packet Tunneling in
              IPv6 Specification", RFC 2473, December 1998.

   [RFC2629]  Rose, M., "Writing I-Ds and RFCs using XML", RFC 2629,
              June 1999.

   [RFC3031]  Rosen, E., Viswanathan, A., and R. Callon, "Multiprotocol
              Label Switching Architecture", RFC 3031, January 2001.

   [RFC3985]  Bryant, S. and P. Pate, "Pseudo Wire Emulation Edge-to-
              Edge (PWE3) Architecture", RFC 3985, March 2005.

   [RFC4364]  Rosen, E. and Y. Rekhter, "BGP/MPLS IP Virtual Private
              Networks (VPNs)", RFC 4364, February 2006.

   [RFC4379]  Kompella, K. and G. Swallow, "Detecting Multi-Protocol
              Label Switched (MPLS) Data Plane Failures", RFC 4379,
              February 2006.

   [RFC4664]  Andersson, L. and E. Rosen, "Framework for Layer 2 Virtual
              Private Networks (L2VPNs)", RFC 4664, September 2006.

   [RFC4762]  Lasserre, M. and V. Kompella, "Virtual Private LAN Service
              (VPLS) Using Label Distribution Protocol (LDP) Signaling",
              RFC 4762, January 2007.

   [RFC5085]  Nadeau, T. and C. Pignataro, "Pseudowire Virtual Circuit
              Connectivity Verification (VCCV): A Control Channel for
              Pseudowires", RFC 5085, December 2007.

   [RFC6073]  Martini, L., Metz, C., Nadeau, T., Bocci, M., and M.
              Aissaoui, "Segmented Pseudowire", RFC 6073, January 2011.

Authors' Addresses

   Yuanbin Yin
   Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd
   Q15, Huawei Campus, No.156 Beiqing Road
   Hai-Dian District, Beijing, 100095
   P.R. China

   Email: yinyuanbin@huawei.com







Yin, et al.              Expires April 24, 2014                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft        Flow Path Trace Requirements          October 2013


   Sheng Jiang
   Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd
   Q14, Huawei Campus, No.156 Beiqing Road
   Hai-Dian District, Beijing, 100095
   P.R. China

   Email: jiangsheng@huawei.com


   Gang Yan
   Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd
   Q15, Huawei Campus, No.156 Beiqing Road
   Hai-Dian District, Beijing, 100095
   P.R. China

   Email: yangang@huawei.com



































Yin, et al.              Expires April 24, 2014                 [Page 8]
