


ALTO Working Group                                           Z. Dulinski
Internet-Draft                                   Jagiellonian University
Intended status: Informational                                P. Wydrych
Expires: September 5, 2011                                R. Stankiewicz
                                                               P. Cholda
                                                               M. Kantor
                                           AGH University of Science and
                                                              Technology
                                                           March 4, 2011


               Inter-ALTO Communication Problem Statement
             draft-dulinski-alto-inter-problem-statement-00

Abstract

   This draft considers an approach to the optimization of the traffic
   generated by the overlay (peer-to-peer) applications, where some
   information on inter-AS (Autonomous System) paths is obtained with
   the usage of dedicated communication scheme known as inter-ALTO
   communication.

   The large amount of network traffic generated by overlay applications
   requires effective management.  This traffic traverses inter-AS links
   and thus generates substantial costs for the operators and poses
   problems with overload on the external and internal links.  The
   traffic is not time-stable as the peers connect and disconnect very
   often.  Additionally, when the overlay traffic is observed on
   inter-AS links, it can be seen that sources and destinations change
   in a very short period of time.  The ALTO (Application-Layer Traffic
   Optimization) service provides the information that enables more
   efficient management of the overlay traffic.  Such applications can
   use the information to perform better-than-random peer selection.
   The ALTO servers are responsible for a pre-selection procedure; the
   final selection is done by overlay clients and then the ALTO protocol
   conveys network information to applications.  To be credible, this
   information should be as close to real network situation as possible.
   However, some types of data are not hold by an operator, but they
   should be gained on the basis of the additional information exchange
   with other AS operators.  This document presents rationale for the
   need of introduction of the inter-ALTO communication.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering



Dulinski, et al.        Expires September 5, 2011               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft        Inter-ALTO Problem Statement            March 2011


   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 5, 2011.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


























Dulinski, et al.        Expires September 5, 2011               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft        Inter-ALTO Problem Statement            March 2011


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4

   2.  Definitions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5

   3.  The Problem and Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.1.  Route Asymmetry  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     3.2.  Different Types of Business Relations  . . . . . . . . . .  8
     3.3.  Congestion Avoidance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     3.4.  Proximity Awareness  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     3.5.  Remote ISP's Preference  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     3.6.  Coordination of ISPs' Policies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     3.7.  Sensitivity of Topology Information  . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     3.8.  Outdated Information . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11

   4.  Usage of the Mechanisms Offered by the ALTO Protocol . . . . . 11

   5.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12

   6.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13

   7.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13

   8.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13

   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
























Dulinski, et al.        Expires September 5, 2011               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft        Inter-ALTO Problem Statement            March 2011


1.  Introduction

   This document describes the rationale for a communication to be used
   between ALTO servers located in different autonomous systems (AS).
   Such an inter-ALTO communication extends the ALTO service
   [RFC5693]capabilities and provides additional information on remote
   peers, i.e., peers located in other ASes.  To make the consideration
   more clear we distinguish local AS and remote ASes.  Local AS is the
   one from which perspective we describe the communication.  Local
   peers are located in the local AS and are served by a local ALTO
   server.  On the contrary, all other peers are located in remote ASes.
   Those peers are referred to as remote and are served by remote ALTO
   server.  This basic terminology adheres to majority of considerations
   in this document.

   The motivation for the ALTO service as discussed in the ALTO problem
   statement [RFC5693] focuses on the overlay traffic optimization based
   on information gathered from the Internet Service Provider (ISP)
   domain, i.e., an Autonomous System (AS).  Due to the suggested
   approach, information on the AS internal topology and some routing
   information obtained from the global Internet (the BGP routing
   tables) may be used for the peer selection procedures.  The data
   transfer cost can be also incorporated.  However, there are some
   parameters which can be used for the better peer selection mechanism,
   but they are not available in the local AS and must be obtained from
   outside, i.e., from a remote AS.  For example, the BGP routing
   information available in the AS identifies only the upstream traffic.
   The information about the downstream traffic is not present or is
   incomplete and the full BGP information for this traffic could be
   obtained from the remote AS containing the subnetwork where the peer
   sending downstream traffic is attached.  In order to obtain such
   data, we propose the inter-ALTO communication.

   It is assumed that the ALTO servers are deployed in the local and
   remote ASes.  The ALTO server located in the client AS can request
   desired information from the ALTO server which is located in the
   remote AS.  Each server is managed by a respective ISP.  Each ISP
   decides what type of information can be exposed to the requesting
   party.  The ALTO server responds with the type of information that
   was previously agreed to exchange.  Each local ALTO server has to
   discover the address of the remote ALTO server before starting the
   communication.  The discovery procedure may use the IP addresses of
   remote peers for the establishment of IP addresses of remote ALTO
   servers.  The detailed analysis of this functionality is out of scope
   of this document.

   The information delivered by remote ALTO servers may be used by a
   local ALTO server to perform advanced rating/ranking procedure of



Dulinski, et al.        Expires September 5, 2011               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft        Inter-ALTO Problem Statement            March 2011


   peers.  The general idea is as follows.

   1.  A peer receives a list of other peers from a tracker, i.e., a
       list of potential candidates to communicate with.

   2.  A peer uses the ALTO protocol [I-D.ietf-alto-protocol] to send
       the list of peers to its local ALTO server.

   3.  Local ALTO server obtains additional information on remote peers
       by communicating respective remote ALTO servers.  If sufficient
       information is available locally and the inter-ALTO communication
       is not needed, this step is omitted.

   4.  Using ISP specific policies and values of parameters associated
       with remote peers the local ALTO server performs rating/ranking
       procedure.

   5.  Sorted/rated list of peers is sent back to the peer with usage of
       the ALTO protocol.

   The requirements, syntax and detailed operation of the inter-ALTO
   communication as well as the rating/ranking procedure is out of scope
   of this document.


2.  Definitions

   In the scope of this document we use all the definitions specified in
   the Section 2 of ALTO problem statement [RFC5693].  Moreover, the
   following terms have the special meaning.

   Local Peer:  A peer which belongs to the same Autonomous System to
         which the ALTO client belongs.

   Remote Peer:  A peer which belongs to another Autonomous System than
         the one to which the ALTO client belongs.

   Local AS:  The Autonomous System to which the ALTO client belongs.

   Remote AS:  An Autonomous System to which a remote peer belongs.

   Local ALTO Server:  The ALTO server serving the ALTO client and the
         local peers.

   Remote ALTO Server:  An ALTO server serving remote peers.






Dulinski, et al.        Expires September 5, 2011               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft        Inter-ALTO Problem Statement            March 2011


3.  The Problem and Motivation

   ALTO server optimization capabilities are limited by the fact that
   they use information available locally only.  It can be shown that
   more information on remote peers, a routing path, or remote ISP
   preferences would be useful.  The data from remote ASes obtained by
   the external interface as shown in Figure 1 of the ALTO protocol
   draft [I-D.ietf-alto-protocol] may have a substantial significance
   for the management of overlay traffic (e.g. with respect to peer
   rating, ranking, or the choice of the best peers).  The suggested
   approach to deliver these types of information is defined in the
   inter-ALTO communication discussed in this document.

   The ALTO service may also be used by the client-server applications,
   supporting the best choice of the mirror servers.  If some mirror
   servers are in other ASes than the client's AS, some information
   about the network conditions in the remote ASes may be delivered only
   by the ALTO servers localized in these ASes.  Both clients and mirror
   servers may communicate with their local ALTO servers for delivering
   traffic optimization parameters.  As an ALTO client communicates only
   with its local ALTO server, the information from remote ASes is
   accessible only via inter-ALTO communication.

   The ALTO-based traffic optimization may be also used in the context
   of the Content Delivery Networks (CDNs) [I-D.penno-alto-cdn].  Penno
   et al. discuss how the ALTO service can be used in the existing and
   future CDNs.  They consider the case when the CDN nodes are in
   multiple administrative domains.  In that case the inter-ALTO
   communication is used.

   The basic ALTO architecture presented in Figure 1 of the ALTO
   protocol draft [I-D.ietf-alto-protocol] defines the external
   interface used to communicate with other information sources like
   remote ALTO servers.  The ALTO Protocol draft, however, does not
   define what information should be exchanged between ALTO servers to
   optimize the traffic.  The inter-ALTO communication proposed by the
   current document implements the external interface as defined by the
   ALTO protocol draft.













Dulinski, et al.        Expires September 5, 2011               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft        Inter-ALTO Problem Statement            March 2011


   +------------------------+                 +------------------------+
   |        Local AS        |                 |       Remote AS        |
   | +-------------+        |                 |       +-------------+  |
   | | Local       |+       |                 |       | Remote      |+ |
   | | Information ||       |                 |       | Information || |
   | | Sources     ||       |                 |       | Sources     || |
   | +-------------+|       |                 |       +-------------+| |
   |  + ------------+       |                 |        + ------------+ |
   |          \             |                 |             /          |
   |           \            |                 |            /           |
   |            +--------+  |  Inter-ALTO     |  +--------+            |
   |            | Local  |  |  Communication  |  | Remote |            |
   |            | ALTO   |-----------------------| ALTO   |            |
   |            | Server |  |                 |  | Server |            |
   |            +--------+  |                 |  +--------+            |
   |           /            |                 |            \           |
   |          /             |                 |             \          |
   | +---------+            |                 |           +---------+  |
   | | Local   |+           |                 |           | Remote  |+ |
   | | ALTO    ||           |                 |           | ALTO    || |
   | | Clients ||           |                 |           | Clients || |
   | +---------+|           |                 |           +---------+| |
   |  +---------+           |                 |            +---------+ |
   |                        |                 |                        |
   +------------------------+                 +------------------------+

             Figure 1: Inter-ALTO communication architecture.

   The architecture of the Inter-ALTO communication is shown in
   Figure 1.  Both ALTO servers gather the information from their
   information sources like routing protocols, provisioning policies, or
   dynamic network information sources.  The local ALTO server needs to
   communicate with a remote ALTO server to obtain information which is
   available only at the entities in the remote AS.

   In particular, the following key aspects motivate the proposal of the
   inter-ALTO communication.

   o  Route asymmetry.

   o  Different types of business relations.

   o  Congestion avoidance.

   o  Proximity awareness (distance to the remote AS), e.g.:

      *  number of inter-AS hops;




Dulinski, et al.        Expires September 5, 2011               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft        Inter-ALTO Problem Statement            March 2011


      *  delay (RTT).

   o  Remote ISP's preference.

   o  Coordination of ISPs' policies.

   o  Outdated information.

3.1.  Route Asymmetry

   The communication between two ASes does not need to follow the same
   path in the upstream and downstream direction.  It was shown that
   about 29% of paths between AS pairs in the Internet are fully
   symmetric, i.e., upstream and downstream traffic follows exactly the
   same path [ICC.optimal].  In 51% of cases the number of inter-AS hops
   is different for the upstream and downstream direction.
   Additionally, in 50.5% of all path pairs a neighbor AS for upstream
   and downstream paths are different.

   The ALTO server can obtain routing information locally (e.g. from BGP
   routers) and can determine the upstream path.  Information about the
   downstream path is usually not easily available.  Some additional
   routing information can be obtained from Looking Glass Servers, but
   not all ASes provide them.  The inter-ALTO communication provides the
   ability to exchange the relevant information between ALTO servers.
   Especially, the downstream path can be reliably determined using the
   information provided by remote ALTO server.  In the light of route
   asymmetry in the Internet such information appears to be necessary
   for a better optimization of a peer rating/ranking algorithm, as
   assumption that the inter-AS routes follow symmetrical paths can give
   not only sub-optimal, but misleading and, in effect, harmful results.

3.2.  Different Types of Business Relations

   Two basic business relations between ISPs may be distinguished.

   When two ISPs agree to exchange the traffic without any charge, such
   a relation is called peering.  The inter-domain link between the
   respective ASes is also called a peering link.  Usually, there is no
   charge if the difference between traffic volumes passing such a link
   in different directions does not exceed a previously agreed limit.

   The other case occurs when one ISP serves as a network provider to
   another ISP (e.g. relation between tier 2 and tier 3 ISPs).  In such
   a case one ISP (acting as a customer) has to pay the other ISP
   (acting as provider) for the traffic sent over the inter-AS link
   connecting them.  The real monetary cost of the traffic volume
   exchanged on such a link depends on agreements between ISPs.  In



Dulinski, et al.        Expires September 5, 2011               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft        Inter-ALTO Problem Statement            March 2011


   general, some links may be considered as cheaper or more expensive.

   AS may be connected to many other ASes with various agreements.  The
   cost of the inter-AS traffic transfer may differ depending on which
   neighbor AS the path passes.  For this reason an ISP may prefer that
   its own customers exchange data with remote peers located in such
   ASes that the path directed to them passes cheaper links.  The ALTO
   server may sort peers taking into account these criteria.  To receive
   almost complete information on routing paths to and from different
   remote domains the information provided by remote ALTO server using
   inter-AS communication may be helpful.

3.3.  Congestion Avoidance

   A peer rating/ranking procedure may also take into account the
   congestions on inter-AS links.  An ISP is able to monitor queues on
   its inter-domain links and assign metrics indicating the buffer
   occupancy or bandwidth utilization.  These metrics can express
   percentage use of buffers or bandwidth on a particular inter-AS link.
   If one inter-domain link is congested it is desirable to promote
   peers reachable through lightly loaded links.  Again, information
   provided by the remote ALTO server would support such optimization.
   The aim of the inter-ALTO communication is not to replace the
   existing congestion avoidance mechanisms.  The idea is to support the
   present mechanism by the exchange of parameters describing the load
   on the inter-AS links.

3.4.  Proximity Awareness

   For a set of reasons (e.g. the performance of an application) the
   ALTO server may suggest its customers to connect to remote peers
   located in its proximity.  The simplest measure of proximity is the
   number of inter-AS hops.  As indicated above, due to the route
   asymmetry, the number of hops may significantly differ between the
   upstream and downstream paths.  Such information for the downstream
   path may be provided by the remote ALTO server.  A more advanced
   metric of proximity can be found in the delay that can be
   approximated by exchanging messages between ALTO servers.  The ALTO
   servers can be equipped with an application-layer ping functionality
   which only operates between ALTO servers.  By exchanging special
   packets prepared by the ALTO servers, these servers can estimate
   delay and packet loss.

3.5.  Remote ISP's Preference

   If two ISPs agree on a cooperation, the remote ALTO server may
   provide its preference parameters (remote preference parameters)
   indicating which peers are better from the point of view of the



Dulinski, et al.        Expires September 5, 2011               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft        Inter-ALTO Problem Statement            March 2011


   remote ISP.  For instance, the AS in which the remote ALTO server is
   located may possess two subnetworks connected to the operator's core
   network by distinct links.  It may happen that a connection to one of
   the subnetworks is cheaper than the other.  The remote operator may
   prefer connections through cheaper link, so peers located in the
   subnetwork transferring data via this cheaper link are preferred.

   The remote preference parameter may be also used when a remote ISP
   wants to suggest peers which are connected to the Internet through
   access links of higher capacity.  This way, the remote ALTO server,
   without exposing the exact values of access link bandwidth, may
   indicate peers with higher throughput.  The remote preference
   parameters have only local meaning, i.e., their values are comparable
   for peers located in the same AS only.

   If a remote ISP does not want to reveal numerical values of network
   parameters related to its peers (such information might be considered
   as confidential) the remote ALTO server may perform a rating/ranking
   procedure and assign priority parameter to its peers.  The rating/
   ranking criteria may remain hidden for the requesting local ALTO
   server.

3.6.  Coordination of ISPs' Policies

   Operators may have an incentive to coordinate their efforts in order
   to decrease transfer costs on inter-AS links or improve quality
   experienced by peers, i.e., coordinate their peer rating/ranking
   strategies.  This way, operators may avoid contradictory strategies
   resulting in inefficiency of rating/ranking algorithms.  Operators
   may agree to promote each other's peers.

   For example, it may happen that operator A wanting to decrease
   traffic on one of its links discourages its own peers from
   communicating with peers located in operator B's domain.  On the
   other hand, operator B would consider peers located in a domain of
   operator A as very attractive for its own peers.  As a result,
   rating/ranking procedures performed by respective ALTO servers give
   contradictory results what may decrease the effectiveness of these
   procedures.  To avoid such a situation, the inter-ALTO communication
   is needed.

   Another example of a usefulness of coordination of policies is
   clustering of ASes.  Recent studies [IJNM.unfairness] have shown that
   locality promotion might be ineffective or even harmful if used in AS
   with small number of peers.  A proposed solution is to create a
   cluster of two or more ASes.  Then ALTO servers serving different
   ASes in the cluster treat all peers located in the cluster as if they
   were in a single AS.  In other words, from a point of view of



Dulinski, et al.        Expires September 5, 2011              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft        Inter-ALTO Problem Statement            March 2011


   locality promotion algorithm all peers located in the cluster are
   local, regardless of their home AS.

3.7.  Sensitivity of Topology Information

   The minimum information that the remote AS provides to the local ALTO
   server via the inter-ALTO communication may be the number of inter-AS
   hops and the number of the local AS's neighbor in the downstream path
   (the full downstream AS_PATH may be not exchanged).  Such information
   does not reveal any sensitive information neither on the ISP internal
   topology details nor remote AS connections with other ASes, but does
   provide basic and very useful information for the local ALTO server.

3.8.  Outdated Information

   It is expected that some information (parameters) from routing
   protocols that will be used in the rating/ranking procedures may
   outdate.  Also information related to the network performance is
   constantly changing.  Therefore, the information obtained from the
   remote AS requires updates.  This updates may be generated on request
   (pull mechanism), on event base schema or periodically (push
   mechanism).  The inter-ALTO communication should be equipped with
   mechanisms for updates.  The need for the present information
   describing network conditions and some routing parameters are
   arguments for introducing specific protocol for the communication
   between ALTO servers.


4.  Usage of the Mechanisms Offered by the ALTO Protocol

   The basic ALTO protocol architecture allows an ALTO server to
   communicate with a third party through the external interface.  The
   inter-ALTO communication may use some functionalities offered by the
   ALTO protocol [I-D.ietf-alto-protocol].

   Server Information Service:  This service defined by the ALTO
         protocol may be extended in order to provide information about
         server's ability to cooperate with other ALTO servers.  Thanks
         to this service, the other ALTO servers may acquire the
         information about available parameters and their definitions.
         These parameters may be used by cooperating ALTO servers for
         the peer rating/ranking procedures.  The access for this
         service may be restricted.  Some information may be accessible
         only by the privileged ALTO servers after the successful
         authentication.






Dulinski, et al.        Expires September 5, 2011              [Page 11]

Internet-Draft        Inter-ALTO Problem Statement            March 2011


   ALTO Information Services:  These services has been defined to
         provide the query information services for ALTO clients.  All
         the information delivered by these services has local meaning.
         This information is related to the locally defined parameters
         describing a particular ISP's network.  Some part of this
         information managed by a remote ALTO server may be useful for
         the requesting local ALTO server.  The requesting ALTO server
         obtains this information via inter-ALTO communication.  After
         receiving the response, the local ALTO server has to perform
         some calculations, scaling, merging, or adaptation of the
         received parameters.  In this way the local ALTO server may
         conform to both its internal network topology and measurements,
         and the external ones.  However, it should be stressed that the
         ALTO Information Services is designed for communication between
         ALTO clients and servers, not for the inter-ALTO communication.

   Network Map:  This structure is defined by the ISP and reflects the
         internal structure of the ISP network.  This structure has only
         a local meaning and, generally, it is not unique for all
         entities within the Internet.
         A particular network map can be used by different operators.
         The requesting ALTO server usually has to perform some
         prediction of the external topology on its own.  The ALTO
         server has to apply its own rules and definitions.  The PIDs,
         defined in the remote ALTO server, have to be mapped on the PID
         structure defined in the local AS.

   Cost Map:  This structure also has the local meaning.  The local ALTO
         server may receive the network map and the cost map from a
         remote ALTO server.  These costs may require recalculation in
         order to unify the cost measures in the local AS.  After these
         operations, if it is needed, the rating/ranking procedure can
         be performed.


5.  Security Considerations

   The communication between ALTO servers requires authentication and
   authorization procedures.  In some cases it may require establishment
   of the secured tunnels between the partner ALTO servers.  The minimum
   security requirements for the inter-ALTO communication is out of
   scope of this document.

   The inter-ALTO communication allows ALTO servers to exchange any
   parameters which improve the performance of the overlay traffic, or,
   generally, allows them to manage overlay traffic.  In order to
   achieve this results a group ISP may exchange sensitive data, the
   exchanged parameters may be confidential.  They should not be



Dulinski, et al.        Expires September 5, 2011              [Page 12]

Internet-Draft        Inter-ALTO Problem Statement            March 2011


   accessible by a third party, e.g., some other ISPs or peers.

   An ISP may have its own policy how organize the overlay traffic and
   this policy may use a number of parameters during the evaluation
   procedure.  The policy result may be delivered to peers in many ways.
   It can take the form of a sorted peer list without any parameters, a
   sorted list with some parameters which are derived from the
   parameters exchanged in the inter-ALTO communication, or raw
   exchanged parameters.  ISPs may have an incentive not to expose these
   parameters in the raw form to peers.  The mentioned sensitive
   parameters require applying a higher level of the security
   procedures.

   In order to keep the exchanged parameters confidential it may be
   reasonable to keep the communications between peers and ALTO server
   from communication among ALTO servers by the protocol differentiation
   separated.  Different security procedures may be easier to manage if
   these communication procedures take the form of two distinct
   protocols.  This protocol separation allows to define mechanisms
   which are specific for the inter-ALTO communication only.  The
   protocol should not allow to use this mechanism by overlay peers.
   The set of procedures for the inter-ALTO communication is expected to
   be separated from the client ALTO communication and this can be
   achieved by distinct protocols.


6.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no actions for IANA.


7.  Acknowledgements

   This draft evolved from draft-dulinski-alto-inter-alto-protocol-00.
   The authors would like to thank all authors of the Inter-ALTO
   communication protocol draft for their contributions.

   This work has been partially supported by the EU through the ICT FP7
   Project SmoothIT (FP7-2007-ICT-216259).


8.  Informative References

   [I-D.ietf-alto-protocol]
              Alimi, R., Penno, R., and Y. Yang, "ALTO Protocol",
              draft-ietf-alto-protocol-06 (work in progress),
              October 2010.




Dulinski, et al.        Expires September 5, 2011              [Page 13]

Internet-Draft        Inter-ALTO Problem Statement            March 2011


   [I-D.penno-alto-cdn]
              Penno, R., Raghunath, S., Medved, J., Alimi, R., Yang, R.,
              and S. Previdi, "ALTO and Content Delivery Networks",
              draft-penno-alto-cdn-02 (work in progress), October 2010.

   [ICC.optimal]
              Dulinski, Z., Kantor, M., Krzysztofek, W., Stankiewicz,
              R., and P. Cholda, "Optimal Choice of Peers based on BGP
              Information", Proceedings of 2010 IEEE International
              Conference on Communications (ICC), May 2010.

   [IJNM.unfairness]
              Lehrieder, F., Oechsner, S., Hossfeld, T., Staehle, D.,
              Despotovic, Z., Kellerer, W., and M. Michel, "Mitigating
              unfairness in locality-aware peer-to-peer networks",
              International Journal of Network Management, Volume 21,
              Issue 1, pp. 3-20, January/February 2011.

   [RFC5693]  Seedorf, J. and E. Burger, "Application-Layer Traffic
              Optimization (ALTO) Problem Statement", RFC 5693,
              October 2009.


Authors' Addresses

   Zbigniew Dulinski
   Jagiellonian University
   ul. Reymonta 4
   Krakow  30-059
   Poland

   Phone: +48 12 663 5571
   Fax:   +48 12 633 4079
   Email: dulinski@th.if.uj.edu.pl


   Piotr Wydrych
   AGH University of Science and Technology
   al. Mickiewicza 30
   Krakow  30-059
   Poland

   Phone: +48 12 617 4817
   Fax:   +48 12 634 2372
   Email: piotr.wydrych@agh.edu.pl






Dulinski, et al.        Expires September 5, 2011              [Page 14]

Internet-Draft        Inter-ALTO Problem Statement            March 2011


   Rafal Stankiewicz
   AGH University of Science and Technology
   al. Mickiewicza 30
   Krakow  30-059
   Poland

   Phone: +48 12 617 4036
   Fax:   +48 12 634 2372
   Email: rstankie@agh.edu.pl


   Piotr Cholda
   AGH University of Science and Technology
   al. Mickiewicza 30
   Krakow  30-059
   Poland

   Phone: +48 12 617 4036
   Fax:   +48 12 634 2372
   Email: piotr.cholda@agh.edu.pl


   Miroslaw Kantor
   AGH University of Science and Technology
   al. Mickiewicza 30
   Krakow  30-059
   Poland

   Phone: +48 12 617 2852
   Fax:   +48 12 634 2372
   Email: kantor@kt.agh.edu.pl




















Dulinski, et al.        Expires September 5, 2011              [Page 15]

