


Network Working Group                                         O. Kolkman
Internet-Draft                                                NLnet Labs
Intended status: BCP                                          R. Housley
Expires: October 1, 2011                            Virgil Security, LLC
                                                          March 30, 2011


                   Ex officio membership to the IASA
              draft-kolkman-iasa-ex-officio-membership-00

Abstract

   This memo allows I* chairs to delegate the responsibilities under
   their ex officio membership to the IAOC to somebody else.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on October 1, 2011.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect



Kolkman & Housley        Expires October 1, 2011                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft         Ex officio IASA membership             March 2011


   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

1.  Introduction

   [RFC4071]appoints the IETF chair, the IAB chair, and the ISOC
   President/CEO as ex officio voting members to the IAOC and the IETF
   Trust[RFC4371].  Allowing flexibility in this appointment model
   allows the burden on these leadership position to be reduced which
   makes them more attractive for potential candidates.

2.  IAOC and Trust Membership modification

   The IETF chair, the IAB chair, and the ISOC President/CEO may
   delegate their responsibilities to other persons.  The delegations by
   the IETF chair and the IAB chair need to be confirmed by the IESG and
   IAB respectively.  The terms of delegation is for a longer term for
   instance aligned with the IESG and IAB appointment cycles (roughly
   anual).

3.  Security Considerations

   There are no security considerations.

4.  IANA Considerations

   [TO BE REMOVED AT TIME OF PUBLICATION AS RFC]

   There are no IANA considerations.

5.  Acknowledgements

   Earlier variations of this modification of BCP101 were proposed by
   John Klensin, who acknowledged Spencer Dawkins and Joel Halpern for
   their suggestions.

6.  References

6.1.  Normative References

   [RFC4071]  Austein, R. and B. Wijnen, "Structure of the IETF
              Administrative Support Activity (IASA)", BCP 101,
              RFC 4071, April 2005.

   [RFC4371]  Carpenter, B. and L. Lynch, "BCP 101 Update for IPR
              Trust", BCP 101, RFC 4371, January 2006.



Kolkman & Housley        Expires October 1, 2011                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft         Ex officio IASA membership             March 2011


6.2.  Informative References

Appendix A.  Document info

   [This section is to be removed at publication]

   $Id: draft-ietf-iasa-chair-membership.xml 4 2011-03-28 12:35:20Z olaf
   $

Authors' Addresses

   Olaf M. Kolkman
   NLnet Labs

   EMail: olaf@nlnetlabs.nl


   Russel Housley
   Virgil Security, LLC

   EMail: housley@virgilsec.com






























Kolkman & Housley        Expires October 1, 2011                [Page 3]

