


Network Working Group                                         O. Kolkman
Internet-Draft                                                NLnet Labs
Intended status: BCP                                          R. Housley
Expires: January 25, 2012                           Virgil Security, LLC
                                                           July 24, 2011


                   Ex officio membership to the IASA
              draft-kolkman-iasa-ex-officio-membership-01

Abstract

   This memo modifies the IAOC's membership in such a way that it allows
   for a reduction of the I* chairs workload without reducing their
   ability gain and provide an intergrated perspective on the IAOC
   activities.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 25, 2012.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of



Kolkman & Housley       Expires January 25, 2012                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft         Ex officio IASA membership              July 2011


   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

1.  Introduction

   BCP101 [RFC4071][RFC4371] appoints the IETF chair, the IAB chair, and
   the ISOC President/CEO, collectively refered to as I*-chairs, as ex
   officio voting members to the IAOC and the IETF Trust.  Access to
   IAOC meetings and notes by these ex-officio members is important
   because first hand information about the trade-offs made in the IAOC
   will inform the I-Chairs activities, besides the I-Chairs can provide
   an integrated perspective about their bodies work to the IAOC.

   On the other hand, a lot of the IAOC work is 'business as usual' and
   presence of I-Chairs is not always required if it were not for the
   reasonable due dilligence requirements that come with being a voting
   member.

   Therefore, introduction of flexibility in the appointment model
   allows the burden on these leadership position to be reduced which
   makes those leadership positions more attractive for potential
   candidates.

   This memo describes the changes in the membership of the IAOC to
   achieve this while maintaining the ability for the I*-chairs to
   provide their (broad) persective to the IAOC activities.  The
   I*-chairs lose their voting rights, but maintain the possibility to
   influence decisions through direct participation in all IAOC and
   Trust activities.

   This document updates BCP101 ([RFC4071] and [RFC4371]).

2.  IAOC and Trust Membership modification

2.1.  Summary of Changes

   The IETF chair, the IAB chair, and the ISOC President/CEO will per
   default be non-voting ex-officio members of the the IAOC.  They are
   not members of the Trust.  They are explicity invited to all of the
   IAOC and Trust activities, including executive sessions, and have the
   right to advice, solicited or not.

   The ISOC board of Trustees, the IAB, and the IAOC will appoint two
   voting members instead of one.  The appointment term remains 2 years,



Kolkman & Housley       Expires January 25, 2012                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft         Ex officio IASA membership              July 2011


   the appointment cycle changes to a year.

   The I*-members are eligible for appointment by their respective
   bodies in which case they serve at the same terms as the appointed
   members.

2.2.  IAOC membership

   With these changes implemented the IAOC consists of eight voting
   members who shall be selected as follows:
   o  Two members appointed by the IETF Nominations Committee (NomCom);
   o  Two member appointed by the IESG;
   o  Two member appointed by the IAB; and
   o  Two member appointed by the ISOC Board of Trustees;
   Non-voting, ex-officio members of the IAOC are
   o  The IETF Chair;
   o  The IAB Chair;
   o  The ISOC President/CEO; and
   o  The IETF Administrative Director

2.3.  IAOC membership

   With these changes implemented the IETF Trust Consists of:
   o  The IAOC appointees; and
   o  The IETF Administrative director
   The IETF Chair, the IAB Chair, and ISOC President/CEO are permanent
   advisors to the Trust.

3.  Security Considerations

   There are no security considerations.

4.  IANA Considerations

   [TO BE REMOVED AT TIME OF PUBLICATION AS RFC]

   There are no IANA considerations.

5.  Acknowledgements

   Dave Crocker suggested the ex-officion member-ship in combination
   with the appointment of additional members.

   Earlier variations of this modification of BCP101 were proposed by
   John Klensin, who acknowledged Spencer Dawkins and Joel Halpern for
   their suggestions.

6.  References



Kolkman & Housley       Expires January 25, 2012                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft         Ex officio IASA membership              July 2011


6.1.  Normative References

   [RFC4071]  Austein, R. and B. Wijnen, "Structure of the IETF
              Administrative Support Activity (IASA)", BCP 101,
              RFC 4071, April 2005.

   [RFC4371]  Carpenter, B. and L. Lynch, "BCP 101 Update for IPR
              Trust", BCP 101, RFC 4371, January 2006.

6.2.  Informative References

Appendix A.  Document info

   [This section is to be removed at publication]

   $Id: draft-ietf-iasa-chair-membership.xml 10 2011-07-24 17:16:59Z
   olaf $

A.1.  Changes between version 0 and 1

   changed from delegation model to ex-officio non-voting, with extra
   members in place.

Authors' Addresses

   Olaf M. Kolkman
   NLnet Labs

   EMail: olaf@nlnetlabs.nl


   Russel Housley
   Virgil Security, LLC

   EMail: housley@virgilsec.com
















Kolkman & Housley       Expires January 25, 2012                [Page 4]

