


Network Working Group                                         O. Kolkman
Internet-Draft                                                NLnet Labs
Intended status: Informational                                S. Bradner
Expires: February 01, 2014                            Harvard University
                                                                  Turner
                                                              IECA, Inc.
                                                         August 02, 2013

                 Characterization of Proposed Standards
             draft-kolkman-proposed-standards-clarified-00

Abstract

   This document clarifies the description of the review performed on
   and the maturity level of IETF Proposed Standard RFCs.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on February 01, 2014.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (http://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Simplified BSD License text
   as described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  2
   2.  IESG Reveiew of Proposed Standards . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  2
   3.  Characterization of Specification  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  2

Kolkman, Bradner & TurnExpires February 01, 2014                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft             Proposed Standard                 August 2013

     3.1.  Characterization of IETF Proposed Standard Specifications   2
     3.2.  Characteristics of Internet Standards  . . . . . . . . . .  3
   4.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   5.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   6.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   Appendix A. Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   Appendix B. Internet Draft Editing History . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     Appendix B.1.  Version 00  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     Appendix B.2.  Editors versioning info . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5

1.  Introduction

   [Editor Note: ietf@ietf.org is the mailing-list for discussing this
   draft.]

   In the two decades after publication of RFC 2026 [RFC2026] the IESG
   has evolved its review processes of Proposed Standard RFCs and thus
   RFC 2026 section 4.1.1 no longer accurately describes IETF Proposed
   Standards.

   This document updates the characterization of Proposed Standards but
   does not speak to or alter the standard maintenance procedures from
   RFC 2026 and RFC 6410 [RFC6410].

2.  IESG Reveiew of Proposed Standards

   The entry-level maturity for the standards track is "Proposed
   Standard".  A specific action by the IESG is required to move a
   specification onto the standards track at the "Proposed Standard"
   level.

   Initially it was assumed that most IETF technical specifications
   would progress through a series of maturity stages starting with
   Proposed Standard, then progressing to Draft Standard then, finally,
   to Internet Standard (see RFC 2026 section 6).  Over time, for a
   number of reasons, this progression became less common.  In response,
   the IESG strengthened its review of Proposed Standards, basically
   operating as if the Proposed Standard was the last chance for the
   IESG to ensure the quality of the technology and the clarity of the
   standards document.  The result was that IETF Proposed Standards
   approved over the last decade or more have had extensive review.
   Because of this change in review assumptions, IETF Proposed Standards
   should be considered to be at least as mature as final standards from
   other standards development organizations.  In fact, the IETF review
   is more extensive than is done in other SDOs due to the cross-area
   technical review performed by the IESG.

3.  Characterization of Specification

   Section 3.1 updates RFC 2026 Section 4.1.1. Section 3.2 is a verbatim
   copy of the characterization of Internet Standards from RFC 2026
   Section 4.1.3.

3.1.  Characterization of IETF Proposed Standard Specifications


Kolkman, Bradner & TurnExpires February 01, 2014                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft             Proposed Standard                 August 2013


   The entry-level maturity for the standards track is "Proposed
   Standard".  A specific action by the IESG is required to move a
   specification onto the standards track at the "Proposed Standard"
   level.

   A Proposed Standard specification is stable, has resolved known
   design choices, is well-understood, has received significant
   community review, and appears to enjoy enough community interest to
   be considered valuable.  However, as with all technical standards,
   further experience might result in a change or even retraction of the
   specification in the future.

   Usually, neither implementation nor operational experience is
   required for the designation of a specification as a Proposed
   Standard.  However, such experience is highly desirable, and will
   usually represent a strong argument in favor of a Proposed Standard
   designation.

   The IESG may require implementation and/or operational experience
   prior to granting Proposed Standard status to a specification that
   materially affects the core Internet protocols or that specifies
   behavior that may have significant operational impact on the
   Internet.

   A Proposed Standard will have no known technical omissions with
   respect to the requirements placed upon it.  Proposed Standards are
   of such quality that implementations can be deployed in the Internet.
   However, as with all technical specifications, Proposed Standards may
   be revised if problems are found or better solutions are identified,
   when experiences with deploying implementations of such technologies
   at scale is gathered.

3.2.  Characteristics of Internet Standards

   An Internet Standard is characterized by a high degree of technical
   maturity and by a generally held belief that the specified protocol
   or service provides significant benefit to the Internet community.

4.  Security Considerations

   This document does not directly affect the security of the Internet.

5.  IANA Considerations

   There are no actions for IANA.

6.  References

   [RFC2026]  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision
              3", BCP 9, RFC 2026, October 1996.




Kolkman, Bradner & TurnExpires February 01, 2014                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft             Proposed Standard                 August 2013


   [RFC6410]  Housley, R., Crocker, D. and E. Burger, "Reducing the
              Standards Track to Two Maturity Levels", BCP 9, RFC 6410,
              October 2011.

Appendix A.  Acknowledgements

   This document is inspired by a discussion at the open microphone
   session during the technical plenary at IETF 87. Thanks for [to be
   added] for motivation, input and review.

Appendix B.  Internet Draft Editing History

   This section is to assist reviewers of this document.  It will be
   removed at publication as RFC.

Appendix B.1.  Version 00

   Introduction and motivation

   Verbatim copy from section 4.1.1 and 4.1.3 of [RFC2026] of the
   Proposed and ant Internet Draft characterization into Section 3.1 and
   Section 3.2

   Modification of paragraphs of the Proposed Standards
   characterization, namely:

   OLD:

   A Proposed Standard specification is generally stable, has resolved
   known design choices, is believed to be well-understood, has received
   significant community review, and appears to enjoy enough community
   interest to be considered valuable.  However, further experience
   might result in a change or even retraction of the specification
   before it advances.

   NEW:

   A Proposed Standard specification is stable, has resolved known
   design choices, is well-understood, has received significant
   community review, and appears to enjoy enough community interest to
   be considered valuable.  However, as with all technical standards,
   further experience might result in a change or even retraction of the
   specification in the future.

   OLD:

   A Proposed Standard should have no known technical omissions with
   respect to the requirements placed upon it.  However, the IESG may
   waive this requirement in order to allow a specification to advance
   to the Proposed Standard state when it is considered to be useful and
   necessary (and timely) even with known technical omissions.



Kolkman, Bradner & TurnExpires February 01, 2014                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft             Proposed Standard                 August 2013


   Implementors should treat Proposed Standards as immature
   specifications.  It is desirable to implement them in order to gain
   experience and to validate, test, and clarify the specification.
   However, since the content of Proposed Standards may be changed if
   problems are found or better solutions are identified, deploying
   implementations of such standards into a disruption-sensitive
   environment is not recommended.

   NEW:

   A Proposed Standard will have no known technical omissions with
   respect to the requirements placed upon it.  Proposed Standards are
   of such quality that implementations can be deployed in the Internet.
   However, as with all technical specifications, Proposed Standards may
   be revised if problems are found or better solutions are identified,
   when experiences with deploying implementations of such technologies
   at scale is gathered.

Appendix B.2.  Editors versioning info

   $Id: draft-kolkman-proposed-standards-clarified.xml 4 2013-08-02
   04:42:37Z olaf $

Authors' Addresses

   Olaf Kolkman
   Stichting NLnet Labs
   Science Park 400
   Amsterdam, 1098 XH
   The Netherlands
   
   Email: olaf@nlnetlabs.nl
   URI:   http://www.nlnetlabs.nl/


   Scott O. Bradner
   Harvard University Information Technology
   Innovation and Architecture
   1350 Mass Ave., Room 760
   Cambridge, MA 02138
   United States of America
   
   Phone: +1 617 495 3864
   Email: sob@harvard.edu
   URI:   http://www.harvard.edu/huit


   Sean Turner
   IECA, Inc.
   
   Email: turners@ieca.com


Kolkman, Bradner & TurnExpires February 01, 2014                [Page 5]
