


Network Working Group                                    O. Kolkman, Ed.
Internet-Draft                                          January 31, 2011
Intended status: Informational
Expires: August 4, 2011


                RFC Editor: RSE consensus documentation
                       draft-kolkman-rse-2011-00

Abstract

   This memo serves as a temporary placeholder for the documentation of
   consensus around the role and responsibilities surrounding the RFC
   Series Editor as developed on the rfc-interest list.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 4, 2011.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect



Kolkman                  Expires August 4, 2011                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                  RSE 2011                    January 2011


   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  The RFC Series Editor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
     2.1.  Executive Management of the Publication and Production
           function. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
     2.2.  Development of the RFC Publication series.  . . . . . . . . 4
   3.  RSE oversight . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
     3.1.  RSOC composition  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   4.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
     4.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
     4.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6


































Kolkman                  Expires August 4, 2011                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                  RSE 2011                    January 2011


1.  Introduction

   This memo tries to cast what I believe the consensus to be in
   language that is close to being the basis for text in 5620bis.  This
   is supposed to be (or quickly evolve into) the basis from which we
   will develop job descriptions and write an update to RFC5620 [1].

   In other words, once we converged this memo will be used as the basis
   for other documents and is not intended to be published as RFC.

   Editorial and other comments appear in [square brackets].

2.  The RFC Series Editor

   The RFC Series Editor(RSE) is an individual who assumes serval
   responsibilities.

2.1.  Executive Management of the Publication and Production function.

   o  The RSE provides input to the IASA budget, statements of work, and
      manages vendor selection processes.  The RSE performs annual
      reviews of the Production and Publication function which are then
      provided to IASA.

   o  Vendor selection is done in cooperation with the streams.

   o  The IASA has the responsibility to approve the total RSE budget
      (and the authority to deny it) The RSE has the responsibility to
      manage all the series functions within that budget.  It is assumed
      that there is a level of cooperation between RSE and IASA that
      allows decisions by the IASA to be 'pro forma'.  In case of
      disagreement the IAB acts as mediator.

   o  When budgets have been assigned by IASA the RSE is responsible for
      managing the RFC Editor to operate within those budgets.

   o  The RSE has operational responsibilities for issues that raise
      above the responsibilities of the publication or publication
      functions such as cross stream coordination of priorities and
      other issues.  When the RSE needs to take extra-budgetary or
      out-of contract measures those actions will be coordinated with
      IASA.

   o  Create documentation and structures that will allow for the RFC
      Series' continuity when circumstances engender the need for the
      execution of the publication and/or production functions by other
      vendors.




Kolkman                  Expires August 4, 2011                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                  RSE 2011                    January 2011


   For this type of responsibility the RSE is expected to cooperate
   closely with the IASA and the various streams.

   [OK: probably good to make something like this explicit:] To prevent
   actual or apparent problems with conflicts of interest or judgment,
   the RSE is barred from having any ownership, advisory, or other
   relationship to the vendors executing the Publication or Production
   functions except as specified elsewhere in this document.  If
   necessary, an exception can be made after public disclosure of those
   relationships and with the explicit permission of the IAB and IAOC.

2.2.  Development of the RFC Publication series.

   In order to develop the RFC Publication series the RSE is expected to
   develop a relationships with the Internet technical community.  With
   that community, the Editor is expected to engage in a process of
   articulating and refining a vision for the Series and its continuous
   evolution.

   Concretely:

      The RSE is responsible for the coordination of discussion on
      Series evolution among the Series' Stream participants and the
      broader Internet technical community.

      In time the RSE is expected to develop and refine a vision on

         the technical specification series, as it continues to evolve
         beyond the historical 'by engineers for engineers' emphasis;
         and

         its publication-technical environment: slowly changing in terms
         of publication and archiving techniques; the communities that
         produce and depend on the RFC Series.  All of those communities
         have been slowly changing to include significant multi-lingual
         non-native-English populations.Some of them also have a primary
         focus on the constraints and consequences of network
         engineering, rather than a primary interest in the engineering
         issues themselves.

      The RSE will develop consensus versions of vision and policy
      documents which will be approved by the RFC Series Oversight
      Committee (RSOC, see Section 3).

   For this type of responsibility the RSE cooperates closely with the
   community and under oversight of the RSOC and thus ultimately under
   oversight of the IAB.




Kolkman                  Expires August 4, 2011                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                  RSE 2011                    January 2011


   Consensus is to hire someone with publication experience and grow
   their knowledge of the community they will serve.

3.  RSE oversight

   [minor:The name of the committee is changed to RSOC]

   The IAB is responsible for oversight over the RFC Series.

   In order to provide continuity over periods longer than the nomcom
   appointment cycle and assure that oversight is informed through
   subject matter experts the IAB will establish a group that implements
   oversight for the IAB, the RFC Series Oversight Committee (RSOC).

   The RSOC will act with authority delegated from the IAB: In general
   it will be the RSOC that will approve consensus policy and vision
   documents as developed by the RSE in collaboration with the
   community.

   In those general cases the IAB is ultimately responsible for
   oversight and acts as a body for appeal and mediation.

   For all aspects that affect the RSE itself (e.g. hiring and firing)
   the RSOC prepares recommendations for the IAB but final decision is
   the responsibility of the IAB.  For instance the RSOC would:

   o  perform annual reviews of the RSE and reports to the IAB.

   o  manage candidate selection and advises the IAB on candidate
      appointment (in other words select the RSE, subject to IAB
      approval)

   It is expected that such oversight by the IAB is a matter of due
   diligence and that the reports and recommendations from the RSOC are
   approached as-if they are binding.

   [added suggested text] There is one aspect in which the RSOC will
   work with the IASA: the enumeration of the RSE herself.  The RSOC
   will propose a budget for approval to the IASA.

   [added suggested text] The RSOC will be responsible to ensure that
   the RFC Series is run in a transparent and accountable manner.

   The RSOC shall develop and publish its own rules of order.







Kolkman                  Expires August 4, 2011                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                  RSE 2011                    January 2011


3.1.  RSOC composition

   [OK: a proposal that keeps sufficient flexibility while still
   describing the lines of authority]

   The RSOC will operate as a Program of the IAB, with the IAB retaining
   final responsibility but delegating authority and responsibility and
   authority to the RSOC as appropriate and as RSOC and RSE
   relationships evolve.  Like other IAB Programs, the RSOC will include
   people who are not current IAB members.  The IAB will designate the
   membership of the RSOC with the goals of preserving effective
   stability, keeping it small enough to be effective, but large enough
   to provide general Internet Community expertise, specific IETF
   expertise, Publication expertise, and stream expertise.  Members
   serve at the pleasure of the IAB.  Specific input about, and
   recommendations of, members will be sought from the streams, the
   IAOC, and the RSE.

   The RSE and a person designed to represent the IASA will serve as ex-
   officio members of the RSOC but either or both can be excluded from
   its discussions if necessary.

4.  References

4.1.  Normative References

4.2.  Informative References

   [1]  Kolkman, O. and IAB, "RFC Editor Model (Version 1)", RFC 5620,
        August 2009.

Author's Address

   Olaf M. Kolkman (editor)

   EMail: olaf@nlnetlabs.nl















Kolkman                  Expires August 4, 2011                 [Page 6]

