


Network Working Group                                    O. Kolkman, Ed.
Internet-Draft                                         February 21, 2011
Intended status: Informational
Expires: August 25, 2011


                RFC Editor: RSE consensus documentation
                       draft-kolkman-rse-2011-03

Abstract

   This memo serves as a temporary placeholder for the documentation of
   consensus around the role and responsibilities surrounding the RFC
   Series Editor as developed on the rfc-interest list.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 25, 2011.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect



Kolkman                  Expires August 25, 2011                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                  RSE 2011                   February 2011


   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  The RFC Series Editor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
     2.1.  Executive Management of the Publication and Production
           function. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
     2.2.  Development of the RFC Publication series.  . . . . . . . . 4
     2.3.  Workload  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   3.  RSE oversight . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
     3.1.  RSOC composition  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   4.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
     4.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
     4.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7

































Kolkman                  Expires August 25, 2011                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                  RSE 2011                   February 2011


1.  Introduction

   This memo tries to cast what I believe the consensus to be in
   language that is close to being the basis for text in 5620bis.  This
   is supposed to be (or quickly evolve into) the basis from which we
   will develop job descriptions and write an update to RFC5620 [1].

   In other words, once we converged this memo will be used as the basis
   for other documents and is not intended to be published as RFC.

   Editorial and other comments appear in [square brackets].

2.  The RFC Series Editor

   The RFC Series Editor(RSE) is an individual who assumes serval
   responsibilities.

2.1.  Executive Management of the Publication and Production function.

   o  With respect to the Publication and Production functions, the RSE
      provides input to the IASA budget, statements of work, and manages
      vendor selection processes.  The RSE performs annual reviews of
      the Production and Publication function which are then provided to
      IASA.

   o  Vendor selection is done in cooperation with the streams and under
      final authority of the IASA.

   o  Concretely:

      *  The RSE owns and develops the work definition (the SOW) and
         manages the vendor search processes.  The work definition is
         created within the (budgetary) boundary condition that are
         negotiated with IASA and takes into account the RSE's
         requirements and community input.

      *  The RSE manages the evaluation process (the bids agains the
         SOW) which leads to a recommendation to IASA

      *  Final vendor selection is done by the IASA in close
         consultation with the RSE to ensure that contract terms and
         other arrangements are consistent with the SOW, consistent with
         the both RSE's and contractor's requirements to satisfy the
         contract, and do not conflict with the role of the RSE.

   o  The IASA has the responsibility to approve the total RSE budget
      (and the authority to deny it) The RSE has the responsibility to
      manage all the series functions within that budget.  It is assumed



Kolkman                  Expires August 25, 2011                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                  RSE 2011                   February 2011


      that there is a level of cooperation between RSE and IASA that
      allows decisions by the IASA to be 'pro forma'.  In case of
      disagreement, the IAB will attempt to mediate the issue.  If no
      mutual agreement can be reached, the IAB will make the final
      decision.

   o  When budgets have been assigned by IASA the RSE is responsible for
      managing the RFC Editor to operate within those budgets.

   o  The RSE primaraly supervises the on-going performance of the
      vendors whitout asserting operational responsibilities.  However,
      the RSE has operational responsibilities for issues that raise
      above the responsibilities of the publication or publication
      functions such as cross stream coordination of priorities and
      other issues.  When the RSE needs to take extra-budgetary or
      out-of contract measures those actions will be coordinated with
      IASA.

   o  Create documentation and structures that will allow for the RFC
      Series' continuity when circumstances engender the need for the
      execution of the publication and/or production functions by other
      vendors.

   For this type of responsibility the RSE is expected to cooperate
   closely with the IASA and the various streams.

   To prevent actual or apparent problems with conflicts of interest or
   judgment, the RSE is barred from having any ownership, advisory, or
   other relationship to the vendors executing the Publication or
   Production functions except as specified elsewhere in this document.
   If necessary, an exception can be made after public disclosure of
   those relationships and with the explicit permission of the IAB and
   IASA.

2.2.  Development of the RFC Publication series.

   In order to develop the RFC Publication series the RSE is expected to
   develop a relationships with the Internet technical community.  With
   that community, the Editor is expected to engage in a process of
   articulating and refining a vision for the Series and its continuous
   evolution.

   Concretely:

      The RSE is responsible for the coordination of discussion on
      Series evolution among the Series' Stream participants and the
      broader Internet technical community.




Kolkman                  Expires August 25, 2011                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                  RSE 2011                   February 2011


      In time the RSE is expected to develop and refine a vision on

         the technical specification series, as it continues to evolve
         beyond the historical 'by engineers for engineers' emphasis;
         and

         its publication-technical environment: slowly changing in terms
         of publication and archiving techniques; the communities that
         produce and depend on the RFC Series.  All of those communities
         have been slowly changing to include significant multi-lingual
         non-native-English populations.Some of them also have a primary
         focus on the constraints and consequences of network
         engineering, rather than a primary interest in the engineering
         issues themselves.

      The RSE will develop consensus versions of vision and policy
      documents which will be approved by the RFC Series Oversight
      Committee (RSOC, see Section 3).

   For this type of responsibility the RSE cooperates closely with the
   community and under oversight of the RSOC and thus ultimately under
   oversight of the IAB.

   Consensus is to hire someone with publication experience and grow
   their knowledge of the community they will serve.

2.3.  Workload

   The job is expected to take on average half of an FTE (approx 20 hrs
   per week) whereby the workload per week is expected to be near full
   time during IETF weeks, be over 20 hours per week in the first few
   months of the engagement, and higher during special projects.

3.  RSE oversight

   The IAB is responsible for oversight over the RFC Series.

   In order to provide continuity over periods longer than the nomcom
   appointment cycle and assure that oversight is informed through
   subject matter experts the IAB will establish a group that implements
   oversight for the IAB, the RFC Series Oversight Committee (RSOC).

   The RSOC will act with authority delegated from the IAB: In general
   it will be the RSOC that will approve consensus policy and vision
   documents as developed by the RSE in collaboration with the
   community.

   In those general cases the IAB is ultimately responsible for



Kolkman                  Expires August 25, 2011                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                  RSE 2011                   February 2011


   oversight and acts as a body for appeal and resolution.

   For all aspects that affect the RSE itself (e.g. hiring and firing)
   the RSOC prepares recommendations for the IAB but final decision is
   the responsibility of the IAB.  For instance the RSOC would:

   o  perform annual reviews of the RSE and reports to the IAB.

   o  manage RSE candidate selection and advises the IAB on candidate
      appointment (in other words select the RSE, subject to IAB
      approval)

   It is expected that such oversight by the IAB is a matter of due
   diligence and that the reports and recommendations from the RSOC are
   approached as if they are binding.

   RSOC as a body should abstain from direct participation in policy-
   making or formation of policy-making committees, which would conflict
   with RSOC's oversight role.  If individual members of RSOC
   participate in policy-making, they should be aware of possible
   conflict with their RSOC role and should be prepared to recuse
   themselves from subsequent RSOC decisions if appropriate.

   There is one aspect in which the RSOC will work with the IASA: the
   renumeration of the RSE itself.  The RSOC will propose a budget for
   approval to the IASA.

   The RSOC will be responsible to ensure that the RFC Series is run in
   a transparent and accountable manner.

   The RSOC shall develop and publish its own rules of order.

3.1.  RSOC composition

   The RSOC will operate as a Program of the IAB, with the IAB retaining
   final responsibility.  The IAB will delegate authority and
   responsibility to the RSOC as appropriate and as RSOC and RSE
   relationships evolve.  Like other IAB Programs, the RSOC will include
   people who are not current IAB members.  The IAB will designate the
   membership of the RSOC with the goals of preserving effective
   stability, keeping it small enough to be effective, but large enough
   to provide general Internet Community expertise, specific IETF
   expertise, Publication expertise, and stream expertise.  Members
   serve at the pleasure of the IAB and are expected to bring a balance
   between short and long term perspective.  Specific input about, and
   recommendations of, members will be sought from the streams, the
   IASA, and the RSE.




Kolkman                  Expires August 25, 2011                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                  RSE 2011                   February 2011


   The RSE and a person designated to represent the IASA will serve as
   ex-officio members of the RSOC but either or both can be excluded
   from its discussions if necessary.

4.  References

4.1.  Normative References

4.2.  Informative References

   [1]  Kolkman, O. and IAB, "RFC Editor Model (Version 1)", RFC 5620,
        August 2009.

Author's Address

   Olaf M. Kolkman (editor)

   EMail: olaf@nlnetlabs.nl

































Kolkman                  Expires August 25, 2011                [Page 7]

