


Network Working Group                                       I. Johansson
Internet-Draft                                               Ericsson AB
Intended status: Informational                              Oct 18, 2009
Expires: April 21, 2010


           Congestion in wireless access, input to ConEx BoF
           draft-johansson-wireless-congestion-properties-00

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 21, 2010.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2009 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents in effect on the date of
   publication of this document (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info).
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.

Abstract

   This document outlines the congestion properties for wireless access
   types such as HSPA and LTE defined in 3GPP.  The target audience is
   people interested in the Congestion Exposure work but the document



Johansson                Expires April 21, 2010                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft        Congestion in wireless access             Oct 2009


   may also be of interest for others who wish to get a basic knowledge
   about 3GPP wireless access and its properties.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Conventions, Definitions and Acronyms . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   3.  Wireless access, an outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   4.  Congestion in wireless access . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   5.  Implications for the ConEx WG . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   6.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   7.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   8.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6




































Johansson                Expires April 21, 2010                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft        Congestion in wireless access             Oct 2009


1.  Introduction

   This document describes in brief the characteristics of wireless
   shared channel access such as LTE and HSPA defined in 3GPP.  The
   motivation for this document is the emerging interest in Congestion
   Exposure as a component that can be used to control IP traffic
   behavior.

   The document should not be taken as an argument for or against the
   Congestion Exposure work, rather the intention is to give some input
   in order to determine what extra requirements wireless access may
   impose on the protocol design.  Wireless access technologies are
   becoming an important part of the IP communication infrastructure and
   therefore it is important that the Congestion Exposure WG address the
   requirements of wireless access as well.

   The description applies mainly to best effort type of access.
   Certain services like VoIP may receive special treatment such as QoS,
   which is outside the scope of this document.


2.  Conventions, Definitions and Acronyms

   This document focuses on cellular wireless access technologies
   standardized in 3GPP, e.g.  HSPA and LTE, therefore an explanation of
   some of the "buzzwords" related to this technology is in order.

   o  NodeB = base station = wireless access point (it is called eNB in
      LTE - evolved NB)

   o  UE = User Equipment = Wireless endpoint

   o  Uplink = Direction UE to NodeB

   o  Downlink = Direction NodeB to UE

   o  BLER = Block error rate

   o  LTE = Long Term Evolution

   o  HSPA = High Speed Packet Access


3.  Wireless access, an outline

   Wireless shared channel access has the property that many UE's within
   a limited geographical area (a.k.a cell) shares the same radio
   channel in the communication between UE and NodeB.  The transmission



Johansson                Expires April 21, 2010                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft        Congestion in wireless access             Oct 2009


   power in the downlink is limited, a typical value may be 20W but this
   varies depending on setup, the transmit power in the uplink is up to
   0.2W.

   When data (TCP, UDP, whatever) is to be transmitted to a UE (downlink
   transmission) the NodeB first schedules the data for transmission.
   The design of the scheduler is up to the implementer of the NodeB and
   not specified by the standard to allow for product differentiation.
   Given the total load, the data may be transmitted immediately (low
   load) or with some delay (high load).

   The data may be split into several radio-frames, this may happen
   because an IP packet is too large to fit in a single radio frame or
   because the radio conditions require that more error correction is
   applied in order to ensure sufficiently reliable transmission.  A
   radio-frame is an entity that carries data (IP packet or part of IP
   packet) over the radio interface.

   A radio frame is typically 1ms duration and the number of useful
   payload bits in a radio-frame varies with radio conditions.

   Transmission in the uplink is similar to what is mentioned above with
   the addition that a UE that needs to transmit data in the uplink must
   ask the NodeB for permission to send the data.  Once the UE receives
   a scheduling grant it starts to send the data at the time instant
   indicated in the grant.  If the data did not fit into one radio-frame
   the data is split and transmitted in pieces, more grants may have to
   be requested.  Also as in the case with downlink transmission
   multiple retransmissions may occur.

   The term "sufficiently reliable transmission" deserves some
   explanation, the goal is not to strive for 100% successful
   transmission in the first transmission attempt, instead a target of
   e.g. 10% BLER is set and if necessary the information from this
   transmission attempt and a subsequent retransmission can be combined
   (soft-combining) to retrieve the data.  A number of retransmit
   attempts can occur and this gives rise to a jitter that typically
   increases with load and distance from UE to closest NodeB.  Given
   that many details around the implementation of actual schedulers are
   proprietary it is to be expected that two different brands of base
   station equipment may give different jitter characteristics for the
   same load condition.


4.  Congestion in wireless access

   The laws of physics spiced with a grain of information theory gives
   that the available throughput for a UE depends on a number of



Johansson                Expires April 21, 2010                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft        Congestion in wireless access             Oct 2009


   factors:

   o  Distance to closest NodeB, the line of sight attenuation is ~10dB
      for each doubling of the distance at 2GHz.  However line of sight
      assumptions seldom applies to wireless deployments.

   o  Interference or total traffic load, this typically varies as a
      function of time (busy-hour issue).

   o  Shadowing, line of sight to NodeB is obstructed

   o  Multipath fading, reflections in e.g walls and roof-tops interfere
      with the direct path radiowave from NodeB to UE

   Radio planning and the use of multiple neighboring cells in
   combination with handover mechanisms typically ensure that the
   available throughput does not vary too much.  Still the available
   throughput for a given UE will vary depending on the conditions given
   above and there are factors such as shadowing that are difficult to
   alleviate.

   The available throughput can, because of the factors given above,
   change rapidly.  A user of a hand-held device may move into a more
   loaded cell, he or she may step into an elevator or drive with the
   car into a tunnel.  As the channel is shared the end result may be
   that a few UEs with very poor radio conditions may consume a lot of
   the available transmission resources (transmission power) in order to
   achieve successful transmission.  The consequence can be that what is
   experienced as isolated congestion or poor throughput for the
   individual UE can cause noticeable problems for many non-congested
   UE's.  To put it real short one can say that in wireless access
   scenarios bitrate is not equal to consumed resources.

   In short it is quite straightforward to realize that transmission
   over wireless links such as the ones described above gives both more
   rapid changes in congestion experience as well as more a dynamic
   throughput experience.  This may have impact on algorithms and
   protocols specified in the Congestion Exposure WG as the dynamic
   congestion behavior may impose requirements on possible policing
   algorithms which in turn may impose additional requirements on the
   underlying protocol design envisioned in the Congestion Exposure WG


5.  Implications for the ConEx WG

   Wireless access is becoming more and more widely used, and as it is
   likely a bottleneck that must be considered, it is important that the
   work of the ConeEx WG takes the particular properties described in



Johansson                Expires April 21, 2010                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft        Congestion in wireless access             Oct 2009


   this document into account when protocols and algorithms for
   congestion exposure is designed.


6.  IANA Considerations

   N/A


7.  Security Considerations

   N/A


8.  Acknowledgements

   The author would like to thank Sara Landstroem for comments and
   suggestions.


Author's Address

   Ingemar Johansson
   Ericsson AB
   Laboratoriegrand 11
   SE-971 28 Lulea
   SWEDEN

   Phone: +46 73 0783289
   Email: ingemar.s.johansson@ericsson.com





















Johansson                Expires April 21, 2010                 [Page 6]


