A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3086

        Title:      Definition of Differentiated Services Per Domain
                    Behaviors and Rules for their Specification
        Author(s):  K. Nichols, B. Carpenter
        Status:     Informational
        Date:       April 2001
        Mailbox:    nichols@packetdesign.com, brian@icair.org
        Pages:      24
        Characters: 63122
        Updates/Obsoletes/SeeAlso:  None

        I-D Tag:    draft-ietf-diffserv-pdb-def-03.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3086.txt


The differentiated services framework enables quality-of-service
provisioning within a network domain by applying rules at the edges to
create traffic aggregates and coupling each of these with a specific
forwarding path treatment in the domain through use of a codepoint in
the IP header.  The diffserv WG has defined the general architecture
for differentiated services and has focused on the forwarding path
behavior required in routers, known as "per-hop forwarding behaviors"
(or PHBs).  The WG has also discussed functionality required at
diffserv (DS) domain edges to select (classifiers) and condition
(e.g., policing and shaping) traffic according to the rules.
Short-term changes in the QoS goals for a DS domain are implemented by
changing only the configuration of these edge behaviors without
necessarily reconfiguring the behavior of interior network nodes.
 
The next step is to formulate examples of how forwarding path
components (PHBs, classifiers, and traffic conditioners) can be used
to compose traffic aggregates whose packets experience specific
forwarding characteristics as they transit a differentiated services
domain.  The WG has decided to use the term per-domain behavior, or
PDB, to describe the behavior experienced by a particular set of
packets as they cross a DS domain.  A PDB is characterized by specific
metrics that quantify the treatment a set of packets with a particular
DSCP (or set of DSCPs) will receive as it crosses a DS domain.  A PDB
specifies a forwarding path treatment for a traffic aggregate and, due
to the role that particular choices of edge and PHB configuration play
in its resulting attributes, it is where the forwarding path and the
control plane interact.  The measurable parameters of a PDB should be
suitable for use in Service Level Specifications at the network edge. 
 
This document defines and discusses Per-Domain Behaviors in detail
and lays out the format and required content for contributions
to the Diffserv WG on PDBs and the procedure that will be applied
for individual PDB specifications to advance as WG products.  This
format is specified to expedite working group review of PDB
submissions. 

This document is a product of the Differentiated Services Working
Group of the IETF.

This memo provides information for the Internet community.  It does
not specify an Internet standard of any kind.  Distribution of this
memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.

