A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3317

        Title:      Differentiated Services Quality of Service Policy
                    Information Base
        Author(s):  K. Chan, R. Sahita, S. Hahn, K. McCloghrie
        Status:     Informational
        Date:       March 2003
        Mailbox:    khchan@nortelnetworks.com, ravi.sahita@intel.com,
                    scott.hahn@intel.com, kzm@cisco.com
        Pages:      96
        Characters: 188553
        Updates/Obsoletes/See Also:   None

        I-D Tag:    draft-ietf-diffserv-pib-09.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3317.txt


This document describes a Policy Information Base (PIB) for a device
implementing the Differentiated Services Architecture.  The
provisioning classes defined here provide policy control over
resources implementing the Differentiated Services Architecture.
These provisioning classes can be used with other none Differentiated
Services provisioning classes (defined in other PIBs) to provide for a
comprehensive policy controlled mapping of service requirement to
device resource capability and usage.

This document is a product of the Differentiated Services (DIFFSERV)
Working Group of the IETF.

This memo provides information for the Internet community.  It does
not specify an Internet standard of any kind.  Distribution of this
memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.
