

BEHAVE WG                                                     M. Bagnulo
Internet-Draft                                                      UC3M
Intended status: Standards Track                             P. Matthews
Expires: June 18, 2010                                    Alcatel-Lucent
                                                          I. van Beijnum
                                                          IMDEA Networks
                                                       December 15, 2009


  NAT64: Network Address and Protocol Translation from IPv6 Clients to
                              IPv4 Servers
                draft-ietf-behave-v6v4-xlate-stateful-05

Abstract

   NAT64 is a mechanism for translating IPv6 packets to IPv4 packets and
   vice-versa.  DNS64 is a mechanism for synthesizing AAAA records from
   A records.  These two mechanisms together enable client-server
   communication between an IPv6-only client and an IPv4-only server,
   without requiring any changes to either the IPv6 or the IPv4 node,
   for the class of applications that work through NATs.  They also
   enable peer-to-peer communication between an IPv4 and an IPv6 node,
   where the communication can be initiated by either end using
   existing, NAT-traversing, peer-to-peer communication techniques.
   NAT64 also support IPv4 initiated communications to a subset of the
   IPv6 hosts through statically configured bindings in the NAT64.  This
   document specifies NAT64, and gives suggestions on how it should be
   deployed.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at



Bagnulo, et al.           Expires June 18, 2010                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                    NAT64                    December 2009


   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on June 18, 2010.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2009 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the BSD License.

   This document may contain material from IETF Documents or IETF
   Contributions published or made publicly available before November
   10, 2008.  The person(s) controlling the copyright in some of this
   material may not have granted the IETF Trust the right to allow
   modifications of such material outside the IETF Standards Process.
   Without obtaining an adequate license from the person(s) controlling
   the copyright in such materials, this document may not be modified
   outside the IETF Standards Process, and derivative works of it may
   not be created outside the IETF Standards Process, except to format
   it for publication as an RFC or to translate it into languages other
   than English.





















Bagnulo, et al.           Expires June 18, 2010                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                    NAT64                    December 2009


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     1.1.  Features of NAT64  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     1.2.  Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
       1.2.1.  NAT64 solution elements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
       1.2.2.  NAT64 Behaviour Walkthrough  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
       1.2.3.  Filtering  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   2.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   3.  NAT64 Normative Specification  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     3.1.  Determining the Incoming tuple . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
     3.2.  Filtering and Updating Binding and Session Information . . 18
       3.2.1.  UDP Session Handling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
       3.2.2.  TCP Session Handling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
       3.2.3.  Rules for allocation of IPv4 transport addresses . . . 28
       3.2.4.  ICMP Query Session Handling  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
       3.2.5.  Generation of the IPv6 representations of IPv4
               addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
     3.3.  Computing the Outgoing Tuple . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
       3.3.1.  Computing the outgoing 5-tuple for TCP and UDP.  . . . 32
       3.3.2.  Computing the outgoing 3-tuple for ICMP Query
               messages . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
     3.4.  Translating the Packet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
     3.5.  Handling Hairpinning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
   4.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
   5.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
   6.  Contributors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
   7.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
   8.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
     8.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
     8.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
   Appendix A.  Application scenarios . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
     A.1.  Scenario 1: an IPv6 network to the IPv4 Internet . . . . . 39
     A.2.  Scenario 3: the IPv6 Internet to an IPv4 network . . . . . 40
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
















Bagnulo, et al.           Expires June 18, 2010                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                    NAT64                    December 2009


1.  Introduction

   This document specifies NAT64, a mechanism for IPv6-IPv4 transition
   and co-existence.  Together with DNS64 [I-D.ietf-behave-dns64], these
   two mechanisms allow a IPv6-only client to initiate communications to
   an IPv4-only server, They also enable peer-to-peer communication
   between an IPv4 and an IPv6 node, where the communication can be
   initiated by either end using existing, NAT-traversing, peer-to-peer
   communication techniques.  NAT64 also support IPv4 initiated
   communications to a subset of the IPv6 hosts through statically
   configured bindings in the NAT64.

   NAT64 is a mechanism for translating IPv6 packets to IPv4 packets and
   vice-versa.  The translation is done by translating the packet
   headers according to IP/ICMP Translation Algorithm
   [I-D.ietf-behave-v6v4-xlate], translating the IPv4 server address by
   adding or removing an IPv6 prefix, and translating the IPv6 client
   address by installing mappings in the normal NAT manner.

   DNS64 is a mechanism for synthesizing AAAA resource records (RR) from
   A RR.  The synthesis is done by adding a IPv6 prefix to the IPv4
   address to create an IPv6 address, where the IPv6 prefix is assigned
   to a NAT64 device.

   Together, these two mechanisms allow a IPv6-only client to initiate
   communications to an IPv4-only server.

   These mechanisms are expected to play a critical role in the IPv4-
   IPv6 transition and co-existence.  Due to IPv4 address depletion,
   it's likely that in the future, a lot of IPv6-only clients will want
   to connect to IPv4-only servers.  The NAT64 and DNS64 mechanisms are
   easily deployable, since they require no changes to either the IPv6
   client nor the IPv4 server.  For basic functionality, the approach
   only requires the deployment of NAT64 function in the devices
   connecting an IPv6-only network to the IPv4-only network, along with
   the deployment of a few DNS64-enabled name servers in the IPv6-only
   network.  However, some advanced features such as support for DNSSEC
   validating stub resolvers or support for some IPsec modes, require
   software updates to the IPv6-only hosts.

   The NAT64 and DNS64 mechanisms are related to the NAT-PT mechanism
   defined in [RFC2766], but significant differences exist.  First,
   NAT64 does not define the NATPT mechanisms used to support the
   general case of IPv6 only servers to be contacted by IPv4 only
   clients, but only defines the mechanisms for IPv6 clients to contact
   IPv4 servers and its potential reuse to support peer to peer
   communications through standard NAT traversal techniques.  Second,
   NAT64 includes a set of features that overcomes many of the reasons



Bagnulo, et al.           Expires June 18, 2010                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                    NAT64                    December 2009


   the original NAT-PT specification was moved to historic status
   [RFC4966].

1.1.  Features of NAT64

   The features of NAT64 are:

   o  NAT64 as specified in this document is compliant with the
      recommendations for how NATs should handle UDP [RFC4787], TCP
      [RFC5382], and ICMP [RFC5508].  As such, NAT64 only supports
      Endpoint-Independent mappings and supports both Endpoint-
      Independent and Address dependent filtering.  Because of the
      compliance with the aforementioned requirements, NAT64 is
      compatible with ICE [I-D.ietf-mmusic-ice].

   o  In the absence of any state in NAT64 regarding a given IPv6 node,
      only said IPv6 node can initiate sessions to IPv4 nodes.  This
      works for roughly the same class of applications that work through
      IPv4-to-IPv4 NATs.

   o  Depending on the filtering policy used (Endpoint-Independent, or
      Address-Dependent), IPv4-nodes MAY be able to initiate sessions to
      a given IPv6 node, if the NAT64 somehow has an appropriate mapping
      (i.e.,state) for said IPv6 node, via one of the following
      mechanism.

      *  The IPv6 node has recently initiated a session to the same or
         other external-IPv4 node.

      *  The IPv6 node has used a NAT-traversal technique (such as ICE)
         which essentially results in the previous bullet point.

      *  If static configuration (i.e. mapping) exists regarding said
         IPv6 node

1.2.  Overview

   This section provides a non-normative introduction to the mechanisms
   of NAT64.  This is achieved by describing the NAT64 behavior
   involving a simple setup, that involves a single NAT64 box, a single
   DNS64 box and a simple network topology.  The goal of this
   description is to provide the reader with a general view of NAT64.
   It is not the goal of this section to describe all possible
   configurations nor to provide a normative specification of the NAT64
   behavior.  The normative specification of NAT64 is provided in
   Section 3.

   NAT64 mechanism is implemented in an NAT64 box which has (at least)



Bagnulo, et al.           Expires June 18, 2010                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                    NAT64                    December 2009


   two interfaces, an IPv4 interface connected to the the IPv4 network,
   and an IPv6 interface connected to the IPv6 network.  Packets
   generated in the IPv6 network for a receiver located in the IPv4
   network will be routed within the IPv6 network towards the NAT64 box.
   The NAT64 box will translate them and forward them as IPv4 packets
   through the IPv4 network to the IPv4 receiver.  The reverse takes
   place for packets generated in the IPv4 network for an IPv6 receiver.
   NAT64, however, is not symmetric.  In order to be able to perform
   IPv6 - IPv4 translation NAT64 requires state, binding an IPv6 address
   and port (hereafter called an IPv6 transport address) to an IPv4
   address and port (hereafter called an IPv4 transport address).

   Such binding state is either statically configured in the NAT64 or it
   is created when the first packet flowing from the IPv6 network to the
   IPv4 network is translated.  After the binding state has been
   created, packets flowing in either direction on that particular flow
   are translated.  The result is that, in the general case, NAT64 only
   supports communications initiated by the IPv6-only node towards an
   IPv4-only node.  Some additional mechanisms (like ICE) or static
   binding configuration, can be used to provide support for
   communications initiated by the IPv4-only node to the IPv6-only node.

1.2.1.  NAT64 solution elements

   In this section we describe the different elements involved in the
   NAT64 approach.

   The main component of the proposed solution is the translator itself.
   The translator has essentially two main parts, the address
   translation mechanism and the protocol translation mechanism.

   Protocol translation from IPv4 packet header to IPv6 packet header
   and vice-versa is performed according to IP/ICMP Translation
   Algorithm [I-D.ietf-behave-v6v4-xlate].

   Address translation maps IPv6 transport addresses to IPv4 transport
   addresses and vice-versa.  In order to create these mappings the
   NAT64 box has two pools of addresses i.e. an IPv6 address pool (to
   represent IPv4 addresses in the IPv6 network) and an IPv4 address
   pool (to represent IPv6 addresses in the IPv4 network).

   The IPv6 address pool is an IPv6 prefix assigned to the translator
   itself (hereafter called Pref64::/n).  Due to the abundance of IPv6
   address space, it is possible to assign an Pref64::/n that is equal
   or even bigger than the whole IPv4 address space.  This allows each
   IPv4 address to be mapped into a different IPv6 address by simply
   concatenating the Pref64::/n with the IPv4 address being mapped and a
   suffix (i.e. an IPv4 address X is mapped into the IPv6 address



Bagnulo, et al.           Expires June 18, 2010                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                    NAT64                    December 2009


   Pref64:X:SUFFIX).  The provisioning of the Pref64::/n is discussed at
   length in [I-D.ietf-behave-address-format]

   The IPv4 address pool is a set of IPv4 addresses, normally a small
   prefix assigned by the local administrator.  Since IPv4 address space
   is a scarce resource, the IPv4 address pool is small and typically
   not sufficient to establish permanent one-to-one mappings with IPv6
   addresses.  So, except for the static/manually created ones, mappings
   using the IPv4 address pool will be created and released dynamically.
   Moreover, because of the IPv4 address scarcity, the usual practice
   for NAT64 is likely to be the mapping of IPv6 transport addresses
   into IPv4 transport addresses, instead of IPv6 addresses into IPv4
   addresses directly, which enable a higher utilization of the limited
   IPv4 address pool.

   Because of the dynamic nature of the IPv6 to IPv4 address mapping and
   the static nature of the IPv4 to IPv6 address mapping, it is easy to
   understand that it is far simpler to allow communication initiated
   from the IPv6 side toward an IPv4 node, which address is
   algorithmically mapped into an IPv6 address, than communications
   initiated from IPv4-only nodes to an IPv6 node in which case IPv4
   address needs to be associated with it dynamically.

   An IPv6 initiator can know or derive in advance the IPv6 address
   representing the IPv4 target and send packets to that address.  The
   packets are intercepted by the NAT64 device, which associates an IPv4
   transport address of its IPv4 pool to the IPv6 transport address of
   the initiator, creating binding state, so that reply packets can be
   translated and forwarded back to the initiator.  The binding state is
   kept while packets are flowing.  Once the flow stops, and based on a
   timer, the IPv4 transport address is returned to the IPv4 address
   pool so that it can be reused for other communications.

   To allow an IPv6 initiator to do the standard DNS lookup to learn the
   address of the responder, DNS64 [I-D.ietf-behave-dns64] is used to
   synthesize an AAAA RR from the A RR (containing the real IPv4 address
   of the responder).  DNS64 receives the DNS queries generated by the
   IPv6 initiator.  If there is no AAAA record available for the target
   node (which is the normal case when the target node is an IPv4-only
   node), DNS64 performs a query for the A record.  If an A record is
   returned, DNS64 creates a synthetic AAAA RR that includes the IPv6
   representations of the IPv4 address created by concatenating the
   Pref64::/n of a NAT64 to the responder's IPv4 address and a suffix
   (i.e. if the IPv4 node has IPv4 address X, then the synthetic AAAA RR
   will contain the IPv6 address formed as Pref64:X:SUFFIX).  The
   synthetic AAAA RR is passed back to the IPv6 initiator, which will
   initiate an IPv6 communication with the IPv6 address associated to
   the IPv4 receiver.  The packet will be routed to the NAT64 device,



Bagnulo, et al.           Expires June 18, 2010                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                    NAT64                    December 2009


   which will create the IPv6 to IPv4 address mapping as described
   before.

1.2.2.  NAT64 Behaviour Walkthrough

   In this example, we consider an IPv6 node located in a IPv6-only site
   that initiates a communication to a IPv4 node located in the IPv4
   network.

   The notation used is the following: upper case letters are IPv4
   addresses; upper case letters with a prime(') are IPv6 addresses;
   lower case letters are ports; prefixes of length n are indicated by
   "P::/n", an IPv6 address built from an IPv4 address X by adding the
   prefix P and a suffix SUFFIX is indicated as "P:X:SUFFIX"", mappings
   are indicated as "(X,x) <--> (Y',y)".

   The scenario for this case is depicted in the following figure:


     +---------------------------------------+       +---------------+
     |IPv6 network    +-------------+        |       |               |
     |  +----+        | Name server |   +-------+    |   IPv4        |
     |  | H1 |        | with DNS64  |   | NAT64 |----| Network       |
     |  +----+        +-------------+   +-------+    |               |
     |    |IP addr: Y'     |              |  |       |  IP addr: X   |
     |    ---------------------------------  |       |  +----+       |
     +---------------------------------------+       |  | H2 |       |
                                                     |  +----+       |
                                                     +---------------+

   The figure shows a IPv6 node H1 which has an IPv6 address Y' and an
   IPv4 node H2 with IPv4 address X.

   A NAT64 connects the IPv6 network to the IPv4 network.  This NAT64
   has a /n prefix (called Pref64::/n) that it uses to represent IPv4
   addresses in the IPv6 address space and a single IPv4 address T
   assigned to its IPv4 interface.  The routing is configured in such a
   way, that the IPv6 packets addressed to a destination address
   containing Pref64::/n are routed to the IPv6 interface of the NAT64
   box.

   Also shown is a local name server with DNS64 functionality.  The
   local name server needs to know the /n prefix assigned to the local
   NAT64 (Pref64::/n).  For the purpose of this example, we assume it
   learns this through manual configuration.

   For this example, assume the typical DNS situation where IPv6 hosts
   have only stub resolvers and the local name server does the recursive



Bagnulo, et al.           Expires June 18, 2010                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                    NAT64                    December 2009


   lookups.

   The steps by which H1 establishes communication with H2 are:

   1.  H1 performs a DNS query for FQDN(H2) and receives the synthetic
       AAAA RR from the local name server that implements the DNS64
       functionality.  The AAAA record contains an IPv6 address formed
       by the Pref64::/n associated to the NAT64 box and the IPv4
       address of H2 and a suffix (i.e.  Pref64:X:SUFFIX).

   2.  H1 sends a packet to H2.  The packet is sent from a source
       transport address of (Y',y) to a destination transport address of
       (Pref64:X:SUFFIX,x), where y and x are ports set by H1.

   3.  The packet is routed to the IPv6 interface of the NAT64 (since
       the IPv6 routing is configured that way).

   4.  The NAT64 receives the packet and performs the following actions:

       *  The NAT64 selects an unused port t on its IPv4 address T and
          creates the mapping entry (Y',y) <--> (T,t)

       *  The NAT64 translates the IPv6 header into an IPv4 header using
          IP/ICMP Translation Algorithm [I-D.ietf-behave-v6v4-xlate].

       *  The NAT64 includes (T,t) as source transport address in the
          packet and (X,x) as destination transport address in the
          packet.  Note that X is extracted directly from the
          destination IPv6 address of the received IPv6 packet that is
          being translated.

   5.  The NAT64 sends the translated packet out its IPv4 interface and
       the packet arrives at H2.

   6.  H2 node responds by sending a packet with destination transport
       address (T,t) and source transport address (X,x).

   7.  The packet is routed to the NAT64 box, which will look for an
       existing mapping containing (T,t).  Since the mapping (Y',y) <-->
       (T,t) exists, the NAT64 performs the following operations:

       *  The NAT64 translates the IPv4 header into an IPv6 header using
          IP/ICMP Translation Algorithm [I-D.ietf-behave-v6v4-xlate].

       *  The NAT64 includes (Y',y) as destination transport address in
          the packet and (Pref64:X:SUFFIX,x) as source transport address
          in the packet.  Note that X is extracted directly from the
          source IPv4 address of the received IPv4 packet that is being



Bagnulo, et al.           Expires June 18, 2010                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft                    NAT64                    December 2009


          translated.

   8.  The translated packet is sent out the IPv6 interface to H1.

   The packet exchange between H1 and H2 continues and packets are
   translated in the different directions as previously described.

   It is important to note that the translation still works if the IPv6
   initiator H1 learns the IPv6 representation of H2's IPv4 address
   (i.e.  Pref64:X:SUFFIX) through some scheme other than a DNS look-up.
   This is because the DNS64 processing does NOT result in any state
   installed in the NAT64 box and because the mapping of the IPv4
   address into an IPv6 address is the result of concatenating the
   prefix defined within the site for this purpose (called Pref64::/n in
   this document) to the original IPv4 address and a suffix.

1.2.3.  Filtering

   A NAT64 box may do filtering, which means that it only allows a
   packet in through an interface if the appropriate permission exists.
   A NAT64 may do no filtering, or it may filter incoming IPv4 packets.
   Filtering of incoming IPv6 packets is not described in this
   specification.

   NAT64 filtering is consistent with the recommendations of RFC 4787
   [RFC4787], and the ones of RFC 5382 [RFC5382].  Because of that, the
   NAT64 as specified in this document, supports both Endpoint-
   Independent filtering and Address-Dependent filtering, both for TCP
   and UDP.

   If a NAT64 performs Endpoint-Independent filtering of incoming IPv4
   packets, then an incoming IPv4 packet is dropped unless the NAT64 has
   state for the destination transport address of the incoming IPv4
   packet.

   If a NAT64 performs Address-Dependent filtering of incoming IPv4
   packets, then an incoming IPv4 packet is dropped unless the NAT64 has
   state involving the destination transport address of the IPv4
   incoming packet and the particular source IP address of the incoming
   IPv4 packet.


2.  Terminology

   This section provides a definitive reference for all the terms used
   in document.

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",



Bagnulo, et al.           Expires June 18, 2010                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft                    NAT64                    December 2009


   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].

   The following terms are used in this document:

   3-Tuple:  The tuple (source IP address, destination IP address, Query
      Identifier).  A 3-tuple uniquely identifies an ICMP Query session.
      When an ICMP Query session flows through a NAT64, each session has
      two different 3-tuples: one with IPv4 addresses and one with IPv6
      addresses.

   5-Tuple:  The tuple (source IP address, source port, destination IP
      address, destination port, transport protocol).  A 5-tuple
      uniquely identifies a UDP/TCP session.  When a UDP/TCP session
      flows through a NAT64, each session has two different 5-tuples:
      one with IPv4 addresses and one with IPv6 addresses.

   BIB:  Binding Information Base.  A table of mappings kept by a NAT64.
      Each NAT64 has three BIBs, one for TCP, one for UDP and one for
      ICMP Queries.

   DNS64:  A logical function that synthesizes AAAA Resource Records
      (containing IPv6 addresses) from A Resource Records (containing
      IPv4 addresses).

   Endpoint-Independent Mapping:  In NAT64, using the same mapping for
      all the sessions involving a given IPv6 transport address of an
      IPv6 host (irrespectively of the transport address of the IPv4
      host involved in the communication).  Endpoint-independent mapping
      is important for peer-to-peer communication.  See [RFC4787] for
      the definition of the different types of mappings in IPv4-to-IPv4
      NATs.

   Filtering, Endpoint-Independent:  The NAT64 filters out only incoming
      IPv4 packets not destined to a transport address for which there
      is not state in the NAT64, regardless of the source IPv4 transport
      address.  The NAT forwards any packets destined to any transport
      address for which it has state.  In other words, having state for
      a given transport address is sufficient to allow any packets back
      to the internal endpoint.  See [RFC4787] for the definition of the
      different types of filtering in IPv4-to-IPv4 NATs.

   Filtering, Address-Dependent:  The NAT64 filters out incoming IPv4
      packets not destined to a transport address for which there is no
      state (similar to the Endpoint-Independent filtering).
      Additionally, the NAT64 will filter out incoming IPv4 packets
      coming from IPv4 address X and destined for a transport address
      that it has state for if the NAT64 has not sent packets to X



Bagnulo, et al.           Expires June 18, 2010                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft                    NAT64                    December 2009


      previously (independently of the port used by X).  In other words,
      for receiving packets from a specific IPv4 endpoint, it is
      necessary for the IPv6 endpoint to send packets first to that
      specific IPv4 endpoint's IP address.

   Hairpinning:  Having a packet do a "U-turn" inside a NAT and come
      back out the same interface as it arrived on.  Hairpinning support
      is important for peer-to-peer applications, as there are cases
      when two different hosts on the same side of a NAT can only
      communicate using sessions that hairpin through the NAT.

   Mapping or Binding:  A mapping between an IPv6 transport address and
      a IPv4 transport address.  Used to translate the addresses and
      ports of packets flowing between the IPv6 host and the IPv4 host.
      In NAT64, the IPv4 transport address is always a transport address
      assigned to the NAT64 itself, while the IPv6 transport address
      belongs to some IPv6 host.

   NAT64:  A device that translates IPv6 packets to IPv4 packets and
      vice-versa.  The NAT64 uses mapping state to perform the
      translation between IPv6 and IPv4 addresses.  The translation
      involves not only the IP header, but also the transport header
      (TCP or UDP).

   Session:  A TCP, UDP or ICMP Query session.  In other words, the bi-
      directional flow of packets between two different hosts.  In
      NAT64, typically one host is an IPv4 host, and the other one is an
      IPv6 host.

   Session table:  A table of sessions kept by a NAT64.  Each NAT64 has
      three session tables, one for TCP, one for UDP and one for ICMP
      Queries.

   Synthetic RR:  A DNS Resource Record (RR) that is not contained in
      any zone data file, but has been synthesized from other RRs.  An
      example is a synthetic AAAA record created from an A record.

   Transport Address:  The combination of an IPv6 or IPv4 address and a
      port.  Typically written as (IP address, port); e.g. (192.0.2.15,
      8001).

   Tuple:  Refers to either a 3-Tuple or a 5-tuple as defined above.

   For a detailed understanding of this document, the reader should also
   be familiar with DNS terminology [RFC1035] and current NAT
   terminology [RFC4787].





Bagnulo, et al.           Expires June 18, 2010                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft                    NAT64                    December 2009


3.  NAT64 Normative Specification

   A NAT64 is a device with at least one IPv6 interface and at least one
   IPv4 interface.  Each NAT64 device MUST have one unicast /n IPv6
   prefix assigned to it, denoted Pref64::/n (Additional consideration
   about the Pref64::/n are presented in Section 3.2.5).  Each NAT64 box
   MUST have one or more unicast IPv4 addresses assigned to it.

   A NAT64 uses the following dynamic data structures:

   o  UDP Binding Information Base

   o  UDP Session Table

   o  TCP Binding Information Base

   o  TCP Session Table

   o  ICMP Query Binding Information Base

   o  ICMP Query Session Table

   These tables contain information needed for the NAT64 processing.
   The actual division of the information into six tables is done in
   order to ease the description of the NAT64 behaviour.  NAT64
   implementations MAY use different data structures as long as they
   store all the required information and the externally visible outcome
   is the same as the one described in this document.

   A NAT64 has three Binding Information Bases (BIBs): one for TCP, one
   for UDP and one for ICMP Queries.  In the case of UDP and TCP BIBs,
   each BIB entry specifies a mapping between an IPv6 transport address
   and an IPv4 transport address:

      (X',x) <--> (T,t)

   where X' is some IPv6 address, T is an IPv4 address, and x and t are
   ports.  T will always be one of the IPv4 addresses assigned to the
   NAT64.  The BIB has then two columns, the BIB IPv6 transport address
   and the BIB IPv4 transport address.  A given IPv6 or IPv4 transport
   address can appear in at most one entry in a BIB: for example, (2001:
   db8::17, 4) can appear in at most one TCP and at most one UDP BIB
   entry.  TCP and UDP have separate BIBs because the port number space
   for TCP and UDP are distinct.  This implementation of the BIBs
   ensures Endpoint-Independent mappings in the NAT64.  The information
   in the BIBs is also used to implement Endpoint-Independent filtering.
   (Address-Dependent filtering is implemented using the Session tables
   described below.)



Bagnulo, et al.           Expires June 18, 2010                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft                    NAT64                    December 2009


   In the case of the ICMP Query BIB, each ICMP Query BIB entry specify
   a mapping between an (IPv6 address, IPv6 Identifier) pair and an
   (IPv4 address, IPv4 Identifier) pair.

      (X',I1) <--> (T,I2)

   where X' is some IPv6 address, T is an IPv4 address, I1 is an ICMPv6
   Identifier and I2 is an ICMPv4 Identifiers.  T will always be one of
   the IPv4 addresses assigned to the NAT64.  A given (IPv6 or IPv4
   address, IPv6 or IPv4 Identifier) pair can appear in at most one
   entry in the ICMP Query BIB.

   Entries in any of the three BIBs can be created dynamically as the
   result of the flow of packets as described in the Section 3.2 but the
   can also be created manually by the system administrator.  NAT64
   implementations SHOULD support manually configured BIB entries for
   any of the three BIBs.  Dynamically-created entries are deleted from
   the corresponding BIB when the last session associated to the BIB
   entry is removed from the session table.  Manually-configured BIB
   entries are not deleted when there is no corresponding session table
   entry and can only be deleted by the administrator.

   A NAT64 also has three session tables: one for TCP sessions, one for
   UDP sessions and one for ICMP Query sessions.  Each entry keeps
   information on the state of the corresponding session.  In the TCP
   and UDP session tables, each entry specifies a mapping between a pair
   of IPv6 transport address and a pair of IPv4 transport address:

      (X',x),(Y',y) <--> (T,t),(Z,z)

   where X' and Y' are IPv6 addresses, T and Z are IPv4 addresses, and
   x, y, z and t are ports.  T will always be one of the IPv4 addresses
   assigned to the NAT64.  Y' is always the IPv6 representation of the
   IPv4 address Z, so Y' is obtained from Z using the algorithm applied
   by the NAT64 to create IPv6 representations of IPv4 addresses. y will
   always be equal to z.

   For each Session Table Entry (STE), there are then five columns:

      The STE source IPv6 transport address, (X',x) in the example
      above,

      The STE destination IPv6 transport address, (Y',y) in the example
      above,

      The STE source IPv4 transport address, (T,t) in the example above,
      and,




Bagnulo, et al.           Expires June 18, 2010                [Page 14]

Internet-Draft                    NAT64                    December 2009


      The STE destination IPv4 transport address, (Z,z) in the example
      above.

      The STE lifetime.

   The terminology used for the session table entry columns is from the
   perspective of an incoming IPv6 packet being translated into an
   outgoing IPv4 packet.

   In the ICMP query session table, each entry specifies a mapping
   between a 3-tuple of IPv6 source address, IPv6 destination address
   and ICMPv6 Query Id and a 3-tuple of IPv4 source address, IPv4
   destination address and ICMPv4 Query Id:

      (X',Y',I1) <--> (T,Z,I2)

   where X' and Y' are IPv6 addresses, T and Z are IPv4 addresses, I1 is
   an ICMPv6 Identifier and I2 is an ICMPv4 Identifier.  T will always
   be one of the IPv4 addresses assigned to the NAT64.  Y' is always the
   IPv6 representation of the IPv4 address Z, so Y' is obtained from Z
   using the algorithm applied by the NAT64 to create IPv6
   representations of IPv4 addresses.

   For each Session Table Entry (STE), there are then six columns:

      The STE source IPv6 address, X' in the example above,

      The STE destination IPv6 address, Y' in the example above,

      The STE IPv6 Identifier, I1 in the example above,

      The STE source IPv4 address, T in the example above,

      The STE destination IPv4 address, Z in the example above, and,

      The STE IPv4 Identifier, I2 in the example above.

      The STE lifetime.

   The NAT64 uses the session state information to determine when the
   session is completed, and also uses session information for Address-
   Dependent filtering.  A session can be uniquely identified by either
   an incoming tuple or an outgoing tuple.

   For each TCP or UDP session, there is a corresponding BIB entry,
   uniquely specified by either the source IPv6 transport address (in
   the IPv6 --> IPv4 direction) or the destination IPv4 transport
   address (in the IPv4 --> IPv6 direction).  For each ICMP Query



Bagnulo, et al.           Expires June 18, 2010                [Page 15]

Internet-Draft                    NAT64                    December 2009


   session, there is a corresponding BIB entry, uniquely specified by
   either the source IPv6 address and ICMPv6 Query Id (in the IPv6 -->
   IPv4 direction) or the destination IPv4 address and the ICMPv4 Query
   Id (in the IPv4 --> IPv6 direction).  However, for all the BIBs, a
   single BIB entry can have multiple corresponding sessions.  When the
   last corresponding session is deleted, if the BIB entry was
   dynamically created, the BIB entry is deleted.

   The NAT64 will receive packets through its interfaces.  These packets
   can be either IPv6 packets or IPv4 packets and they may carry TCP
   traffic, UDP traffic or ICMP traffic.  The processing of the packets
   will be described next.  In the case that the processing is common to
   all the aforementioned types of packets, we will refer to the packet
   as the incoming packet in general.  In case that the processing is
   specific to IPv6 packets, we will refer to the incoming IPv6 packet
   and similarly to the IPv4 packets.

   The processing of an incoming IP packet takes the following steps:

   1.  Determining the incoming tuple

   2.  Filtering and updating binding and session information

   3.  Computing the outgoing tuple

   4.  Translating the packet

   5.  Handling hairpinning

   The details of these steps are specified in the following
   subsections.

   This breakdown of the NAT64 behavior into processing steps is done
   for ease of presentation.  A NAT64 MAY perform the steps in a
   different order, or MAY perform different steps, as long as the
   externally visible outcome is the same.

3.1.  Determining the Incoming tuple

   This step associates a incoming tuple with every incoming IP packet
   for use in subsequent steps.  In the case of TCP, UDP and ICMP error
   packets, the tuple is a 5-tuple consisting of source IP address,
   source port, destination IP address, destination port, transport
   protocol.  In case of ICMP Queries, the tuple is a 3-tuple consisting
   of the source IP address, destination IP address and Query
   Identifier.

   If the incoming IP packet contains a complete (un-fragmented) UDP or



Bagnulo, et al.           Expires June 18, 2010                [Page 16]

Internet-Draft                    NAT64                    December 2009


   TCP protocol packet, then the 5-tuple is computed by extracting the
   appropriate fields from the packet.

   If the incoming packet is an ICMP query message (i.e. an ICMPv4 Query
   message or an ICMPv6 Informational message), the 3-tuple is the
   source IP address, the destination IP address and the ICMP Query
   Identifier.

   If the incoming IP packet contains a complete (un-fragmented) ICMP
   error message, then the 5-tuple is computed by extracting the
   appropriate fields from the IP packet embedded inside the ICMP error
   message.  However, the role of source and destination is swapped when
   doing this: the embedded source IP address becomes the destination IP
   address in the 5-tuple, the embedded source port becomes the
   destination port in the 5-tuple, etc.  If it is not possible to
   determine the 5-tuple (perhaps because not enough of the embedded
   packet is reproduced inside the ICMP message), then the incoming IP
   packet is silently discarded.

   If the incoming IP packet contains a fragment, then more processing
   may be needed.  This specification leaves open the exact details of
   how a NAT64 handles incoming IP packets containing fragments, and
   simply requires that the external behavior of the NAT64 is compliant
   with the following conditions:

      The NAT64 MUST handle fragments arriving out-of-order conditioned
      to the following:

         The NAT64 MUST limit the amount of resources devoted to the
         storage of fragmented packets in order to protect from DoS
         attack.

         As long as the NAT64 has available resources, the NAT64 MUST
         allow the fragments to arrive over a time interval.  The time
         interval MUST be configurable and the default value MUST be of
         at least 10 seconds.

         The NAT64 MAY require that the UDP, TCP, or ICMP header be
         completely contained within the fragment that contains OFFSET
         equal to zero.

      A NAT64 MAY elect to queue the fragments as they arrive and
      translate all fragments at the same time.  Alternatively, a NAT64
      MAY translate the fragments as they arrive, by storing information
      that allows it to compute the 5-tuple for fragments other than the
      first.  In the latter case, subsequent fragments may arrive before
      the first.




Bagnulo, et al.           Expires June 18, 2010                [Page 17]

Internet-Draft                    NAT64                    December 2009


      Implementers of NAT64 should be aware that there are a number of
      well-known attacks against IP fragmentation; see [RFC1858] and
      [RFC3128].  Implementers should also be aware of additional issues
      with reassembling packets at high rates, described in [RFC4963].

3.2.  Filtering and Updating Binding and Session Information

   This step updates binding and session information stored in the
   appropriate tables.  This step may also filter incoming packets, if
   desired.

   Irrespectively of the transport protocol used, the NAT64 must
   silently discard all incoming IPv6 packets containing a source
   address that contains the Pref64::/n.  This is required in order to
   prevent hairpinning loops as described in the Security Considerations
   section.  In addition, the NAT64 function will only process incoming
   IPv6 packets that contain a destination address that contains
   Pref64::/n.  Likewise, the NAT64 function will only process incoming
   IPv4 packets that contain a destination address that belong to the
   IPv4 pool assigned to the NAT64.

   The details of this step depend on the protocol (UDP, TCP or ICMP
   Query).

3.2.1.  UDP Session Handling

   The state information stored for a UDP session in the UDP session
   table includes a timer that tracks the remaining lifetime of the UDP
   session.  When the timer expires, the UDP session is deleted.  If all
   the UDP sessions corresponding to a UDP BIB entry are deleted, then
   the UDP BIB entry is also deleted (only applies to the case of
   dynamically created entries).

   An IPv6 incoming packet with an incoming tuple with source transport
   address (X',x) and destination transport address (Y',y) is processed
   as follows:

      The NAT64 searches for a UDP BIB entry that contains an BIB IPv6
      transport address that matches the IPv6 source transport address
      (X',x).  If such an entry does not exists, a new entry is created.
      As BIB IPv6 transport address, the source IPv6 transport address
      of the packet (X',x) is included and the BIB IPv4 transport
      address is set to (T,t) which is allocated using the rules defined
      in Section 3.2.3.  The result is a BIB entry as follows: (X',x)
      <--> (T,t).

      The NAT64 searches for the session table entry corresponding to
      the incoming 5-tuple.  If no such entry is found, a new entry is



Bagnulo, et al.           Expires June 18, 2010                [Page 18]

Internet-Draft                    NAT64                    December 2009


      created.  The information included in the session table is as
      follows:

         The STE source IPv6 transport address is set to (X',x), the
         source IPv6 transport addresses contained in the received IPv6
         packet,

         The STE destination IPv6 transport address is set to (Y',y),
         the destination IPv6 transport addresses contained in the
         received IPv6 packet,

         The STE source IPv4 transport address is extracted from the
         corresponding UDP BIB entry i.e. is set to (T,t),

         The STE destination IPv4 transport is set to (Z(Y'),y), y being
         the same port as the STE destination IPv6 transport address and
         Z(Y') being algorithmically generated from the IPv6 destination
         address (i.e.  Y') using the reverse algorithm as specified in
         Section 3.2.5 .

      The result is a Session table entry as follows: (X',x),(Y',y) <-->
      (T,t),(Z(Y'),y)

      The NAT64 sets or resets the timer in the session table entry to
      maximum session lifetime.  By default, the maximum session
      lifetime is 5 minutes.  The packet is translated and forwarded as
      described in the following sections.

   An IPv4 incoming packet, with an incoming tuple with source IPv4
   transport address (Y,y) and destination IPv4 transport address (X,x)
   is processed as follows:

      The NAT64 searches for a UDP BIB entry that contains an BIB IPv4
      transport address matches (Y,y) i.e. the IPv4 destination
      transport address in the incoming IPv4 packet.  If such an entry
      does not exists, the packet is dropped.  An ICMP message MAY be
      sent to the original sender of the packet, unless the discarded
      packet is itself an ICMP message.  The ICMP message, if sent, has
      a type of 3 (Destination Unreachable).

      If the NAT64 applies Address-Dependent filters on its IPv4
      interface, then the NAT64 checks to see if the incoming packet is
      allowed according to the address-dependent filtering rule.  To do
      this, it searches for a session table entry with a STE source IPv4
      transport address equal to (X,x) (i.e. the destination IPv4
      transport address in the incoming packet) and STE destination IPv4
      address equal to Y (i.e. the source IPv4 address in the incoming
      packet).  If such an entry is found (there may be more than one),



Bagnulo, et al.           Expires June 18, 2010                [Page 19]

Internet-Draft                    NAT64                    December 2009


      packet processing continues.  Otherwise, the packet is discarded.
      If the packet is discarded, then an ICMP message MAY be sent to
      the original sender of the packet, unless the discarded packet is
      itself an ICMP message.  The ICMP message, if sent, has a type of
      3 (Destination Unreachable) and a code of 13 (Communication
      Administratively Prohibited).

      In case the packet is not discarded in the previous processing
      (either because the NAT64 is not filtering or because the packet
      is compliant with the Address-dependent filtering rule), then the
      NAT64 searches for the session table entry corresponding
      containing the STE source IPv4 transport address equal to (X,x)
      and the STE destination IPv4 transport address equal to (Y,y).  If
      no such entry is found, a new entry is created.  In case a new UDP
      session table entry is created, it contains the following
      information:

         The STE source IPv6 transport address is extracted from the
         corresponding UDP BIB entry

         The STE destination IPv6 transport address is set to (Z'(Y),y),
         y being the same port y than the destination IPv4 transport
         address and Z'(Y) being the IPv6 representation of Y, generated
         using the algorithm described in Section 3.2.5

         The STE source IPv4 transport address is set to (X,x) the
         destination IPv4 transport addresses contained in the received
         IPv4 packet,

         The STE destination IPv4 transport is set to (Y,y), the source
         IPv4 transport addresses contained in the received IPv4 packet.

      The NAT64 sets or resets the timer in the session table entry to
      maximum session lifetime.  By default, the maximum session
      lifetime is 5 minutes.

3.2.2.  TCP Session Handling

   The state information stored for a TCP session:

      Binding:(X',x),(Y',y) <--> (T,t),(Z,z)

      Lifetime: is a timer that tracks the remaining lifetime of the TCP
      session.  When the timer expires, the TCP session is deleted.  If
      all the TCP sessions corresponding to a TCP BIB entry are deleted,
      then the TCP BIB entry is also deleted (only applies to the case
      of dynamically created entries).




Bagnulo, et al.           Expires June 18, 2010                [Page 20]

Internet-Draft                    NAT64                    December 2009


   TCP sessions are expensive, because their inactivity lifetime is set
   to at least 2 hours and 4 min (as per [RFC5382]), so it is important
   that each TCP session table entry corresponds to an existent TCP
   session.  In order to do that, for each TCP session established
   through it, it tracks the corresponding state machine as follows.

   The states are the following ones:

      CLOSED: Analogous to [RFC0793], CLOSED is a fictional state
      because it represents the state when there is no state for this
      particular 5-tuple, and therefore, no connection.

      V4 SYN RCV: An IPv4 packet containing a TCP SYN was received by
      the NAT64, implying that a TCP connection is being initiated from
      the IPv4 side.  The NAT64 is now waiting for a matching IPv4
      packet containing the TCP SYN in the opposite direction.

      V6 SYN RCV: An IPv6 packet containing a TCP SYN was received by
      the NAT64, implying that a TCP connection is being initiated from
      the IPv6 side.  The NAT64 is now waiting for a matching IPv4
      packet containing the TCP SYN in the opposite direction.

      ESTABLISHED: Represent an open connection, with data flowing in
      both directions.

      V4 FIN RCV: An IPv4 packet containing a TCP FIN was received by
      the NAT64, data can still flow in the connection, the NAT64 is
      waiting for a matching TCP FIN in the opposite direction.

      V6 FIN RCV: An IPv6 packet containing a TCP FIN was received by
      the NAT64, data can still flow in the connection, the NAT64 is
      waiting for a matching TCP FIN in the opposite direction.

      V6 FIN + V4 FIN RCV: Both an IPv4 packet containing a TCP FIN and
      an IPv6 packet containing an TCP FIN for this connection were
      received by the NAT64.  The NAT64 keeps the connection state alive
      and forwards packet in both directions for a short period of time
      to allow remaining packets (in particular the ACKs) to be
      delivered.

      RST RCV: A packet containing a TCP RST was received by the NAT64
      for this connection.  The NAT64 will keep the state for the
      connection for a short time and if no other data packets for that
      connection are received, the assumption is that the node has
      accepted the RST packet and the state for this connection is then
      terminated.

   The state machine used by the NAT64 for the TCP session processing is



Bagnulo, et al.           Expires June 18, 2010                [Page 21]

Internet-Draft                    NAT64                    December 2009


   depicted next.  The described state machine handles all TCP segments
   received through the IPv6 and IPv4 interface.  There is one state
   machine per TCP connection that is potentially established through
   the NAT64.  After bootstrapping of the NAT64 device, all TCP session
   are in CLOSED state.  As we mention above, the CLOSED state is a
   fictional state when is no state for that particular connection in
   the NAT64.  It should be noted that there is one state machine per
   connection, so only packets belonging to a given connection are
   inputs to the state machine associated to that connection.  In other
   words, when in the state machine below we state that a packet is
   received, it is implicit that the incoming 5-tuple of the data packet
   matches to the one of the state machine.

   A TCP segment with the SYN flag set that is received through the IPv6
   interface is called a V6 SYN, similarly, V4 SYN, V4 FIN, V6 FIN, V6
   FIN + V4 FIN, V6 RST and V4 RST.



































Bagnulo, et al.           Expires June 18, 2010                [Page 22]

Internet-Draft                    NAT64                    December 2009


     +----------------------------+   +-----------------------------+
     |                            |   |                             |
     |                            V   V                             |
     |                 V6       +------+      V4                    |
     |            +----SYN------|CLOSED|-----SYN------+             |
     |            |             +------+              |             |
     |            |                ^                  |             |
     |            |                |4min T.O.         |             |
     |            V                |                  V             |
     |        +-------+         +-------+          +-------+        |
     |        |V6 SYN |         |RST RCV|          |V4 SYN |        |
     |        |  RCV  |         +-------+          |  RCV  |        |
     |        +-------+          |    ^            +-------+        |
     |           |         data pkt   |               |             |
     |           |               |  V4 or V6 RST      |             |
     2:04Hrs  V4 SYN             V    |              V6 SYN         |
     T.O.        |          +--------------+          |             |
     |           +--------->| ESTABLISHED  |<---------+             |
     +--------------------->|              |                        |
                            +--------------+                        |
                              |           |                         |
                          V4 FIN       V6 FIN                       |
                              |           |                         |
                              V           V                         |
                      +---------+       +----------+                |
                      | V4 FIN  |       |  V6 FIN  |                |
                      +---------+       +----------+                |
                              |           |                         |
                          V6 FIN       V4 FIN                     4 min
                              |           |                        T.O.
                              V           V                         |
                         +-------------------+                      |
                         | V4 FIN + V6 FIN   |----------------------+
                         +-------------------+



   We next describe the state information and the transitions.

   *** CLOSED ***

   If a V6 SYN is received with an incoming tuple with source transport
   address (X',x) and destination transport address (Y',y) (This is the
   case of a TCP connection initiated from the IPv6 side), the
   processing is as follows:

   1.  The NAT64 searches for a TCP BIB entry that matches the IPv6
       source transport address (X',x).



Bagnulo, et al.           Expires June 18, 2010                [Page 23]

Internet-Draft                    NAT64                    December 2009


          If such an entry does not exists, a new BIB entry is created.
          The BIB IPv6 transport address is set to (X',x) (i.e. the
          source IPv6 transport address of the packet).  The BIB IPv4
          transport address is set to an IPv4 transport address
          allocated using the rules defined in Section 3.2.3 The
          processing of the packet continues as described in bullet 2.

          If the entry already exists, then the processing continues as
          described bullet 2.

   2.  Then a new TCP session entry is created in the TCP session table.
       The information included in the session table is as follows:

          The STE source IPv6 transport address is set to (X',x) (i.e.
          the source transport address contained in the received V6 SYN
          packet,

          The STE destination IPv6 transport address is set to (Y',y)
          (i.e. the destination transport address contained in the
          received V6 SYN packet,

          The STE source IPv4 transport address is set to the BIB IPv4
          transport address of the corresponding TCP BIB entry.

          The STE destination IPv4 transport address contains the port y
          (i.e. the same port as the IPv6 destination transport address)
          and the IPv4 address that is algorithmically generated from
          the IPv6 destination address (i.e.  Y') using the reverse
          algorithm as specified in Section 3.2.5.

          The lifetime of the TCP session table entry is set to at least
          to 4 min (the transitory connection idle timeout as defined in
          [RFC5382]).

   3.  The state of the session is moved to V6 SYN RCV.

   4.  The NAT64 translates and forwards the packet as described in the
       following sections

   If a V4 SYN packet is received with an incoming tuple with source
   IPv4 transport address (Y,y) and destination IPv4 transport address
   (X,x) (This is the case of a TCP connection initiated from the IPv4
   side), the processing is as follows:

      If the security policy requires silently dropping externally
      initiated TCP connections, then the packet is silently discarded,
      else,




Bagnulo, et al.           Expires June 18, 2010                [Page 24]

Internet-Draft                    NAT64                    December 2009


      If the destination transport address contained in the incoming V4
      SYN (i.e.  X,x) is not in use in the TCP BIB, then the packet is
      discarded and an ICMP Port Unreachable error (Type 3, Code 3) is
      sent back to the source of the v4 SYN.  The state remains
      unchanged in CLOSED

      If the destination transport address contained in the incoming V4
      SYN (i.e.  X,x) is in use in the TCP BIB, then

         A new session table entry is created in the TCP session table,
         containing the following information:

            The STE source IPv4 transport address is set to (X,x) (i.e.
            the destination transport address contained in the V4 SYN)

            The STE destination IPv4 transport address is set to (Y,y)
            (i.e. the source transport address contained in the V4 SYN)

            The STE transport IPv6 source address is set to the IPv6
            transport address contained in the corresponding TCP BIB
            entry.

            The STE destination IPv6 transport address contains the port
            y (i.e. the same port than the destination IPv4 transport
            address) and the IPv6 representation of Y (i.e. the IPv4
            address of the destination IPv4 transport address),
            generated using the algorithm described in Section 3.2.5.

            The lifetime of the entry is set to 6 seconds as per
            [RFC5382].

         The state is moved to V4 SYN RCV.

         If the NAT64 is performing Address-Dependent filtering, the
         packet is stored (The motivation for creating the session table
         entry and storing the packet (instead of simply dropping the
         packet based on the filtering) is to support simultaneous open
         of TCP connections).

         If the NAT64 is not performing Address-Dependent filtering, it
         translates and forwards the packet as described in the
         following sections.

   For any other packet belonging to this connection,

      If there is a corresponding entry in the TCP BIB depending on the
      security policy other packets MAY be forwarded or MAY be silently
      discarded.  In any case, the state remains unchanged.



Bagnulo, et al.           Expires June 18, 2010                [Page 25]

Internet-Draft                    NAT64                    December 2009


      If there is no corresponding entry in the TCP BIB the packet is
      silently discarded.

   *** V4 SYN RCV ***

   If a V6 SYN is received with incoming tuple with source transport
   address (X',x) and destination transport address (Y',y), then the
   lifetime of the corresponding TCP session table entry is set to at
   least 2 hours 4 min (the established connection idle timeout as
   defined in [RFC5382]).  The packet is translated and forwarded.  The
   state is moved to ESTABLISHED.

   If the lifetime expires, an ICMP Port Unreachable error (Type 3, Code
   3) containing the IPv4 SYN packet stored is sent back to the source
   of the v4 SYN, the session table entry is deleted and, the state is
   moved to CLOSED.

   For any other packet, depending on the security policy other packets
   MAY be forwarded or MAY be silently discarded.  In any case, the
   state remains unchanged.

   *** V6 SYN RCV ***

   If a V4 SYN is received (with or without the ACK flag set), with an
   incoming tuple with source IPv4 transport address (Y,y) and
   destination IPv4 transport address (X,x), then the state is moved to
   ESTABLISHED.  The timer is set to at least 2 hours 4 min (the
   established connection idle timeout as defined in [RFC5382]).  The
   packet is translated and forwarded.

   If the lifetime expires, the session table entry is deleted and the
   state is moved to CLOSED.

   For any other packet, depending on the security policy other packets
   MAY be forwarded or MAY be silently discarded.  In any case, the
   state remains unchanged.

   *** ESTABLISHED ***

   If the lifetime expires, the session table entry is deleted and the
   state is moved to CLOSED.

   If a V4 FIN packet is received, the packet is translated and
   forwarded.  The state is moved to V4 FIN RCV.

   If a V6 FIN packet is received, the packet is translated and
   forwarded.  The state is moved to V6 FIN RCV.




Bagnulo, et al.           Expires June 18, 2010                [Page 26]

Internet-Draft                    NAT64                    December 2009


   If a V4 RST or a V6 RST packet is received, the packet is translated
   and forwarded.  The lifetime is set to 4 min and state is moved to
   RST RCV.  (Since the NAT64 is uncertain whether the peer will accept
   the RST packet, instead of moving the state to CLOSED, it moves to
   the RST RCV, which has a shorter lifetime.  If no other packets are
   received for this connection during the short timer, the NAT64
   assumes that the peer has accepted the RST packet and moves to
   CLOSED.  If packet keep flowing, the NAT64 assumes that the peer has
   not accepted the RST packet and moves back to ESTABLISHED state.)

   If any other packet is received, the packet is translated and
   forwarded.  The lifetime is set to at least 2 hours and 4 min.  The
   state remains unchanged as ESTABLISHED.

   *** V4 FIN RCV ***

   If a V6 FIN packet is received, the packet is translated and
   forwarded.  The lifetime is set to 4 min.  The state is moved to V6
   FIN + V4 FIN RCV.

   If any other packet is received, the packet is translated and
   forwarded.  The lifetime is set to at least 2 hours and 4 min.  The
   state remains unchanged as V4 FIN RCV.

   If the lifetime expires, the session table entry is deleted and the
   state is moved to CLOSED.

   *** V6 FIN RCV ***

   If a V4 FIN packet is received, the packet is translated and
   forwarded.  The lifetime is set to 4 min.  The state is moved to V6
   FIN + V4 FIN RCV.

   If any other packet is received, the packet is translated and
   forwarded.  The lifetime is set to at least 2 hours and 4 min.  The
   state remains unchanged as V6 FIN RCV.

   If the lifetime expires, the session table entry is deleted and the
   state is moved to CLOSED.

   *** V6 FIN + V4 FIN RCV ***

   All packets are translated and forwarded.

   If the lifetime expires, the session table entry is deleted and the
   state is moved to CLOSED.

   *** RST RCV ***



Bagnulo, et al.           Expires June 18, 2010                [Page 27]

Internet-Draft                    NAT64                    December 2009


   If a packet other than a RST packet is received, the lifetime is set
   to at least 2 hours and 4 min and the state is moved to ESTABLISHED.

   If the lifetime expires, the session table entry is deleted and the
   state is moved to CLOSED.

3.2.3.  Rules for allocation of IPv4 transport addresses

   If the rules specify that a new TCP or UDP BIB entry is created for a
   source transport address of (S',s), then the NAT64 allocates an IPv4
   transport address for this BIB entry as follows:

      If there exists some other BIB entry containing S' as the IPv6
      address and mapping it to some IPv4 address T, then use T as the
      IPv4 address.  Otherwise, use any IPv4 address of the IPv4 pool
      assigned to the NAT64 to be used for translation.

      If the port s is in the Well-Known port range 0..1023, then the
      NAT64 SHOULD allocate a port t from this same range.  Otherwise,
      if the port s is in the range 1024..65535, then the NAT64 SHOULD
      allocate a port t from this range.  Furthermore, if port s is
      even, then t SHOULD be even, and if port s is odd, then t SHOULD
      be odd. (this behavior is recommended in Section 7.1 of [RFC5382])

      In all cases, the allocated IPv4 transport address (T,t) MUST NOT
      be in use in another entry in the same BIB, but MAY be in use in
      the other BIB (referring to the UDP and TCP BIBs).

   If it is not possible to allocate an appropriate IPv4 transport
   address or create a BIB entry for some reason, then the packet is
   discarded.  The NAT64 MAY send an ICMPv6 Destination Unreachable/
   Address unreachable (Code 3) message.

3.2.4.  ICMP Query Session Handling

   The state information stored for an ICMP Query session in the ICMP
   Query session table includes a timer that tracks the remaining
   lifetime of the session.  When the timer expires, the session is
   deleted.  If all the sessions corresponding to a ICMP Query BIB entry
   are deleted, then the ICMP Query BIB entry is also deleted in the
   case of dynamically created entries.

   An incoming ICMPv6 Informational packet with IPv6 source address X',
   IPv6 destination address Y' and Identifier I1, is processed as
   follows:

      If the local security policy determines that ICMPv6 Informative
      packets are to be filtered, the packet is silently discarded.



Bagnulo, et al.           Expires June 18, 2010                [Page 28]

Internet-Draft                    NAT64                    December 2009


      Else, the NAT64 searches for a ICMP Query BIB entry that matches
      the (X',I1) pair.  If such entry does not exist, a new entry is
      created with the following data:

         The BIB IPv6 address is set to X' i.e. the source IPv6 address
         of the IPv6 packet.

         The BIB ICMPv6 Query Id is set to I1 i.e. the ICMPv6 Query
         Identifier.

         If there exists some other BIB entry containing the same IPv6
         address X' and mapping it to some IPv4 address T, then use T as
         the BIB IPv4 address for this new entry.  Otherwise, use any
         IPv4 address assigned to the IPv4 interface.

         As the BIB ICMPv4 Identifier use any available value i.e. any
         identifier value for which no other entry exists with the same
         (IPv4 address, ICMPv4 Query Id) pair.

      The NAT64 searches for an ICMP query session table entry
      corresponding to the incoming 3-tuple (X',Y',I1).  If no such
      entry is found, a new entry is created.  The information included
      in the new session table entry is as follows:

         The STE IPv6 source address is set to the X' i.e. the address
         contained in the received IPv6 packet,

         The STE IPv6 destination address is set to the Y' i.e. the
         address contained in the received IPv6 packet,

         The STE IPv6 identifier is set to the I1 I.e. the identifier
         contained in the received IPv6 packet,

         The STE IPv4 source address is set to the IPv4 address
         contained in the corresponding BIB entry,

         The STE IPv4 identifier is set to the IPv4 identifier contained
         in the corresponding BIB entry,

         The STE IPv4 destination address is algorithmically generated
         from Y' using the reverse algorithm as specified in
         Section 3.2.5.

      The NAT64 sets or resets the timer in the session table entry to
      maximum session lifetime.  By default, the maximum session
      lifetime is 60 seconds.  The maximum lifetime value SHOULD be
      configurable.  The packet is translated and forwarded as described
      in the following sections.



Bagnulo, et al.           Expires June 18, 2010                [Page 29]

Internet-Draft                    NAT64                    December 2009


   An incoming ICMPv4 Query packet with source IPv4 address Y,
   destination IPv4 address X and Identifier I2 is processed as follows:

      The NAT64 searches for a ICMP Query BIB entry that contains X as
      IPv4 address matches and I2 as the IPv4 Identifier.  If such an
      entry does not exists, the packet is dropped.  An ICMP message MAY
      be sent to the original sender of the packet, unless the discarded
      packet is itself an ICMP message.  The ICMP message, if sent, has
      a type of 3 (Destination Unreachable).

      If the NAT64 filters on its IPv4 interface, then the NAT64 checks
      to see if the incoming packet is allowed according to the address-
      dependent filtering rule.  To do this, it searches for a session
      table entry with a STE source IPv4 address equal to X, an STE IPv4
      Identifier equal to I2 and a STE destination IPv4 address equal to
      Y. If such an entry is found (there may be more than one), packet
      processing continues.  Otherwise, the packet is discarded.  If the
      packet is discarded, then an ICMP message MAY be sent to the
      original sender of the packet, unless the discarded packet is
      itself an ICMP message.  The ICMP message, if sent, has a type of
      3 (Destination Unreachable) and a code of 13 (Communication
      Administratively Prohibited).

      In case the packet is not discarded in the previous processing
      (either because the NAT64 is not filtering or because the packet
      is compliant with the Address-dependent filtering rule), then the
      NAT64 searches for a session table entry with a STE source IPv4
      address equal to X, an STE IPv4 Identifier equal to I2 and a STE
      destination IPv4 address equal to Y. If no such entry is found, a
      new entry is created with the following information:

         The STE source IPv4 address is set to X,

         The STE IPv4 Identifier is set to I2,

         The STE destination IPv4 address is set to Y,

         The STE source IPv6 address is set to the IPv6 address of the
         corresponding BIB entry,

         The STE IPv6 Identifier is set to the IPv6 Identifier of the
         corresponding BIB entry, and,

         The STE destination IPv6 address is set to the IPv6
         representation of the IPv4 address of Y, generated using the
         algorithm described in Section 3.2.5.





Bagnulo, et al.           Expires June 18, 2010                [Page 30]

Internet-Draft                    NAT64                    December 2009


         The NAT64 sets or resets the timer in the session table entry
         to maximum session lifetime.  By default, the maximum session
         lifetime is 60 seconds.  The maximum lifetime value SHOULD be
         configurable.  The packet is translated and forwarded as
         described in the following sections.

3.2.5.  Generation of the IPv6 representations of IPv4 addresses

   NAT64 support multiple algorithms for the generation of the IPv6
   representation of an IPv4 address.  The constraints imposed to the
   generation algorithms are the following:

      The same algorithm to create an IPv6 address from an IPv4 address
      MUST be used by:

         The DNS64 to create the IPv6 address to be returned in the
         synthetic AAAA RR from the IPv4 address contained in original A
         RR, and,

         The NAT64 to create the IPv6 address to be included in the
         destination address field of the outgoing IPv6 packets from the
         IPv4 address included in the destination address field of the
         incoming IPv4 packet.

      The algorithm MUST be reversible, i.e. it MUST be possible to
      extract the original IPv4 address from the IPv6 representation.

      The input for the algorithm MUST be limited to the IPv4 address,
      the IPv6 prefix (denoted Pref64::/n) used in the IPv6
      representations and optionally a set of stable parameters that are
      configured in the NAT64 (such as fixed string to be used as a
      suffix).

         If we note n the length of the prefix Pref64::/n, then n MUST
         the less or equal than 96.  If a Pref64::/n is configured
         through any means in the DNS64 (such as manually configured, or
         other automatic mean not specified in this document), the
         default algorithm MUST use this prefix.  If no prefix is
         available, the algorithm SHOULD use the Well-Known prefix (64:
         FF9B::/96) defined in [I-D.ietf-behave-address-format]

   NAT64 MUST support the algorithm for generating IPv6 representations
   of IPv4 addresses defined in section 2 of
   [I-D.ietf-behave-address-format].  The aforementioned algorithm
   SHOULD be used as default algorithm.






Bagnulo, et al.           Expires June 18, 2010                [Page 31]

Internet-Draft                    NAT64                    December 2009


3.3.  Computing the Outgoing Tuple

   This step computes the outgoing tuple by translating the addresses
   and ports or ICMP Query Id in the incoming tuple.

   In the text below, a reference to the the "BIB" means either the TCP
   BIB the UDP BIB or the ICMP Query BIB as appropriate.

      NOTE: Not all addresses are translated using the BIB.  BIB entries
      are used to translate IPv6 source transport addresses to IPv4
      source transport addresses, and IPv4 destination transport
      addresses to IPv6 destination transport addresses.  They are NOT
      used to translate IPv6 destination transport addresses to IPv4
      destination transport addresses, nor to translate IPv4 source
      transport addresses to IPv6 source transport addresses.  The
      latter cases are handled applying the algorithmic transformation
      described in Section 3.2.5.  This distinction is important;
      without it, hairpinning doesn't work correctly.

3.3.1.  Computing the outgoing 5-tuple for TCP and UDP.

   The transport protocol in the outgoing 5-tuple is always the same as
   that in the incoming 5-tuple.

   When translating in the IPv6 --> IPv4 direction, let the incoming
   source and destination transport addresses in the 5-tuple be (S',s)
   and (D',d) respectively.  The outgoing source transport address is
   computed as follows: the BIB contains a entry (S',s) <--> (T,t), then
   the outgoing source transport address is (T,t).

   The outgoing destination address is computed algorithmically from D'
   using the address transformation described in Section 3.2.5.

   When translating in the IPv4 --> IPv6 direction, let the incoming
   source and destination transport addresses in the 5-tuple be (S,s)
   and (D,d) respectively.  The outgoing source transport address is
   computed as follows:

      The outgoing source transport address is generated from S using
      the address transformation algorithm described in Section 3.2.5.

      The BIB table is searched for an entry (X',x) <--> (D,d), and the
      outgoing destination transport address is set to (X',x).








Bagnulo, et al.           Expires June 18, 2010                [Page 32]

Internet-Draft                    NAT64                    December 2009


3.3.2.  Computing the outgoing 3-tuple for ICMP Query messages

   When translating in the IPv6 --> IPv4 direction, let the incoming
   source and destination addresses in the 3-tuple be S' and D'
   respectively and the ICMPv6 Query Identifier be I1.  The outgoing
   source address is computed as follows: the BIB contains a entry
   (S',I1) <--> (T,I2), then the outgoing source address is T and the
   ICMPv4 Query Id is I2.

   The outgoing IPv4 destination address is computed algorithmically
   from D' using the address transformation described in Section 3.2.5.

   When translating in the IPv4 --> IPv6 direction, let the incoming
   source and destination addresses in the 3-tuple be S and D
   respectively and the ICMPv4 query Id is I2.  The outgoing source
   address is generated from S using the address transformation
   algorithm described in Section 3.2.5.  The BIB is searched for an
   entry containing (X',I1) <--> (D,I2) and the outgoing destination
   address is X' and the outgoing ICMPv6 Query Id is I1.

3.4.  Translating the Packet

   This step translates the packet from IPv6 to IPv4 or vice-versa.

   The translation of the packet is as specified in section 3 and
   section 4 of IP/ICMP Translation Algorithm
   [I-D.ietf-behave-v6v4-xlate], with the following modifications:

   o  When translating an IP header (sections 3.1 and 4.1), the source
      and destination IP address fields are set to the source and
      destination IP addresses from the outgoing tuple as determined in
      Section 3.3.

   o  When the protocol following the IP header is TCP or UDP, then the
      source and destination ports are modified to the source and
      destination ports from the outgoing 5-tuple.  In addition, the TCP
      or UDP checksum must also be updated to reflect the translated
      addresses and ports; note that the TCP and UDP checksum covers the
      pseudo-header which contains the source and destination IP
      addresses.  An algorithm for efficiently updating these checksums
      is described in [RFC3022].

   o  When the protocol following the IP header is ICMP and it is an
      ICMP Query message, the ICMP query Identifier is set to the one of
      the outgoing 3-tuple as determined in Section 3.3.2.

   o  When the protocol following the IP header is ICMP (sections 3.4
      and 4.4) and it is an ICMP error message, the source and



Bagnulo, et al.           Expires June 18, 2010                [Page 33]

Internet-Draft                    NAT64                    December 2009


      destination transport addresses in the embedded packet are set to
      the destination and source transport addresses from the outgoing
      5-tuple (note the swap of source and destination).

   The size of outgoing packets as well and the potential need for
   fragmentation is done according to the behavior defined in IP/ICMP
   Translation Algorithm [I-D.ietf-behave-v6v4-xlate]

3.5.  Handling Hairpinning

   This step handles hairpinning if necessary.  A NAT64 that forwards
   packets originating from an IPv6 address, destined for an IPv4
   address that matches the active mapping for another IPv6 address,
   back to that IPv6 address are defined as as supporting "hairpinning".

   If the destination IP address is an address assigned to the NAT64
   itself (i.e., is one of the IPv4 addresses assigned to the IPv4
   interface, or is covered by the Pref64::/n prefix assigned to the
   IPv6 interface), then the packet is a hairpin packet.  The outgoing
   5-tuple becomes the incoming 5-tuple, and the packet is treated as if
   it was received on the outgoing interface.  Processing of the packet
   continues at step 2.  Filtering and updating binding and session
   information described in Section 3.2


4.  Security Considerations

   Implications on end-to-end security.

   Any protocol that protect IP header information are essentially
   incompatible with NAT64.  So, this implies that end to end IPsec
   verification will fail when AH is used (both transport and tunnel
   mode) and when ESP is used in tunnel mode.  This is inherent to any
   network layer translation mechanism.  End-to-end IPsec protection can
   be restored, using UDP encapsulation as described in [RFC3948].  The
   actual extensions to support IPsec are out of the scope of this
   document.

   Filtering.

   NAT64 creates binding state using packets flowing from the IPv6 side
   to the IPv4 side.  In accordance with the procedures defined in this
   document following the guidelines defined in RFC 4787 [RFC4787] a
   NAT64 must offer "enpoint independent filtering".  This means:

      for any IPv6 side packet with source (S'1,s1) and destination
      (Pref64::D1,d1) that creates an external mapping to (S1,s1),
      (D1,d1),



Bagnulo, et al.           Expires June 18, 2010                [Page 34]

Internet-Draft                    NAT64                    December 2009


      for any subsequent external connection to from S'1 to (D2,d2)
      within a given binding timer window,

      (S1,s1) = (S2,s2) for all values of D2,d2

   Implementations may also provide support for "Address-Dependent
   Mapping" and "Address and Port-Dependent Mapping", as also defined in
   this document and following the guidelines defined in RFC 4787
   [RFC4787].

   The security properties however are determined by which packets the
   NAT64 filter allows in and which it does not.  The security
   properties are determined by the filtering behavior and filtering
   configuration in the filtering portions of the NAT64, not by the
   address mapping behavior.  For example,

      Without filtering - When "endpoint independent filtering" is used
      in NAT64, once a binding is created in the IPv6 ---> IPv4
      direction, packets from any node on the IPv4 side destined to the
      IPv6 transport address will traverse the NAT64 gateway and be
      forwarded to the IPv6 transport address that created the binding.
      However,

      With filtering - When "endpoint independent filtering" is used in
      NAT64, once a binding is created in the IPv6 ---> IPv4 direction,
      packets from any node on the IPv4 side destined to the IPv6
      transport address will first be processed against the filtering
      rules.  If the source IPv4 address is permitted, the packets will
      be forwarded to the IPv6 transport address.  If the source IPv4
      address is explicitly denied -- or the default policy is to deny
      all addresses not explicitly permitted -- then the packet will
      discarded.  A dynamic filter may be employed where by the filter
      will only allow packets from the IPv4 address to which the
      original packet that created the binding was sent.  This means
      that only the D IPv4 addresses to which the IPv6 host has
      initiated connections will be able to reach the IPv6 transport
      address, and no others.  This essentially narrows the effective
      operation of the NAT64 device to a "Address Dependent" behavior,
      though not by its mapping behavior, but instead by its filtering
      behavior.

   Attacks to NAT64.

   The NAT64 device itself is a potential victim of different type of
   attacks.  In particular, the NAT64 can be a victim of DoS attacks.
   The NAT64 box has a limited number of resources that can be consumed
   by attackers creating a DoS attack.  The NAT64 has a limited number
   of IPv4 addresses that it uses to create the bindings.  Even though



Bagnulo, et al.           Expires June 18, 2010                [Page 35]

Internet-Draft                    NAT64                    December 2009


   the NAT64 performs address and port translation, it is possible for
   an attacker to consume all the IPv4 transport addresses by sending
   IPv6 packets with different source IPv6 transport addresses.  It
   should be noted that this attack can only be launched from the IPv6
   side, since IPv4 packets are not used to create binding state.  DoS
   attacks can also affect other limited resources available in the
   NAT64 such as memory or link capacity.  For instance, it is possible
   for an attacker to launch a DoS attack to the memory of the NAT64
   device by sending fragments that the NAT64 will store for a given
   period.  If the number of fragments is high enough, the memory of the
   NAT64 could be exhausted.  NAT64 devices should implement proper
   protection against such attacks, for instance allocating a limited
   amount of memory for fragmented packet storage.

   Avoiding hairpinning loops

   If the IPv6-only client can guess the IPv4 binding address that will
   be created, it can use the IPv6 representation of it as source
   address for creating this binding.  Then any packet sent to the
   binding's IPv4 address will loop in the NAT64.

   Consider the following example:

   Suppose that the IPv4 pool is 192.0.2.0/24

   Then the IPv6-only client sends this to NAT64:

      Source: [Pref64::192.0.2.1]:500

      Destination: whatever

   The NAT64 allocates 192.0.2.1:500 as IPv4 binding address.  Now
   anything sent to 192.0.2.1:500, be it a hairpinned IPv6 packet or an
   IPv4 packet, will loop.

   It should be noted that it is not hard to guess the IPv4 address that
   will be allocated.  First the attacker creates a binding and use e.g.
   STUN to know your external IPv4.  New bindings will always have this
   address.  Then it uses a source port in the range 1-1023.  This will
   increase your chances to 1/512 (since range and parity must be
   preserved).

   In order to address this vulnerability, the NAT64 drops IPv6 packets
   whose source address is in Pref64::/n.







Bagnulo, et al.           Expires June 18, 2010                [Page 36]

Internet-Draft                    NAT64                    December 2009


5.  IANA Considerations

   This document contains no IANA considerations.


6.  Contributors

   George Tsirtsis

      Qualcomm

      tsirtsis@googlemail.com

   Greg Lebovitz

      Juniper

      gregory.ietf@gmail.com

   Simon Parreault

      Viagenie

      simon.perreault@viagenie.ca


7.  Acknowledgements

   Dave Thaler, Dan Wing, Alberto Garcia-Martinez, Reinaldo Penno,
   Ranjana Rao, Lars Eggert, Senthil Sivakumar, Zhen Cao and Joao Damas
   reviewed the document and provided useful comments to improve it.

   The content of the draft was improved thanks to discussions with Fred
   Baker and Jari Arkko.

   Marcelo Bagnulo and Iljitsch van Beijnum are partly funded by
   Trilogy, a research project supported by the European Commission
   under its Seventh Framework Program.


8.  References

8.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC1035]  Mockapetris, P., "Domain names - implementation and



Bagnulo, et al.           Expires June 18, 2010                [Page 37]

Internet-Draft                    NAT64                    December 2009


              specification", STD 13, RFC 1035, November 1987.

   [RFC4787]  Audet, F. and C. Jennings, "Network Address Translation
              (NAT) Behavioral Requirements for Unicast UDP", BCP 127,
              RFC 4787, January 2007.

   [RFC3948]  Huttunen, A., Swander, B., Volpe, V., DiBurro, L., and M.
              Stenberg, "UDP Encapsulation of IPsec ESP Packets",
              RFC 3948, January 2005.

   [RFC5382]  Guha, S., Biswas, K., Ford, B., Sivakumar, S., and P.
              Srisuresh, "NAT Behavioral Requirements for TCP", BCP 142,
              RFC 5382, October 2008.

   [RFC5508]  Srisuresh, P., Ford, B., Sivakumar, S., and S. Guha, "NAT
              Behavioral Requirements for ICMP", BCP 148, RFC 5508,
              April 2009.

   [I-D.ietf-behave-v6v4-xlate]
              Li, X., Bao, C., and F. Baker, "IP/ICMP Translation
              Algorithm", draft-ietf-behave-v6v4-xlate-04 (work in
              progress), November 2009.

   [I-D.ietf-behave-address-format]
              Huitema, C., Bao, C., Bagnulo, M., Boucadair, M., and X.
              Li, "IPv6 Addressing of IPv4/IPv6 Translators",
              draft-ietf-behave-address-format-02 (work in progress),
              December 2009.

8.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.ietf-behave-dns64]
              Bagnulo, M., Sullivan, A., Matthews, P., and I. Beijnum,
              "DNS64: DNS extensions for Network Address Translation
              from IPv6 Clients to IPv4 Servers",
              draft-ietf-behave-dns64-02 (work in progress),
              October 2009.

   [RFC0793]  Postel, J., "Transmission Control Protocol", STD 7,
              RFC 793, September 1981.

   [RFC2766]  Tsirtsis, G. and P. Srisuresh, "Network Address
              Translation - Protocol Translation (NAT-PT)", RFC 2766,
              February 2000.

   [RFC1858]  Ziemba, G., Reed, D., and P. Traina, "Security
              Considerations for IP Fragment Filtering", RFC 1858,
              October 1995.



Bagnulo, et al.           Expires June 18, 2010                [Page 38]

Internet-Draft                    NAT64                    December 2009


   [RFC3128]  Miller, I., "Protection Against a Variant of the Tiny
              Fragment Attack (RFC 1858)", RFC 3128, June 2001.

   [RFC3022]  Srisuresh, P. and K. Egevang, "Traditional IP Network
              Address Translator (Traditional NAT)", RFC 3022,
              January 2001.

   [RFC4966]  Aoun, C. and E. Davies, "Reasons to Move the Network
              Address Translator - Protocol Translator (NAT-PT) to
              Historic Status", RFC 4966, July 2007.

   [I-D.ietf-mmusic-ice]
              Rosenberg, J., "Interactive Connectivity Establishment
              (ICE): A Protocol for Network Address Translator (NAT)
              Traversal for Offer/Answer Protocols",
              draft-ietf-mmusic-ice-19 (work in progress), October 2007.

   [RFC4963]  Heffner, J., Mathis, M., and B. Chandler, "IPv4 Reassembly
              Errors at High Data Rates", RFC 4963, July 2007.

   [I-D.ietf-behave-v6v4-framework]
              Baker, F., Li, X., Bao, C., and K. Yin, "Framework for
              IPv4/IPv6 Translation",
              draft-ietf-behave-v6v4-framework-03 (work in progress),
              October 2009.


Appendix A.  Application scenarios

   In this section, we describe how to apply NAT64/DNS64 to the suitable
   scenarios described in [I-D.ietf-behave-v6v4-framework] .

A.1.  Scenario 1: an IPv6 network to the IPv4 Internet

   An IPv6 only network basically has IPv6 hosts (those that are
   currently available) and because of different reasons including
   operational simplicity, wants to run those hosts in IPv6 only mode,
   while still providing access to the IPv4 Internet.  The scenario is
   depicted in the picture below.












Bagnulo, et al.           Expires June 18, 2010                [Page 39]

Internet-Draft                    NAT64                    December 2009


                               +----+                  +-------------+
                               |    +------------------+IPv6 Internet+
                               |    |                  +-------------+
     IPv6 host-----------------+ GW |
                               |    |                  +-------------+
                               |    +------------------+IPv4 Internet+
                               +----+                  +-------------+

     |-------------------------public v6-----------------------------|
     |-------public v6---------|NAT|----------public v4--------------|




   The proposed NAT64/DNS64 is perfectly suitable for this particular
   scenario.  The deployment of the NAT64/DNS64 would be as follows: The
   NAT64 function should be located in the GW device that connects the
   IPv6 site to the IPv4 Internet.  The DNS64 functionality can be
   placed either in the local recursive DNS server or in the local
   resolver in the hosts.

   The proposed NAT64/DNS64 approach satisfies the requirements of this
   scenario, in particular because it doesn't require any changes to
   current IPv6 hosts in the site to obtain basic functionality.

A.2.  Scenario 3: the IPv6 Internet to an IPv4 network

   The scenario of servers using private addresses and being reached
   from the IPv6 Internet basically includes the cases that for whatever
   reason the servers cannot be upgraded to IPv6 and they even may not
   have public IPv4 addresses and it would be useful to allow IPv6 nodes
   in the IPv6 Internet to reach those servers.  This scenario is
   depicted in the figure below.

                                     +----+
   IPv6 Host(s)-------(Internet)-----+ GW +------Private IPv4 Servers
                                     +----+

   |---------public v6---------------|NAT|------private v4----------|

   This scenario can again be perfectly served by the NAT64 approach.
   In this case the NAT64 functionality is placed in the GW device
   connecting the IPv6 Internet to the server's site.  In this case, the
   DNS64 functionality is not required in general since real (i.e. non
   synthetic) AAAA RRs for the IPv4 servers containing the IPv6
   representation of the IPv4 address of the servers can be created.
   See more discussion about this in [I-D.ietf-behave-dns64]




Bagnulo, et al.           Expires June 18, 2010                [Page 40]

Internet-Draft                    NAT64                    December 2009


   Again, this scenario is satisfied by the NAT64 since it supports the
   required functionality without requiring changes in the IPv4 servers
   nor in the IPv6 clients.


Authors' Addresses

   Marcelo Bagnulo
   UC3M
   Av. Universidad 30
   Leganes, Madrid  28911
   Spain

   Phone: +34-91-6249500
   Fax:
   Email: marcelo@it.uc3m.es
   URI:   http://www.it.uc3m.es/marcelo


   Philip Matthews
   Alcatel-Lucent
   600 March Road
   Ottawa, Ontario
   Canada

   Phone: +1 613-592-4343 x224
   Fax:
   Email: philip_matthews@magma.ca
   URI:


   Iljitsch van Beijnum
   IMDEA Networks
   Avda. del Mar Mediterraneo, 22
   Leganes, Madrid  28918
   Spain

   Email: iljitsch@muada.com













Bagnulo, et al.           Expires June 18, 2010                [Page 41]


