


IPv6 Operations                                                 T. Chown
Internet-Draft                                 University of Southampton
Intended status: Informational                                   M. Ford
Expires: December 9, 2011                               Internet Society
                                                               S. Venaas
                                                           Cisco Systems
                                                            June 7, 2011


                      World IPv6 Day Call to Arms
                   draft-chown-v6ops-call-to-arms-03

Abstract

   The Internet Society (ISOC) has declared that June 8th 2011 will be
   World IPv6 Day, on which some major organisations are going to make
   their content available over IPv6.  With the likes of Google and
   Facebook providing IPv6 access to their production services and
   domains, it is very likely we will see more IPv6 traffic flowing
   across the Internet than has ever been seen before.  With this in
   mind, it seems timely to issue a call to arms for systems and network
   administrators to review their organisation's IPv6 capabilities in
   order to mitigate common causes of IPv6 connectivity problems in
   advance of the day.  The increased traffic on World IPv6 Day should
   also create an excellent opportunity to observe the behaviour and
   performance of IPv6; it is thus very desirable to have appropriate
   measurement tools in place in advance.  We discuss some appropriate
   tools from the network and application perspective.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 9, 2011.

Copyright Notice




Chown, et al.           Expires December 9, 2011                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft         World IPv6 Day Call to Arms             June 2011


   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Connectivity Issues  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     2.1.  Unmanaged Tunnels  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     2.2.  Tunnel Broker first-hop delays . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     2.3.  Connection Timeouts  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     2.4.  PMTU Discovery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     2.5.  Rogue Router Advertisements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     2.6.  Tunnel performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     2.7.  AAAA record advertised but service not enabled . . . . . .  8
     2.8.  IPv6 Reverse DNS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   3.  Instrumentation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     3.1.  IPv6 traffic levels  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     3.2.  Network flow records . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     3.3.  Client Web Access Success Rate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     3.4.  Tools to measure IPv6 brokenness . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     3.5.  IPv4 Performance Comparison  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     3.6.  User Tickets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     3.7.  Security monitoring  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   4.  IPv6-only testing  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   5.  Conclusions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   6.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   7.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   8.  Acknowledgments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   9.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15










Chown, et al.           Expires December 9, 2011                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft         World IPv6 Day Call to Arms             June 2011


1.  Introduction

   Despite the recent exhaustion of the available IPv4 address pool,
   deployment of IPv6 remains limited.  To help encourage organisations
   to trial production deployment, ISOC has declared June 8th 2011 as
   World IPv6 Day [ISOC].  Organisations are encouraged to use this day
   to test IPv6 in production by making their main, externally-facing
   websites available over IPv6.  Sites planning to turn on IPv6 for
   access in their network in the interest of World IPv6 Day should
   ensure this is completed well before the day, and commit to leaving
   it active after the event, and thus using the method they would
   choose to do so indefinitely.  At the current time, this would
   generally mean enabling dual-stack networking with IPv4 running
   alongside IPv6.  However, IPv6-only networks are ultimately
   inevitable, and so some sites may choose to use June 8th to undertake
   some focused tests on that deployment model.

   The purpose of this document is two-fold.  One is to discuss common
   IPv6 connectivity issues that are likely to arise on June 8th, with a
   focus on dual-stack networking (which is likely to be how the vast
   majority of sites take part).  Most of the issues discussed in this
   text are those that would affect an end site or enterprise network
   running IPv6, but may be applicable elsewhere.  Highlighting the
   issues should help raise awareness of those problems and possible
   mitigations.  The other purpose is to encourage organisations to
   think about how they might get useful instrumentation in place to
   observe what happens in and to/from their networks on the day, both
   from the network and application perspective.  Such measurement tools
   are likely to be useful in the longer term, so once deployed they
   could be left in place beyond June 8th.

   For sites providing content, June 8th will be a chance to make some
   public facing services available over IPv6, most likely web content
   using their production domain (e.g. www.example.com) rather than a
   contrived IPv6 test domain (e.g. www.ipv6.example.com).  Enabling
   public-facing Internet services is a reasonable first step for any
   organisation deploying IPv6.  For ISPs, supporting IPv6 for their
   Internet-facing services (web, mail, etc.) and recording the impact
   of World IPv6 Day on their IPv4-only customers is an appropriate
   action.  For sites enabling clients, doing so initially in their IT
   department may be appropriate; for educational sites enabling IPv6 on
   eduroam wireless networks could be appropriate given the underlying
   802.1x authentication technology is IP version independent.

   It should be emphasised that while World IPv6 Day is in many senses
   an 'experiment' or 'test flight' for IPv6, organisations should
   strongly consider deploying IPv6 in exactly the same robust way that
   they would do if they were deploying IPv6 and leaving it enabled



Chown, et al.           Expires December 9, 2011                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft         World IPv6 Day Call to Arms             June 2011


   indefinitely.  Similarly, applying measures to improve IPv6
   robustness, e.g. improved ICMPv6 filtering practice, should be
   considered long term benefits.  That they 'affect' the experiment is
   not a problem; indeed all measures that improve the robustness of
   IPv6 deployment should be seen as worthwhile.  There will still be
   problems found, but these can at least be recognised and work done to
   make them better.

   The document also includes a brief section on tools that might be
   used to test IPv6-only operation.

   The scope of this document is purely informational to provoke
   discussion.


2.  Connectivity Issues

   In this section we review some common causes of IPv6 connectivity
   issues, oriented towards those that end sites or enterprises may have
   some ability to influence or mitigate.  Some issues, such as transit
   arrangements, are not included - currently the focus is on end sites
   (or users) who may take part in the World IPv6 Day. Some IPv6
   connectivity test sites are emerging, for example [testipv6].  There
   is no significance to the order in which issues are listed.

2.1.  Unmanaged Tunnels

   One cause of connectivity problems is the use of unmanaged tunnels,
   in particular 'automated' methods that are not provisioned by the
   user's ISP.  The most common example is 6to4 [RFC3056], or more
   specifically the 6to4 relay approach described in [RFC3068].  A
   native IPv6 host communicating with a 6to4 host will require both
   hosts to have access to an appropriately capable 6to4 relay (which
   may or may not be the same relay).  If a host in a native IPv6
   network has no route to 2002::/16 it cannot send traffic to a 6to4
   host.  Similarly, a 6to4 router that cannot reach the well-known IPv4
   anycast relay address cannot send traffic to a native IPv6 network.
   There are also potential issues with Protocol 41 filtering at site
   borders close to the client.

   A presentation by Geoff Huston at IETF80 [Huston2011] highlighted the
   connection failure rates with 6to4, measured in excess of 15%, as
   well as the additional latency in 6to4 communications, with 6to4
   showing an average additional 1.2s latency per retrieval.

   One approach to this problem is to encourage sites/ISPs to run local
   relays, as discussed in [I-D.carpenter-v6ops-6to4-teredo-advisory].
   This draft discusses how to make 6to4 more robust in situations where



Chown, et al.           Expires December 9, 2011                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft         World IPv6 Day Call to Arms             June 2011


   there is a conscious decision to use it.  Sites using 6to4 should
   consider deploying local relays to increase the chance of a good IPv6
   experience.  The alternative to reduce such problems is simply to
   move 6to4 to Historic, as proposed in
   [I-D.troan-v6ops-6to4-to-historic].  This would mean 6to4 would not
   be enabled by default anywhere, and once its usage had reduced
   enough, relays could be turned off.

   There may still be some CPE routers that do enable 6to4 by default;
   it is likely that devices behind such routers will experience
   problems on World IPv6 Day.

   Connection failures and latency with the Teredo protocol [RFC4380]
   were also highlighted by Geoff Huston's IETF80 presentation.  Teredo
   connection failure rates were as high as 35%, with 1-3s additional
   latency.  One of the connection issues is reliance on the ICMPv6
   probe packet being able to reach the destination host; in practice
   filters may block these.  Thus Teredo should not be considered a
   reliable means of accessing the IPv6 Internet.

2.2.  Tunnel Broker first-hop delays

   IPv6 tunnel brokers, such as those provided by SixXS
   (http://www.sixxs.net) and Hurricane Electric
   (http://tunnelbroker.net) provide a more robust, managed approach to
   IPv6-in-IPv4 tunnelled access than 6to4.  Individual users interested
   in IPv6 access for World IPv6 Day, in the absence of IPv6 support
   from their ISP, should consider registering to use a free tunnel
   broker.  It would be sensible to register for and test your broker
   client well in advance of IPv6 Day, and ideally plan to keep it
   available beyond that date, until your ISP provides IPv6 natively for
   you.  One set of test sites to use would be the list cited on the
   ISOC World IPv6 Day site [ISOCsites].

   When choosing a broker service, it is prudent to pick one with a
   presence near to you that has a minimal round trip time.  Providers
   such as SixXS and HE have tunnel broker servers in many countries.
   Beware picking a broker in another continent that may add 150ms+ to
   your round trip times.

2.3.  Connection Timeouts

   One of the main drivers for IPv6 Day is identifying and fixing the
   problems that can lead to connection timeouts.  Because unreliable
   IPv6 connectivity leads to intensely frustrating problems for end-
   users, it is essential that people motivated to deploy IPv6
   connectivity, whether for themselves, or for a larger network, only
   do so in a well-supported, production-quality fashion.



Chown, et al.           Expires December 9, 2011                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft         World IPv6 Day Call to Arms             June 2011


   Where dual-stack systems - or rather the applications running on them
   - have a choice of IPv4 or IPv6 connectivity, timeouts can occur if
   there is no connectivity on the preferred protocol.  For example, if
   both A and AAAA DNS records exists for a web server, and IPv6
   connectivity is broken, there is likely to be some timeout for the
   browser before the connection drops back to IPv4.

   A bigger problem exists if the application or OS tries IPv6 first and
   then does not fall back to IPv4.  A bug in versions of Opera prior to
   10.5 caused such behaviour, which was obviously a big issue for Opera
   users trying to access dual-stack web sites with broken IPv6
   connectivity.

   The author has undertaken some informal tests at his own site, which
   shows how different combinations of browsers and operating systems
   behave in the event of IPv6 connections failing or when ICMP
   unreachables are received.  On Linux/Firefox, web connections timeout
   after 20 seconds for 'no response', but immediately for unreachables.
   In contrast, Windows Vista/IE was 20 seconds regardless of
   unreachables being received.  Any non-trivial delay will cause
   significant user frustration.

   A more complete set of tests was run by Teemu Savolainen and reported
   at IETF80 [Savolainen2011].  Although the tests were only samples,
   they confirmed the results, also showing experiences across a much
   broader range of platforms, and that the problems with Vista/IE are
   repeated with Win 7/IE.  It's thus clear that if major content
   providers enable IPv6 on World IPv6 Day, and end users for some
   reason try to access the content with broken IPv6 connectivity, they
   are likely to experience significant timeout issues.

   This problem is probably the main reason that Google implemented a
   AAAA whitelisting system for its test sites.  The sites had to
   demonstrate they had good IPv6 connectivity before being allowed into
   the test programme.  The topic is discussed in
   [I-D.ietf-v6ops-v6-aaaa-whitelisting-implications].  For the sake of
   World IPv6 Day, it is expected that no such whitelisting is in place
   - that is, after all, the point of having a day dedicated to testing
   IPv6 in production.

   An interesting suggestion to handle the problem is the 'happy
   eyeballs' approach described in [I-D.ietf-v6ops-happy-eyeballs].
   This approach is now also being suggested for multiple interface
   systems, as per [I-D.chen-mif-happy-eyeballs-extension].  The happy
   eyeballs philosophy is to try both IPv4 and IPv6 together, and keep
   the first working connection up, remembering the result for future
   connection attempts.  It may prefer IPv6 slightly in initial
   connections rather than trying connections exactly simultaneously.



Chown, et al.           Expires December 9, 2011                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft         World IPv6 Day Call to Arms             June 2011


   It is an interesting approach, though some people are concerned about
   the additional connection load, or that this 'workaround' is simply
   masking underlying problems that should be fixed.

2.4.  PMTU Discovery

   IPv6 mandates that fragmentation is only undertaken by the sending
   node, and thus IPv6 requires working PMTU Discovery [RFC1981].  An
   existing RFC gives Recommendations for Filtering ICMPv6 Messages in
   Firewalls [RFC4890]; if this guidance is not followed, connectivity
   problems are likely to arise.  Blindly filtering all ICMPv6 messages
   is not good practise.  Filtering ICMP is a common practice in some
   IPv4 networks today.  Adopting the same approach to ICMPv6 when
   deploying IPv6 networks will cause connectivity issues for users of
   the network filtering ICMPv6 and hosts trying to reach the filtered
   network.  RFC 4890 is therefore an important document for IPv6
   deployment engineers to read and it is similarly important to verify
   that IPv6 firewall deployments support appropriate configurations for
   ICMPv6 filtering.

   The minimum MTU for IPv6 is 1280 bytes.  Checking the MTU is an
   important step when connectivity issues arise.  Where PMTUD is not
   working or not implemented, the using the minimum MTU is likely to
   resolve the problem, though not give optimal performance (the cause
   should still be investigated and resolved for longer term benefit).
   Tunnel broker services such as SixXS and HE set their MTUs to default
   to 1280, probably due to the varying conditions their customers may
   be in.  However, it is preferable for enterprise networks to
   configure appropriate ICMPv6 filtering to allow PMTUD to operate and
   establish the most efficient MTUs for a link.

2.5.  Rogue Router Advertisements

   Within a site, hosts may use IPv6 Stateless Address Autoconfiguration
   (SLAAC) [RFC4862].  However, it is possible for accidental (or
   malicious) rogue RAs to cause connectivity issues, as described in
   the Rogue Router Advertisement Problem Statement [RFC6104].

   A typical cause of rogue RAs is Windows ICS, which can present a
   rogue 6to4 router on its wireless interface.  This will cause hosts
   to potentially autoconfigure two global IPv6 addresses and pick the
   wrong default router, with unpredictable results.  As a (bad) example
   the author experienced a scenario where he had a rogue 6to4 RA, but
   because the rogue 6to4 was working he was able to access IPv6
   networks outside his own network, but could not access most internal
   hosts inside his own network because he was unwittingly using 6to4
   from outside into his own network, and thus being firewalled from
   those internal hosts.



Chown, et al.           Expires December 9, 2011                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft         World IPv6 Day Call to Arms             June 2011


   In many cases, default address selection [RFC3484] (and
   [I-D.ietf-6man-rfc3484-revise]) would avoid such cases, because the
   address selection rules should prefer, or can be configured to
   prefer, native IPv6 over 6to4.  However not all operating systems
   implement RFC 3484 yet, in particular MacOS X (though support may be
   appearing in Lion).  Where rogue RAs cause broken IPv6 behaviour, the
   timeout issues discussed above may apply.

   Adding ACLs to your switches to block ICMPv6 Type 134 packets on
   ports that do not have routers connected would also minimise the
   impact of rogue RAs.  A more elegant solution is RA Guard [RFC6105],
   and another is use of SEcure Neighbour Discovery (SEND) [RFC3971].
   However neither is widely implemented yet.  Indeed, any reported
   operational experience of SEND in an enterprise network would be very
   welcome.

   Finally, there is a tool called RAmond, available freely from
   http://ramond.sourceforge.net, that can be configured to detect and
   issue deprecating RAs against observed rogue RAs.  This software is
   based on rafixd.

2.6.  Tunnel performance

   In scenarios where sites currently have manually configured tunnels
   to gain IPv6 connectivity, it may be the case that such encapsulation
   is performed by a router's CPU, in which case unexpected high volumes
   of traffic may cause problems.  Bear in mind that on World IPv6 Day,
   you may start using IPv6 by default for some high bandwidth
   applications that you had not used before, e.g.  YouTube from Google.
   It may be prudent to estimate your load for such applications in
   advance, and test the capability of your tunnelling solution to
   handle that load.

2.7.  AAAA record advertised but service not enabled

   If enabling a service for World IPv6 Day, be aware of other existing
   services that may be running on the same system.  If a server has
   multiple functions, all services should be IPv6 enabled before a AAAA
   record is entered into the DNS for services that may use that name.

   A related consideration is to make sure that firewalls don't just
   drop IPv6 packets to ports that are not in use.  It's better if the
   firewall or host sends an unreachable indication or a TCP RST to
   avoid a potential timeout.  For example, if you add a AAAA record for
   your web server that also runs say FTP, where FTP is IPv4 only,
   either the firewall should have port 21 open or the firewall should
   be configured ta send a TCP RST.  There are of course tradeoffs in
   enabling ICMP unreachables.



Chown, et al.           Expires December 9, 2011                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft         World IPv6 Day Call to Arms             June 2011


2.8.  IPv6 Reverse DNS

   Presence of IPv6 reverse DNS records is used by many systems as a
   security method.  For example, many mail exchangers will only accept
   SMTP connections from IP addresses with a reverse DNS entry.  It is
   thus important for such records to exist where, for example, a site
   is sending mail out over IPv6 transport.  It is not necessarily the
   case that such connections will fall back to IPv4 if reverse records
   are not present.


3.  Instrumentation

   In this section we discuss potential instrumentation approaches that
   may be configured in advance of World IPv6 Day, and then retained
   longer term after the event.  These are particularly useful if your
   site is turning on AAAA records for its production web presence (for
   example) and wants to get the best insight into how the systems
   performed and the nature of the end user experience.

   These measurements should complement informal, subjective reports
   from users at participating sites.  It is probably prudent to make at
   least your organisation's IT staff aware of the 'at risk' day, and
   actions they should take should they experience problems.  It may
   also be desirable to undertake some form of user survey soon
   afterwards; whether you inform general users in advance is an issue
   for each site.  The ARIN IPv6 wiki is a good source of such advice
   [ARINwiki].

3.1.  IPv6 traffic levels

   It should be possible to measure raw IPv6 traffic levels
   independently on dual-stack switch/router platforms, given
   implementations of appropriate MIBs.  Sites should take steps to
   ensure they have the tools in place to be able to view the relative
   levels of IPv4 and IPv6 traffic over time.

   Application level measurement is also desirable, because handling of
   choice (preference) of protocol used lies with the application if
   both A and AAAA records are returned.  Sites should be aware that due
   to IPv6 Privacy Extensions [RFC4941] application logs may show more
   apparent different clients connecting, due to clients cycling the
   source IPv6 address they use over time.

   The types of information gathered might for example include:

   o  IPv6 traffic volume, sources of IPv6 traffic by AS, types of IPv6
      traffic (e.g. native, 6to4, Teredo, tunnelled);



Chown, et al.           Expires December 9, 2011                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft         World IPv6 Day Call to Arms             June 2011


   o  IPv6 application mix, comparison with IPv4;

   o  The number and type of IPv6 client connections.

3.2.  Network flow records

   Where available, sites should seek to generate and record network
   flow records for traffic, to maximise opportunities to analyse
   traffic patterns after the event, or in the case of reports of
   specific problems.  Netflow v9 supports IPv6.  Open source IPv6-
   capable Netflow collectors also exist, e.g. nfsen, from
   http://nfsen.sourceforge.net.

3.3.  Client Web Access Success Rate

   There have been some recent studies on the capabilities of web
   clients to access content on dual-stack servers by IPv4 or IPv6 in
   the presence of both A and AAAA records existing for a web domain.

   One good example is that of [Anderson10], as reported at RIPE-61,
   where the author set up some application (web server) oriented tests
   for his newspaper content in Norway.  The methodology was to add an
   invisible IFRAME to his site that would include IMG links randomly to
   1x1 images that were served either via an IPv4-only target or a dual-
   stack target.  Variation in the hit rates would imply IPv6
   brokenness.  By analysing the http metadata information could be
   gleaned on the cause of the brokenness.  Results in Q4'2009 showed
   0.2-0.3% brokenness, including the Opera bug mentioned above.

   Recent figures published by Google suggest at most a 0.1% level of
   brokenness, indicating some improvement, but that level is still
   potentially 1 in 1000 users with a problem.

3.4.  Tools to measure IPv6 brokenness

   Sites may wish to make their own measurements of IPv6 brokenness
   rather than relying on third party reports.  There are some openly
   available tools available that work along similar principles to the
   method proposed by Tore Anderson above.

   The APNIC Labs test tool uses a combination of JavaScript and Google
   Analytics to measure various types of brokenness [APNIC].  Eric
   Vyncke's tool [Vyncke] measures a slightly smaller set of types of
   brokenness, but also looks very useful, with additional reports on
   the browser type for each failure.  The author is currently using the
   latter tool, and plans to enable the APNIC measurement system shortly
   when other Analytics updates are applied locally.




Chown, et al.           Expires December 9, 2011               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft         World IPv6 Day Call to Arms             June 2011


3.5.  IPv4 Performance Comparison

   Where a dual-stack service is deployed, measuring the relative
   performance of both protocols is desirable.  This may primarily be a
   measurement of throughput or delay, but may also include
   availability/uptime measurement.  A site may choose to set up its own
   performance measuring framework, for example using open source
   bandwidth and throughput test tools.  Participants in World IPv6 Day
   will be monitored from a broad range of locations and measurements
   will be available to show availability of AAAA records, reachability
   to http service, latency and availability over time.

3.6.  User Tickets

   It is possible a higher than usual user ticket rate for connectivity
   issues may be experienced. being able to categorise these cases for
   subsequent analysis is desirable.

3.7.  Security monitoring

   We mentioned RAmond above in the context of watching for rogue RAs.
   There is another useful package called NDPmon, also available freely
   from http://ndpmon.sourceforge.net, that can be configured to watch
   for certain types of IPv6 'abuse' on your local network.  It may be
   interesting to run the tool to confirm whether any 'bad' traffic is
   observed within your network on World IPv6 Day.


4.  IPv6-only testing

   The long-term IPv6 deployment plan is IPv6-only networking, rather
   than dual-stack.  It is not clear how quickly significant IPv6-only
   networks will emerge, but testing of approaches to IPv6-only
   operation is desirable as soon as possible.  A draft by Jari Arkko
   and Ari Keranen describes some such experiences
   [I-D.arkko-ipv6-only-experience].

   Some experience of NAT64 [RFC6146] has been described in
   [I-D.tan-v6ops-nat64-experiences], though this appears to have used
   only NAT-PT so far.  An implementation of NAT64 is available at
   http://ecdysis.viagenie.ca.  Operational experience of IVI is also
   desirable.  An implementation of IVI is available at
   http://www.ivi2.org/IVI.


5.  Conclusions

   With the ISOC World IPv6 Day event due on June 8th 2011, this



Chown, et al.           Expires December 9, 2011               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft         World IPv6 Day Call to Arms             June 2011


   document aims to help focus attention on both improving awareness and
   mitigations of common causes of IPv6 connectivity problems, and
   encouraging sites and organisations to introduce appropriate
   instrumentation into their networks so they can observe traffic
   behaviour appropriately.

   This is still an early version of the text, and is thus a little
   drafty.  All comments are very welcome towards a mature version in
   advance of June.


6.  Security Considerations

   There are no extra security consideration for this document.


7.  IANA Considerations

   There are no extra IANA consideration for this document.


8.  Acknowledgments

   To be added.


9.  Informative References

   [RFC1981]  McCann, J., Deering, S., and J. Mogul, "Path MTU Discovery
              for IP version 6", RFC 1981, August 1996.

   [RFC3056]  Carpenter, B. and K. Moore, "Connection of IPv6 Domains
              via IPv4 Clouds", RFC 3056, February 2001.

   [RFC3068]  Huitema, C., "An Anycast Prefix for 6to4 Relay Routers",
              RFC 3068, June 2001.

   [RFC3484]  Draves, R., "Default Address Selection for Internet
              Protocol version 6 (IPv6)", RFC 3484, February 2003.

   [RFC3971]  Arkko, J., Kempf, J., Zill, B., and P. Nikander, "SEcure
              Neighbor Discovery (SEND)", RFC 3971, March 2005.

   [RFC4380]  Huitema, C., "Teredo: Tunneling IPv6 over UDP through
              Network Address Translations (NATs)", RFC 4380,
              February 2006.

   [RFC4862]  Thomson, S., Narten, T., and T. Jinmei, "IPv6 Stateless



Chown, et al.           Expires December 9, 2011               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft         World IPv6 Day Call to Arms             June 2011


              Address Autoconfiguration", RFC 4862, September 2007.

   [RFC4890]  Davies, E. and J. Mohacsi, "Recommendations for Filtering
              ICMPv6 Messages in Firewalls", RFC 4890, May 2007.

   [RFC4941]  Narten, T., Draves, R., and S. Krishnan, "Privacy
              Extensions for Stateless Address Autoconfiguration in
              IPv6", RFC 4941, September 2007.

   [RFC6104]  Chown, T. and S. Venaas, "Rogue IPv6 Router Advertisement
              Problem Statement", RFC 6104, February 2011.

   [RFC6105]  Levy-Abegnoli, E., Van de Velde, G., Popoviciu, C., and J.
              Mohacsi, "IPv6 Router Advertisement Guard", RFC 6105,
              February 2011.

   [RFC6146]  Bagnulo, M., Matthews, P., and I. van Beijnum, "Stateful
              NAT64: Network Address and Protocol Translation from IPv6
              Clients to IPv4 Servers", RFC 6146, April 2011.

   [I-D.carpenter-v6ops-6to4-teredo-advisory]
              Carpenter, B., "Advisory Guidelines for 6to4 Deployment",
              draft-carpenter-v6ops-6to4-teredo-advisory-03 (work in
              progress), March 2011.

   [I-D.ietf-v6ops-happy-eyeballs]
              Wing, D. and A. Yourtchenko, "Happy Eyeballs: Trending
              Towards Success with Dual-Stack Hosts",
              draft-ietf-v6ops-happy-eyeballs-02 (work in progress),
              May 2011.

   [I-D.tan-v6ops-nat64-experiences]
              Tan, J., Lin, J., and W. Li, "Experience from NAT64
              applications", draft-tan-v6ops-nat64-experiences-00 (work
              in progress), March 2011.

   [I-D.troan-v6ops-6to4-to-historic]
              Troan, O., "Request to move Connection of IPv6 Domains via
              IPv4 Clouds (6to4) to Historic status",
              draft-troan-v6ops-6to4-to-historic-01 (work in progress),
              March 2011.

   [I-D.ietf-v6ops-v6-aaaa-whitelisting-implications]
              Livingood, J., "IPv6 AAAA DNS Whitelisting Implications",
              draft-ietf-v6ops-v6-aaaa-whitelisting-implications-05
              (work in progress), May 2011.

   [I-D.chen-mif-happy-eyeballs-extension]



Chown, et al.           Expires December 9, 2011               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft         World IPv6 Day Call to Arms             June 2011


              Chen, G. and C. Williams, "Happy Eyeballs Extension for
              Multiple Interfaces",
              draft-chen-mif-happy-eyeballs-extension-01 (work in
              progress), March 2011.

   [I-D.ietf-6man-rfc3484-revise]
              Matsumoto, A., Kato, J., and T. Fujisaki, "Update to RFC
              3484 Default Address Selection for IPv6",
              draft-ietf-6man-rfc3484-revise-02 (work in progress),
              March 2011.

   [I-D.arkko-ipv6-only-experience]
              Arkko, J. and A. Keranen, "Experiences from an IPv6-Only
              Network", draft-arkko-ipv6-only-experience-03 (work in
              progress), April 2011.

   [APNIC]    "IPv6 Capability Tracker", <http://labs.apnic.net/>.

   [Vyncke]   Vyncke, E., "Estimation of IPv6 brokenness",
              <http://test4.vyncke.org/testv6/>.

   [ARINwiki]
              "ARIN IPv6 Wiki", <http://getipv6.info/index.php/
              Customer_problems_that_could_occur>.

   [testipv6]
              "Test IPv6", <http://www.test-ipv6.com/>.

   [ISOC]     "World IPv6 Day", <http://isoc.org/wp/worldipv6day/>.

   [Huston2011]
              Huston, G., "Stacking it Up: Experimental Observations on
              the operation of Dual Stack Services", 2011,
              <http://www.ietf.org/proceedings/80/slides/v6ops-1.pdf>.

   [Savolainen2011]
              Savolainen, T., "Experiences of host behaviour in broken
              IPv6 networks", 2011,
              <http://www.ietf.org/proceedings/80/slides/v6ops-12.pdf>.

   [ISOCsites]
              "IPv6 Enabled Websites",
              <http://www.worldipv6day.org/ipv6-enabled-websites>.

   [Anderson10]
              Anderson, T., "Measuring and Combating IPv6 Brokenness",
              2010,
              <http://ripe61.ripe.net/presentations/162-ripe61.pdf>.



Chown, et al.           Expires December 9, 2011               [Page 14]

Internet-Draft         World IPv6 Day Call to Arms             June 2011


Authors' Addresses

   Tim Chown
   University of Southampton
   Highfield
   Southampton, Hampshire  SO17 1BJ
   United Kingdom

   Email: tjc@ecs.soton.ac.uk


   Mat Ford
   Internet Society
   Geneva,
   Switzerland

   Email: ford@isoc.org


   Stig Venaas
   Cisco Systems
   Tasman Drive
   San Jose, CA  95134
   USA

   Email: stig@cisco.com

























Chown, et al.           Expires December 9, 2011               [Page 15]

