


NFSv4 Working Group                                           W. Adamson
Internet-Draft                                                    NetApp
Intended status: Standards Track                             N. Williams
Expires: March 30, 2013                                     Cryptonector
                                                      September 26, 2012


                 NFSv4 Multi-Domain FedFS Requirements
         draft-adamson-nfsv4-multi-domain-federated-fs-reqs-00

Abstract

   This document describes constraints to the NFSv4.0 and NFSv4.1
   protocols as well as the use of multi-domain capable file systems,
   name resolution services, and security services to fully enable a
   multi-domain NFSv4 federated file system.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on March 30, 2013.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2012 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.



Adamson & Williams       Expires March 30, 2013                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft    NFSv4 Multi-Domain FedFS Requirements   September 2012


Table of Contents

   1.      Requirements notation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.      Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.      Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   4.      Multi-domain Constraints to the NFSv4 Protocol . . . . . .  6
   4.1.    Name@dns_domain Constraints  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   4.2.    RPC Security Constraints . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   5.      Cross-Domain Authorization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   5.1.    Authorization Information  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   5.2.    Resolving Cross-Domain Authorization Information . . . . .  8
   5.2.1.  GSS-API Authorization Payload  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   5.2.2.  Using Authoritative Name Services  . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   6.      Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   7.      References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   7.1.    Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   7.2.    Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
           Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14

































Adamson & Williams       Expires March 30, 2013                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft    NFSv4 Multi-Domain FedFS Requirements   September 2012


1.  Requirements notation

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].














































Adamson & Williams       Expires March 30, 2013                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft    NFSv4 Multi-Domain FedFS Requirements   September 2012


2.  Introduction

   The NFSv4.0 [RFC3530] and NFSv4.1 [RFC5661] (NFSv4) protocols enable
   the construction of a distributed file system which can join NFSv4
   servers from multiple administrative domains, each potentially using
   separate name resolution services and separate security services,
   into a common multi-domain name space.

   The Federated File System (FedFS) [I-D.ietf-nfsv4-federated-fs-reqts]
   describes requirements and adminstrative tools to construct a uniform
   server-based namespace that is capable of spanning a whole enterprise
   and that is easy to manage.

   A multi-domain capable filesystem uses local ID forms that can
   represent identities from both local and remote domains.  A multi-
   domain NFSv4 FedFS joins multiple NFSv4 administrative domains each
   consisting of NFSv4 servers that export multi-domain capable
   filesystems, and that employ separate name resolution services and
   separate security services into a uniform server-based name space
   capable of spanning multiple enterprises.

   This document describes constraints to the NFSv4.0 and NFSv4.1
   protocols as well as the use of multi-domain capable file systems,
   name resolution services, and security services to fully enable a
   multi-domain NFSv4 federated file system.


























Adamson & Williams       Expires March 30, 2013                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft    NFSv4 Multi-Domain FedFS Requirements   September 2012


3.  Background

   NFSv4 deals with two kinds of identities: authentication identities
   (referred to here as "principals") and authorization identities
   ("users" and "groups" of users).  NFSv4 supports multiple
   authentication methods, each authenticating an "initiator principal"
   (typically representing a user) to an "acceptor principals" (always
   corresponding to the server).  NFSv4 does not prescribe how to
   represent authorization identities on file systems.  All file access
   decisions constitute "authorization" and are made by servers using
   information about principals (such as username, group memberships,
   and so on) and file metadata related to authorization, such as a
   file's access control list (ACL).

   NFSv4 servers therefore must perform two kinds of mappings:

   1.  Between the authentication identity and the authorization context
       (a principal's user ID, group memberships, etcetera)

   2.  Between the on-the-wire authorization identity representation and
       the on-disk authorization identity representation.

   Many aspects of these mappings are entirely implementation specific,
   but some require multi-domain capable name resolution and security
   services.  In order to inter operate in a multi-domain NFSv4 FedFS
   servers must use such services in compatible ways.

























Adamson & Williams       Expires March 30, 2013                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft    NFSv4 Multi-Domain FedFS Requirements   September 2012


4.  Multi-domain Constraints to the NFSv4 Protocol

4.1.  Name@dns_domain Constraints

   NFSv4 uses a syntax of the form "name@dns_domain" as the on wire
   representation of the "who" field of an NFSv4 access control entry
   (ACE) for users and groups.  This design provides a level of
   indirection that allows a client and server with different internal
   representations of authorization identity to inter operate even when
   referring to authorization identities from different administrative
   domains.

   Multi-domain capable sites need to meet the following requirements in
   order to ensure that clients and servers can map name@dns_domain to
   internal representations reliably:

   o  The dns_domain portion of name@dns_domain MUST be unique within
      the FedFS NFSv4 multi-domain namespace.  [ANDROS: IANA help here?]
      See [RFC3530] section 5.9 "Interpreting owner and owner_group",
      for a discussion on dns_domain configuration.

   o  The name portion of name@dns_domain MUST be unique within the
      specified dns_domain.

   o  Every local representation of a user and of a group MUST have a
      canonical name@dns_domain, and it must be possible to return the
      canonical name@dns_domain for any identity stored on disk, at
      least when required infrastructure servers (such as name services)
      are online.

4.2.  RPC Security Constraints

   As described in [RFC5661] section 2.2.1.1 "RPC Security Flavors":

               NFSv4.1 clients and servers MUST implement RPCSEC_GSS.
               (This requirement to implement is not a requirement
               to use.) Other flavors, such as AUTH_NONE, and AUTH_SYS,
               MAY be implemented as well.

   The underlying RPCSEC_GSS security service used in a multi-domain
   NFSv4 FedFS is REQUIRED to employ a method of cross domain trust so
   that a principal from a security service in one domain can be
   authenticated in another domain that uses the same security service.
   Kerberos, and PKU2U [I-D.zhu-pku2u] are examples of such security
   services.

   The AUTH_NONE security flavor can be useful in a multi-domain NFSv4
   FedFS to grant universal access to public data without any



Adamson & Williams       Expires March 30, 2013                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft    NFSv4 Multi-Domain FedFS Requirements   September 2012


   credentials.

   The AUTH_SYS security flavor uses a host-based authentication model
   where the weakly authenticated host (the NFS client) asserts the
   user's authorization identities using small integers, uidNumber and
   gidNumber [RFC2307], as user and group identity representations.
   Because this authorization ID representation has no DNS domain
   component, AUTH_SYS can only be used in a name space where all
   clients and servers share an [RFC2307] name service.  A shared name
   service is required because uidNumbers and gidNumbers are passed in
   the RPC credential; there is no negotiation of namespace in AUTH_SYS.
   Collisions can occur if multiple name services are used.

   A new version of RPCSEC_GSS [I-D.williams-rpcsecgssv3] includes a
   modernized replacement for AUTH_SYS which addresses this issue.




































Adamson & Williams       Expires March 30, 2013                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft    NFSv4 Multi-Domain FedFS Requirements   September 2012


5.  Cross-Domain Authorization

   In order to authorize client principal access to files, the NFS
   server must map the RPCSEC_GSS client principal name or the
   underlying GSS-API security context to authorization information
   meaningful to the file system being exported.

5.1.  Authorization Information

   Here we list the authorization information that a multi-domain FedFS
   NFSv4 server needs in order to make a file access decision.  Note
   that the server may need to map the global IDs to a local
   representation.

   o  UserID: This field contains the principal's global ID and the
      name@dns_domain form thereof.

   o  PrimaryGroupID: This field contains the global ID for the
      principal's primary group, and the name@dns_domain form thereof.

   o  Groups: This field contains an array of global ID for the groups
      that the principal is a member of, and the name@dns_domain forms
      thereof.

   o  Optional field(s) for privileges, authorizations, implementation-
      specific items, etcetera, relevant to authorization.

5.2.  Resolving Cross-Domain Authorization Information

   In the cross-domain case where a client principal is seeking access
   to files on a server in a different NFSv4 domain, the NFS server
   needs to obtain, in a secure manner, the authorization information
   from an authoritative source: e.g. a name service in the client
   principals NFS domain.

   There are several methods the cross-domain authoritative
   authorization information can be obtained:

   1.  A mechanism specific GSS-API authorization payload containing
       credential authorization data.

   2.  An NFS server local domain name query when there is a security
       agreement between the two cross-domain name services plus regular
       update data feeds so that the NFS server local domain name
       service is authoritative for the client principal domain.

   3.  A direct query from the NFS server to the client principal
       authoritative name service.



Adamson & Williams       Expires March 30, 2013                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft    NFSv4 Multi-Domain FedFS Requirements   September 2012


   The authorization data information SHOULD be obtained via the GSS-API
   name attribute interface [I-D.ietf-kitten-gssapi-naming-exts] either
   via a single attribute for the credential authorization data or via
   discrete GSS-API name attributes corresponding to the authorization
   data elements.

   Note that the retrieval of attribute values used by the GSS-API name
   attribute interface implementation could utilize any of the above
   mentioned methods of obtaining the authorization information.

5.2.1.  GSS-API Authorization Payload

   Authorization context information can sometimes be obtained from the
   credentials authenticating a principal; the GSS-API represents such
   information as attributes of the initiator principal name.

   For example:

   o  Kerberos 5 [RFC4120] has a method for conveying "authorization
      data", both client-asserted as well as KDC-authenticated
      authorization data.  Some KDC implementation, notably Windows
      KDCs, use this feature to convey a "privilege attribute
      certificate" [PAC]listing the principal's user and group global
      IDs as "security identifiers" (SIDs).

   o  Some KDCs (will) issue Kerberos Tickets with the General PAD
      [I-D.sorce-krbwg-general-pac] as authorization data.  The General
      PAD authorization data MUST be authenticated in the sense that its
      contents must come from an authenticated, trusted source, such as
      a name server or the issuer of the client principal's credential.
      The General PAD lists user and group global IDs as "universal user
      identifiers" (UUIDs) as well as their string representations and
      DNS domains.

   o  PKIX [RFC5280] certificates allow for extensions that could be
      used similarly.

   When a client principal is authenticated using a GSS-API
   authorization payload, the server SHOULD extract the payload from the
   client's ticket and map, if need be, the global IDs to local ID
   representations.

   The authorization context information in a GSS-API authorization
   payload can be considered a single, authenticated, discrete GSS-API
   name attribute, in which case the server must parse it into its
   individual elements.





Adamson & Williams       Expires March 30, 2013                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft    NFSv4 Multi-Domain FedFS Requirements   September 2012


5.2.2.  Using Authoritative Name Services

   If a GSS-API authorization payload for the client principal is not
   available, then the server SHOULD try to map the client principal
   name to a local notion of user account, and then lookup that user
   account's authorization context information through authenticated
   name service lookups.

   Authoritative name service queries may also be necessary to construct
   the name@dns_domain form of a global ID obtained from a GSS-API
   authorization payload.








































Adamson & Williams       Expires March 30, 2013                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft    NFSv4 Multi-Domain FedFS Requirements   September 2012


6.  Security Considerations

   Some considerations to come
















































Adamson & Williams       Expires March 30, 2013                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft    NFSv4 Multi-Domain FedFS Requirements   September 2012


7.  References

7.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC2307]  Howard, L., "An Approach for Using LDAP as a Network
              Information Service", RFC 2307, March 1998.

   [RFC3530]  Shepler, S., Callaghan, B., Robinson, D., Thurlow, R.,
              Beame, C., Eisler, M., and D. Noveck, "Network File System
              (NFS) version 4 Protocol", RFC 3530, April 2003.

   [I-D.ietf-nfsv4-federated-fs-reqts]
              Lentini, J., Everhart, C., Ellard, D., Tewari, R., and M.
              Naik, "Requirements for Federated File Systems",
              draft-ietf-nfsv4-federated-fs-reqts-06 (work in progress),
              October 2009.

   [RFC4120]  Neuman, C., Yu, T., Hartman, S., and K. Raeburn, "The
              Kerberos Network Authentication Service (V5)", RFC 4120,
              July 2005.

   [RFC5661]  Shepler, S., Eisler, M., and D. Noveck, "Network File
              System (NFS) Version 4 Minor Version 1 Protocol",
              RFC 5661, January 2010.

   [I-D.ietf-kitten-gssapi-naming-exts]
              Williams, N., Johansson, L., Hartman, S., and S.
              Josefsson, "GSS-API Naming Extensions",
              draft-ietf-kitten-gssapi-naming-exts-15 (work in
              progress), May 2012.

   [I-D.zhu-pku2u]
              Zhu, L., Altman, J., and N. Williams, "Public Key
              Cryptography Based User-to-User Authentication - (PKU2U)",
              draft-zhu-pku2u-09 (work in progress), November 2008.

   [I-D.sorce-krbwg-general-pac]
              Sorce, S., Yu, T., and T. Hardjono, "A Generalized PAC for
              Kerberos V5", draft-sorce-krbwg-general-pac-01 (work in
              progress), December 2010.

   [PAC]      Brezak, J., "Utilizing the Windows 2000 Authorization Data
              in Kerberos Tickets for Access Control to Resources",
              October 2002.




Adamson & Williams       Expires March 30, 2013                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft    NFSv4 Multi-Domain FedFS Requirements   September 2012


7.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.williams-rpcsecgssv3]
              Haynes, T. and N. Williams, "Remote Procedure Call (RPC)
              Security Version 3", draft-williams-rpcsecgssv3-02 (work
              in progress), May 2011.

   [RFC5280]  Cooper, D., Santesson, S., Farrell, S., Boeyen, S.,
              Housley, R., and W. Polk, "Internet X.509 Public Key
              Infrastructure Certificate and Certificate Revocation List
              (CRL) Profile", RFC 5280, May 2008.








































Adamson & Williams       Expires March 30, 2013                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft    NFSv4 Multi-Domain FedFS Requirements   September 2012


Authors' Addresses

   William A. (Andy) Adamson
   NetApp

   Email: andros@netapp.com


   Nicolas Williams
   Cryptonector

   Email: nico@cryptonector.com







































Adamson & Williams       Expires March 30, 2013                [Page 14]

