


NFSv4 Working Group                                           W. Adamson
Internet-Draft                                                    NetApp
Intended status: Standards Track                             N. Williams
Expires: October 19, 2013                                   Cryptonector
                                                          April 17, 2013


                 NFSv4 Multi-Domain FedFS Requirements
         draft-adamson-nfsv4-multi-domain-federated-fs-reqs-02

Abstract

   This document describes constraints to the NFSv4.0 and NFSv4.1
   protocols as well as the use of multi-domain capable file systems,
   name resolution services, and security services required to fully
   enable a multi-domain NFSv4 federated file system.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on October 19, 2013.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.



Adamson & Williams      Expires October 19, 2013                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft    NFSv4 Multi-Domain FedFS Requirements       April 2013


Table of Contents

   1.    Requirements notation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.    Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.    Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   4.    Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   5.    Multi-domain Constraints to the NFSv4 Protocol . . . . . . .  8
   5.1.  Name@domain Constraints  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   5.2.  RPC Security Constraints . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   6.    NFSv4 Multi-domain File Access . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   6.1.  Resolving Multi-domain Authorization Information . . . . . . 10
   6.2.  GSS-API Authorization Payload  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   7.    Setting and Retrieving NFSv4 Multi-domain ACLs . . . . . . . 12
   8.    Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   9.    References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   9.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   9.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
         Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16

































Adamson & Williams      Expires October 19, 2013                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft    NFSv4 Multi-Domain FedFS Requirements       April 2013


1.  Requirements notation

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].














































Adamson & Williams      Expires October 19, 2013                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft    NFSv4 Multi-Domain FedFS Requirements       April 2013


2.  Introduction

   The NFSv4.0 [RFC3530] and NFSv4.1 [RFC5661] (hereafter referred to as
   NFSv4) protocols enable the construction of a distributed file system
   which can join NFSv4 servers from multiple NFSv4 domains, each
   potentially using separate name resolution services and separate
   security services, into a common multi-domain name space.

   The Federated File System (FedFS) [RFC5716] describes the
   requirements and administrative tools to construct a uniform file
   server based namespace that is capable of spanning a whole enterprise
   and that is easy to manage.

   An NFSv4 multi-domain capable filesystem uses local ID forms that can
   represent identities from both local and remote NFSv4 domains.  An
   NFSv4 multi-domain FedFS joins multiple NFSv4 domains each consisting
   of NFSv4 servers that export multi-domain capable filesystems, and
   that employ potentially separate name resolution services and
   separate security services into a uniform NFSv4 server-based name
   space capable of spanning multiple enterprises.

   This document describes constraints to the NFSv4.0 and NFSv4.1
   protocols as well as the use of multi-domain capable file systems,
   name resolution services, and security services required to fully
   enable an NFSv4 multi-domain federated file system.


























Adamson & Williams      Expires October 19, 2013                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft    NFSv4 Multi-Domain FedFS Requirements       April 2013


3.  Terminology

      Domain: This term is used in multiple contexts where it has
      different meanings.  Here we provide specific definitions.

         DNS domain: a set of computers, services, or any internet
         resource identified by an DNS domain name [RFC1034].

         Security realm or domain: a set of configured security
         providers, users, groups, security roles, and security policies
         running a single security protocol and administered by a single
         entity.  E.g. a Kerberos Realm.  While a typical configuration
         is to use the uppercase DNS domain name as the Kerberos realm
         name they are independent.

         NFSv4 domain: a set of users, groups and computers running
         NFSv4 protocols administered by a single entity, and identified
         by a unique NFSv4 domain name.  See [RFC5661] Section 5.9
         "Interpreting owner and owner_group".  An NFSv4 domain can
         include multiple DNS domains and multiple security realms.

         Multi-domain: In this document this always refers to multiple
         NFSv4 domains.

         FedFS domain: A file name space that can cross multiple shares
         on multiple file servers using file-access protocols such as
         NFSv4 or CIFS [CIFS].  A FedFS domain is typically a single
         administrative entity, and has a name that is similar to a DNS
         domain name.  Also known as a Federation.

         Administrative domain: a set of users, groups, computers and
         services administered by a single entity.  Can include multiple
         DNS domains, NFSv4 domains, security domains, and FedFS
         domains.

      Local representation of identity: an object such as a uidNumber
      (UID) or gidNumber (GID) [RFC2307], or a Windows Security
      Identifier (SID), or other such representation of a user or a
      group of users on-disk in a file system.

      Global ID: A representation of identity that is globally unique.
      Examples include the name@domain or ID@domain NFSv4 syntax, and
      the Windows Security Identifier (SID).

      Name Service: provides the mapping between {NFSv4 domain, name}
      and {NFSv4 domain, ID} via lookups.  Can be applied to local or
      remote domains.  Often provided by a Directory Service such as
      LDAP.



Adamson & Williams      Expires October 19, 2013                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft    NFSv4 Multi-Domain FedFS Requirements       April 2013


      ID mapping: Is a mapping between {remote NFSv4 domain, remote
      NFSv4 domain ID} and {local representation of identity}.

      Principal: an RPCSEC_GSS authentication identity.  Usually, but
      not always, a user; rarely, if ever, a group; sometimes a host.

      Authorization Context: A collection of information about a
      principal such as username, userID, group membership, etcetera
      used in authorization decisions.










































Adamson & Williams      Expires October 19, 2013                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft    NFSv4 Multi-Domain FedFS Requirements       April 2013


4.  Background

   NFSv4 deals with two kinds of identities: authentication identities
   (referred to here as "principals") and authorization identities
   ("users" and "groups" of users).  NFSv4 supports multiple
   authentication methods, each authenticating an "initiator principal"
   (typically representing a user) to an "acceptor principal" (always
   corresponding to the NFSv4 server).  NFSv4 does not prescribe how to
   represent authorization identities on file systems.  All file access
   decisions constitute "authorization" and are made by NFSv4 servers
   using authorization context information and file metadata related to
   authorization, such as a file's access control list (ACL).

   NFSv4 servers therefore must perform two kinds of mappings:

   1.  A mapping between the authentication identity and the
       authorization context information.

   2.  A mapping between the on-the-wire authorization identity
       representation and the on-disk authorization identity
       representation.

   Many aspects of these mappings are entirely implementation specific,
   but some require multi-domain capable name resolution and security
   services.  In order to interoperate in a multi-domain NFSv4 FedFS
   file system, NFSv4 servers must use such services in compatible ways.

























Adamson & Williams      Expires October 19, 2013                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft    NFSv4 Multi-Domain FedFS Requirements       April 2013


5.  Multi-domain Constraints to the NFSv4 Protocol

5.1.  Name@domain Constraints

   NFSv4 uses a syntax of the form "name@domain" as the on wire
   representation of the "who" field of an NFSv4 access control entry
   (ACE) for users and groups.  This design provides a level of
   indirection that allows NFSv4 clients and servers with different
   internal representations of authorization identity to interoperate
   even when referring to authorization identities from different NFSv4
   domains.

   NFSv4 multi-domain capable sites need to meet the following
   requirements in order to ensure that NFSv4 clients and servers can
   map between name@domain and internal representations reliably:

   o  The NFSv4 domain portion of name@domain MUST be unique within the
      FedFS NFSv4 multi-domain namespace.  See [RFC3530] section 5.9
      "Interpreting owner and owner_group" for a discussion on NFSv4
      domain configuration.

   o  The name portion of name@domain MUST be unique within the
      specified NFSv4 domain.

   o  Every local representation of a user and of a group MUST have a
      canonical name@domain, and it must be possible to return the
      canonical name@domain for any identity stored on disk, at least
      when required infrastructure servers (such as name services) are
      online.

5.2.  RPC Security Constraints

   As described in [RFC5661] section 2.2.1.1 "RPC Security Flavors":

               NFSv4.1 clients and servers MUST implement RPCSEC_GSS.
               (This requirement to implement is not a requirement
               to use.) Other flavors, such as AUTH_NONE, and AUTH_SYS,
               MAY be implemented as well.

   The underlying RPCSEC_GSS security mechanism used in a multi-domain
   NFSv4 FedFS is REQUIRED to employ a method of cross NFSv4 domain
   trust so that a principal from a security service in one NFSv4 domain
   can be authenticated in another NFSv4 domain that uses a security
   service with the same security mechanism.  Kerberos, and PKU2U
   [I-D.zhu-pku2u] are examples of such security services.

   The AUTH_NONE security flavor can be useful in a multi-domain NFSv4
   FedFS to grant universal access to public data without any



Adamson & Williams      Expires October 19, 2013                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft    NFSv4 Multi-Domain FedFS Requirements       April 2013


   credentials.

   The AUTH_SYS security flavor uses a host-based authentication model
   where the weakly authenticated host (the NFSv4 client) asserts the
   user's authorization identities using small integers, uidNumber and
   gidNumber [RFC2307], as user and group identity representations.
   Because this authorization ID representation has no DNS domain
   component, AUTH_SYS can only be used in a name space where all NFSv4
   clients and servers share an [RFC2307] name service.  A shared name
   service is required because uidNumbers and gidNumbers are passed in
   the RPC credential; there is no negotiation of namespace in AUTH_SYS.
   Collisions can occur if multiple name services are used.  AUTH_SYS
   can not be used in an NFSv4 multi-domain federated file system.

   A new version of RPCSEC_GSS [I-D.williams-rpcsecgssv3] includes a
   modernized replacement for AUTH_SYS which addresses this issue.



































Adamson & Williams      Expires October 19, 2013                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft    NFSv4 Multi-Domain FedFS Requirements       April 2013


6.  NFSv4 Multi-domain File Access

   In the mult-domain case where a principal is seeking access to files
   on a NFSv4 server in a different NFSv4 domain, the NFSv4 server must
   [ANDROS: MUST?] obtain, in a secure manner, the principal's
   authorization information from an authoritative source: e.g. a name
   service in the principal's NFSv4 domain.  The NFSv4 server then needs
   to map the remote principal and the authorization information such as
   the principal's primary group and group membership list into a local
   representation of ID suitable for use in file system ACLs.  This is
   the first mapping described in Section 4 "Background".

   In the local NFSv4 domain case where the principal is seeking access
   to files on an NFSv4 server in the local NFSv4 domain, the server has
   knowledge of the local policies and methods for obtaining the
   principal's authorization information and the mapping to local
   representation of identity.  In the multi-domain case there can be no
   assumption of such knowledge.

6.1.  Resolving Multi-domain Authorization Information

   There are several methods the remote NFSv4 domain authoritative
   authorization information for a principal can be obtained:

   1.  A mechanism specific GSS-API authorization payload containing
       credential authorization data.  This is the preferred method as
       it avoids requiring any knowledge of a remote NFSv4 domain name
       service.

   2.  An authenticated NFSv4 server local NFSv4 domain name query when
       there is a security agreement between the two multi-domain name
       services plus regular update data feeds so that the NFSv4 server
       local NFSv4 domain name service is authoritative for the
       principal's remote NFSv4 domain.  This requires the local NFSv4
       domain to have detailed knowledge of the remote NFSv4 domain's
       name authoritative name service.

   3.  An authenticated direct query from the NFSv4 server to the
       principal's NFSv4 domain authoritative name service.  This
       requires the NFSv4 server to have detailed knowledge of the
       remote NFSv4 domain's authoritative name service.  [ANDROS:
       Define a protocol for this?]

   The authorization data information should be obtained via the GSS-API
   name attribute interface [RFC6680] either via a single attribute for
   the credential authorization data or via discrete GSS-API name
   attributes corresponding to the authorization data elements.




Adamson & Williams      Expires October 19, 2013               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft    NFSv4 Multi-Domain FedFS Requirements       April 2013


   Note that the retrieval of attribute values used by the GSS-API name
   attribute interface implementation could utilize any of the above
   mentioned methods of obtaining the authorization information which
   demonstrates the usefulness of the API.

6.2.  GSS-API Authorization Payload

   To avoid requiring detailed knowledge of remote NFSv4 domain name
   services, authorization context information SHOULD be obtained from
   the credentials authenticating a principal; the GSS-API represents
   such information as attributes of the initiator principal name.

   For example:

   o  Kerberos 5 [RFC4120] has a method for conveying "authorization
      data", both client-asserted as well as KDC-authenticated
      authorization data.  Some KDC implementation, notably Windows
      KDCs, use this feature to convey a "privilege attribute
      certificate" [PAC] listing the principal's user and group global
      IDs as "security identifiers" (SIDs).

   o  Some KDCs (will) issue Kerberos Tickets with the General PAD
      [I-D.sorce-krbwg-general-pac] (PAD) as Kerberos authorization data
      listing user and group names along with their uidNumber and
      gidNumber [RFC2307], the name of the DNS domain [ANDROS: review
      General PAD RFC to ensure this can be the NFSv4 domain] along with
      a unique DNS domain identifier and other information.  The General
      PAD authorization data MUST be authenticated in the sense that its
      contents must come from an authenticated, trusted source, such as
      a name server or the issuer of the principal's credential.

   o  PKIX [RFC5280] certificates allow for extensions that could be
      used similarly.

   The authorization context information in a GSS-API authorization
   payload can be considered a single, authenticated, discrete GSS-API
   name attribute, in which case the NFSv4 server must parse it into its
   individual elements and ID-Map or use name services to map the
   information to local ID representations.  [ANDROS: clarify - is it
   one name attribute or not.  If not, how can you tell?]











Adamson & Williams      Expires October 19, 2013               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft    NFSv4 Multi-Domain FedFS Requirements       April 2013


7.  Setting and Retrieving NFSv4 Multi-domain ACLs

   When servicing a set acl request, the NFSv4 server must be able to
   map the name@domain in the ACE who field to a local representation of
   ID.  When servicing a get acl request, the NFSv4 server must be able
   to map the local representation of ID in the file system ACL to the
   name@domain form.  This mapping between name@domain and local
   representation of ID must [ANDROS: MUST?] be done against an
   authoritative source.  This is the second mapping described in
   Section 4 "Background".

   The local name-service is authoritative for these mappings for remote
   users and groups when one of the first two methods in (Section 6.1)
   is used to keep the local name-service updated with remote
   information.




































Adamson & Williams      Expires October 19, 2013               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft    NFSv4 Multi-Domain FedFS Requirements       April 2013


8.  Security Considerations

   Some considerations to come
















































Adamson & Williams      Expires October 19, 2013               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft    NFSv4 Multi-Domain FedFS Requirements       April 2013


9.  References

9.1.  Normative References

   [RFC1034]  Mockapetris, P., "Domain names - concepts and facilities",
              STD 13, RFC 1034, November 1987.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC2307]  Howard, L., "An Approach for Using LDAP as a Network
              Information Service", RFC 2307, March 1998.

   [RFC3530]  Shepler, S., Callaghan, B., Robinson, D., Thurlow, R.,
              Beame, C., Eisler, M., and D. Noveck, "Network File System
              (NFS) version 4 Protocol", RFC 3530, April 2003.

   [RFC4120]  Neuman, C., Yu, T., Hartman, S., and K. Raeburn, "The
              Kerberos Network Authentication Service (V5)", RFC 4120,
              July 2005.

   [RFC5661]  Shepler, S., Eisler, M., and D. Noveck, "Network File
              System (NFS) Version 4 Minor Version 1 Protocol",
              RFC 5661, January 2010.

   [RFC5716]  Lentini, J., Everhart, C., Ellard, D., Tewari, R., and M.
              Naik, "Requirements for Federated File Systems", RFC 5716,
              January 2010.

   [RFC6680]  Williams, N., Johansson, L., Hartman, S., and S.
              Josefsson, "Generic Security Service Application
              Programming Interface (GSS-API) Naming Extensions",
              RFC 6680, August 2012.

   [I-D.zhu-pku2u]
              Zhu, L., Altman, J., and N. Williams, "Public Key
              Cryptography Based User-to-User Authentication - (PKU2U)",
              draft-zhu-pku2u-09 (work in progress), November 2008.

   [I-D.sorce-krbwg-general-pac]
              Sorce, S., Yu, T., and T. Hardjono, "A Generalized PAC for
              Kerberos V5", draft-sorce-krbwg-general-pac-01 (work in
              progress), December 2010.

   [PAC]      Brezak, J., "Utilizing the Windows 2000 Authorization Data
              in Kerberos Tickets for Access Control to Resources",
              October 2002.




Adamson & Williams      Expires October 19, 2013               [Page 14]

Internet-Draft    NFSv4 Multi-Domain FedFS Requirements       April 2013


   [CIFS]     Microsoft Corporation, "[MS-CIFS] -- v20130118 Common
              Internet File System (CIFS) Protocol", January 2013.

9.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.williams-rpcsecgssv3]
              Haynes, T. and N. Williams, "Remote Procedure Call (RPC)
              Security Version 3", draft-williams-rpcsecgssv3-02 (work
              in progress), May 2011.

   [RFC5280]  Cooper, D., Santesson, S., Farrell, S., Boeyen, S.,
              Housley, R., and W. Polk, "Internet X.509 Public Key
              Infrastructure Certificate and Certificate Revocation List
              (CRL) Profile", RFC 5280, May 2008.





































Adamson & Williams      Expires October 19, 2013               [Page 15]

Internet-Draft    NFSv4 Multi-Domain FedFS Requirements       April 2013


Authors' Addresses

   William A. (Andy) Adamson
   NetApp

   Email: andros@netapp.com


   Nicolas Williams
   Cryptonector

   Email: nico@cryptonector.com







































Adamson & Williams      Expires October 19, 2013               [Page 16]

