


Network Working Group                                           K. Drage
Internet-Draft                                            Alcatel-Lucent
Intended status: Standards Track                             A. Johnston
Expires: March 24, 2011                                            Avaya
                                                             J. McMillen
                                                            Unaffiliated
                                                      September 20, 2010


        Interworking ISDN Call Control User Information with SIP
                    draft-drage-cuss-sip-uui-isdn-00

Abstract

   The motivation and use cases for interworking and transporting ITU-T
   DSS1 User-user information element data in SIP are described in the
   "Problem Statement and Requirements for Transporting User to User
   Call Control Information in SIP" document.  As networks move to SIP
   it is important that applications requiring this data can continue to
   function in SIP networks as well as the ability to interwork with
   this ISDN service for end-to- end transparency.  This document
   defines a usage of the User-to-User header field to enable
   interworking with this ISDN service.

   This document is covers the interworking with both public ISDN and
   private ISDN capabilities, so the interworking with QSIG will also be
   addressed.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on March 24, 2011.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the



Drage, et al.            Expires March 24, 2011                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft               SIP UUI for CC               September 2010


   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   3.  Summary of the ISDN User-to-User Service . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     3.1.  The service  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     3.2.  Impacts of the ISDN service on SIP operation . . . . . . .  5
   4.  Relation to SIP-T  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   5.  Transition away from ISDN  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   6.  ISDN Usage of the User-to-User Header Field  . . . . . . . . .  6
   7.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   8.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   9.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   10. Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10























Drage, et al.            Expires March 24, 2011                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft               SIP UUI for CC               September 2010


1.  Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in BCP 14, RFC 2119
   [RFC2119].


2.  Overview

   This document describes a usage of the User-to-User header field
   defined in [johnston-cuss-sip-uui] to enable the transport of User to
   User Information (UUI) in ISDN interworking scenarios using SIP
   [RFC3261].  Specifically, this document discuss the interworking of
   call control related ITU-T DSS1 User-user information element[Q931],
   [Q957.1] and ITU-T Q.763 User-to-user information parameter [Q763]
   data in SIP.  UUI is widely used in the PSTN today in contact centers
   and call centers which are transitioning away from ISDN to SIP.


3.  Summary of the ISDN User-to-User Service

3.1.  The service

   ISDN defines a number of related services.  Firstly there is a user
   signalling bearer service, which uses the information elements /
   parameters in the signalling channel to carry the data, and does not
   establish a related circuit-switched connection.  For DSS1, this is
   specified in ITU-T Recommendation Q.931 section 3.3 and section 7
   [Q931].  It also defines a user-to-user signalling supplementary
   service, which uses the information elements / parameters in the
   signalling channel to carry additional data, but which is used in
   conjunction with the establishment of a related circuit-switched
   connection.  This reuses the same information elements / parameters
   as the user signalling bearer service, with the addition of other
   signalling information, and for DSS1 this is specified in ITU-T
   Recommendation Q.957.1 [Q957.1].

   ISDN defines three variants of the user-to-user signalling
   supplementary service as follows:

   UUS1:  User-to-user information exchanged during the setup and
      clearing phases of a call, by transporting User-to-user
      information element within call control messages.  This in itself
      has two subvariants, UUS1 implicit and UUS1 explicit.  UUS1
      explicit uses additional supplementary service control information
      to control the request and granting of the service, as in USS2 and
      UUS3.  In UUS1 implicit, it is the presence of the user signalling



Drage, et al.            Expires March 24, 2011                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft               SIP UUI for CC               September 2010


      data itself that constitutes the request for the service.  UUS1
      explicit as a result also allows the requester to additionally
      specify whether the parallel circuit-switched connection should
      proceed if the UUS1 service cannot be provided (preferred or
      required).

   UUS2:  User-to-user information exchanged from the sender's point of
      view during call establishment, between the DSS1 ALERTING and DSS1
      CONNECT messages, within DSS1 USER INFORMATION messages; and

   UUS3:  User-to-user information exchanged while a call is in the
      Active state, within DSS1 USER INFORMATION messages.

   The service is always requested by the calling user.

   This document defines only the application of the ISDN UUS1 implicit
   supplementary service to interworking scenarios, this being the most
   widely deployed and used of the various ISDN user-to-user services,
   and indeed the one that matches the requirements specified in
   draft-johnston-cuss-sip-uui-reqs.

   The ISDN UUS1 service has the following additional characteristics as
   to the data that can be transported:

      The maximum number of octets of user information that can be
      transported in 128 octets.  It is noted that some early ISDN
      implementations had a limitation of 32 octets, but it is
      understood that these are not currently deployed.

      The content of the user information octets is described by a
      single octet protocol discriminator (see table 4-26 of ITU-T
      Recommendation Q.931) [Q931].  That protocol descriminator may
      describe the protocol used within the user data, the structure of
      the user data, or leave it entirely open.  Note that not all
      values within the protocol discriminator necessarily make sense
      for use in the user to user service, as the content is aligned
      with the protocol discriminator that appears at the start of all
      DSS1 messages (see table 4-1 of ITU-T Recommendation Q.931)
      [Q931].

      Only a single user information package can be transported in each
      message.

      The ISDN service works without encryption or integrity protection.
      The user trusts the intermediate network elements, and therefore
      the operator of those elements, not to modify the data, and to
      deliver all the data to the remote user.  On a link by link basis,
      message contents are protected at layer 2 by standard CRC



Drage, et al.            Expires March 24, 2011                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft               SIP UUI for CC               September 2010


      mechanisms - this allows loss on a link level basis to be
      detected, but does not guard against fraudulent attacks on the
      link itself.  This does not prevent the use of additional
      encryption or integrity protection within the payload itself,
      although the limit on the size of the payload (128 octets) will
      restrict this.

3.2.  Impacts of the ISDN service on SIP operation

   The ISDN service has the following impacts that need to be understood
   within the SIP environment.

   Call transfer  ISDN call transfer cancels all user-to-user
      supplementary services.  In the ISDN, if user-to-user data is
      required after call transfer, then UUS3 has to be renegotiated,
      which is not provided by this SIP extension.  The impact of this
      restriction on the SIP environment is that UUI header fields
      cannot be exchanged in transactions clearing down the SIP dialog
      after call transfer has occurred.

   Conference  ISDN conferencing allows the user to still exchange user-
      to-user data after the conference is created.  As far as UUS1 is
      concerned, this means that when an individual party clears, those
      clearing messages can still contain user-to-user data.  As a
      conferee this is sent to the conference controller.  As the
      conference controller, as this effectively clears the conference,
      it can be broadcast to all conferees, or sent to individual
      conferees [OPEN ISSUE - CHECK THIS IN THE PROTOCOL - DOES IT
      REQUIRE EXPLICIT].

      The ISDN three-party supplementary service is similar in many ways
      to conferencing, but is signalled using a different mechanism.
      This means that on clearing, the controller using UUS1 implicit
      does have the choice of sending data to either or both remote
      users.

   Diversion  When ISDN diversion occurs, any UUS1 user-to-user data is
      sent to the forwarded-to-user (assuming that the call meets
      requirements for providing the service - this is impacted by the
      explicit service only).  If the type of diversion is such that the
      call is also delivered to the forwarding user, they will also
      receive any UUS1 user-to-user data.

   Contributors note: The above list needs to be studied further in
   regard to private ISDN service definitions, e.g. for the interworking
   of SIP and QSIG.





Drage, et al.            Expires March 24, 2011                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft               SIP UUI for CC               September 2010


4.  Relation to SIP-T

   A method of transport of ISDN UUI is to use SIP-T [RFC3372] and
   transport the UUI information end-to-end, as part of an ISUP message
   or QSIG message) as a MIME body.  If the SIP-T method of
   encapsulation of ISDN instead of interworking is used, this is a
   reasonable mechanism and does not require any extensions to existing
   SIP-T.  However, if true ISDN interworking is being done, this
   approach is not reasonable.  Instead, the better approach is to
   interwork the ISDN UUI using the native SIP UUI transport mechanism,
   the User-to-User header field.  The rest of this document describes
   this approach.


5.  Transition away from ISDN

   This interworking usage of the SIP UUI mechanism will likely begin
   with one User Agent being an ISDN gateway while the other User Agent
   is a native SIP endpoint.  As networks transition away from ISDN, it
   is possible that both User Agents could become native SIP endpoints.
   In this case, there is an opportunity to transition away from this
   ISDN usage to a more general usage of [johnston-cuss-sip-uui].  This
   will be possible when both endpoints are aware of the actual
   application using the UUI.

   The SIP UUI mechanism provides a way to achieve this transition.  As
   an endpoint moves from being an ISDN gateway to a native SIP
   endpoint, and a usage application for the UUI has been standardized,
   the endpoint can carry the UUI both as ISDN and application encoding.
   This will permit the other endpoint to utlize the UUI if it is an
   ISDN gateway or a native SIP endpoint.  When all the endpoints have
   moved away from ISDN, the ISDN encoding usage can be discontinued.


6.  ISDN Usage of the User-to-User Header Field

   This document defines the purpose usage of the ISDN interworking
   application of UUI which is to interoperate with ISDN User to User
   Signaling (UUS), a supplementary service in which the user is able to
   send/receive a limited amount of information to/from another ISDN
   user over the signalling channel in association with a call to the
   other ISDN user..

   Two examples of ISDN UUI with redirection (transfer and diversion)
   are defined in [ANSII] and [ETSI].

   OPEN ISSUE 1: Key to defining such an application is to understand
   how the capabilities of the generic SIP User-to-User header field



Drage, et al.            Expires March 24, 2011                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft               SIP UUI for CC               September 2010


   extension relate to those provide by the ISDN user-to-user signalling
   supplementary service.  If they are the same as the ISDN User-to-user
   signalling supplementary service then interworking is solely a matter
   of mapping the construct in one protocol into the equivalent
   construct in the other protocol.  As the ISDN user-to-user signalling
   supplementary service is a somewhat restricted service, it is
   unlikely that the capabilities will be more than the generic SIP
   User-to-User header field extension.  So we need to deal with the
   question of what occurs when (and if) the generic SIP User-to-User
   header field extension has wider capabilities than those of the ISDN
   user-to-user signalling supplementary service.  The capabilities of
   the ISDN user-to-user signalling supplementary service have been
   outlined in section 3.  The following open issues target what could
   occur if each of these capabilities are exceeded.

   OPEN ISSUE 2: The maximum number of octets defined for the generic
   SIP User-to-User header field extension exceeds the 128 octets
   supported by the ISDN user-to-user signalling supplementary service.
   Obviously if the SIP sender sends more than that allowed, then
   mapping of the entire contents is impossible.  Truncation should not
   occur (as the truncation cannot be signalled in the ISDN and the
   contents will probably end up meaningless) and therefore the only
   option is to discard the information and proceed without it.  Mapping
   in the opposite direction will never be a problem.  Is extra
   signalling needed to allow for this discard; it is believed that the
   answer is no.  If the SIP user knows that it is interworking with the
   ISDN, then the UUI application at the SIP endpoint should limit its
   communication to 128 octet packets, in the knowledge that discard
   will occur if it does not.  The UUI application at the SIP endpoint
   has complete control over what occurs.  It should be noted that this
   was exactly the envisaged operation when early ISDN implementations
   that only supported 32 octets interworked with those supporting 128
   octets.  It also corresponds to the interworking with ISDNs that do
   not support the supplementary service at all, as discard will occur
   in these circumstances as well.  Note that failure to include the
   user-user data into the ISDN SETUP message (when discard occurs) will
   result in the service being unavailable for the remainder of the call
   when UUS1 implicit operation is used.

   OPEN ISSUE 3: The generic SIP User-to-User header field extension
   supports the description of more "protocol discriminators" that that
   supported by the ISDN user-to-user signalling supplementary service.
   Part of this depends on how these additional application identifiers
   (if any) are carried, and as a result whether the existing ISDN
   protocol discriminator is carried "as is".  At the moment this is
   assumed, and therefore if a valid protocol discriminator value
   exists, then it is mapped.  If one does not exist then it is not
   mapped, and discard of the entire user data occurs as in open issue



Drage, et al.            Expires March 24, 2011                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft               SIP UUI for CC               September 2010


   2.  It is believed that many of the considerations of Issue 2 apply,
   and therefore the sole reason for any additional signalling support
   is to identify a protocol discriminator that can be mapped (i.e. one
   that forms part of the set that exists in ISDN), from those that
   cannot.  Note that failure to include the user-user data into the
   ISDN SETUP message (when discard occurs) will result in the service
   being unavailable for the remainder of the call when UUS1 implicit
   operation is used.

   OPEN ISSUE 4: It could be that more than one payload is allowed to be
   included in the generic SIP User-to-User header field extension
   whereas only one payload is supported by the ISDN user-to-user
   signalling supplementary service.  It is believed the considerations
   are identical to open issue 2.

   OPEN ISSUE 5: If integrity protection or encryption is supported in
   the generic SIP User-to-User header field extension then it is
   unlikely this can be supported in the ISDN.  It is assumed that the
   gateway will support nothing but the transparent mapping of payload,
   and indeed fulfils no useful function by performing any capability in
   regard to integrity protection or encryption.  Similar considerations
   apply as for open issue 2, i.e. that the UUI application at the SIP
   endpoint has complete control over what occurs.

   OPEN ISSUE 6: Interworking depends on there being equivalent
   functionality existing in both protocols.  The mapping for ISDN basic
   call to SIP is well established and deployed.  It is believed that
   there is no issue in mapping the generic SIP User-to-User header
   field extension as supported in RFC 3261 to the ISDN user-to-user
   signalling supplementary service in this respect.  Issues may occur
   when more complex SIP transactions are used such as the 3xx response
   and the REFER method.  This is of course dependent on there being a
   mapping at the ISDN gateway of the the 3xx response or the REFER
   method in the first place.  Many SIP deployments rely on some server
   converting REFER transactions to INVITE transactions within the SIP
   environment, therefore the interworking requirements are merely those
   of the INVITE dialog itself.  Are there other more complex scenarios
   that need to be studied for interworking?


7.  IANA Considerations


8.  Security Considerations







Drage, et al.            Expires March 24, 2011                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft               SIP UUI for CC               September 2010


9.  Acknowledgements

   Thanks to Spencer Dawkins, Vijay Gurbani, and Laura Liess for their
   review of earlier versions of this document.  The authors wish to
   thank Francois Audet, Denis Alexeitsev, Paul Kyzivat, Cullen
   Jennings, and Mahalingam Mani for their comments.


10.  Normative References

   [RFC3261]  Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., Camarillo, G., Johnston,
              A., Peterson, J., Sparks, R., Handley, M., and E.
              Schooler, "SIP: Session Initiation Protocol", RFC 3261,
              June 2002.

   [Q931]     "ITU-T Recommendation Q.931: Digital subscriber Signalling
              System No. 1 - Network layer; ISDN user-network interface
              layer 3 specification for basic call control",
              http://www.itu.int/rec/T-REC-Q.931-199805-I/en .

   [Q957.1]   "ITU-T Recommendation Q.957.1: Digital subscriber
              Signalling System No. 1 - Stage 3 description for
              supplementary services using DSS 1; Stage 3 description
              for additional information transfer supplementary services
              using DSS 1: User-to-User Signalling (UUS)",
              http://www.itu.int/rec/T-REC-Q.957.1-199607-I .

   [Q763]     "ITU-T Q.763 Signaling System No. 7 - ISDN user part
              formats and  codes",
              http://www.itu.int/rec/T-REC-Q.931-199805-I/en .

   [ANSII]    "ANSI T1.643-1995, Telecommunications-Integrated Services
              Digital Network  (ISDN)-Explicit Call Transfer
              Supplementary Service".

   [ETSI]     "ETSI ETS 300 207-1 Ed.1 (1994), Integrated Services
              Digital Network  (ISDN); Diversion supplementary
              services".

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC3372]  Vemuri, A. and J. Peterson, "Session Initiation Protocol
              for Telephones (SIP-T): Context and Architectures",
              BCP 63, RFC 3372, September 2002.

   [RFC3324]  Watson, M., "Short Term Requirements for Network Asserted
              Identity", RFC 3324, November 2002.



Drage, et al.            Expires March 24, 2011                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft               SIP UUI for CC               September 2010


   [johnston-cuss-sip-uui-reqs]
              Johnston, A., McMillen, J., and L. Liess, "Problem
              Statement and Requirements for Transporting User to User
              Call Control Information in  SIP",
              draft-johnston-cuss-sip-uui-reqs-00 .

   [johnston-cuss-sip-uui]
              Johnston, A., McMillen, J., and J. Rafferty, "A Mechanism
              for Transporting User to User Call Control Information in
              SIP", draft-johnston-cuss-sip-uui-00 .


Authors' Addresses

   Keith Drage
   Alcatel-Lucent
   Quadrant, Stonehill Green, Westlea
   Swindon
   UK

   Email: keith.drage@alcatel-lucent.com


   Alan Johnston
   Avaya
   St. Louis, MO  63124

   Email: alan.b.johnston@gmail.com


   Joanne McMillen
   Unaffiliated

   Email: c.joanne.mcmillen@gmail.com

















Drage, et al.            Expires March 24, 2011                [Page 10]


