AVT Working Group                                              G. Feher
Internet Draft                                                      BME
Intended status: Informational                         October 19, 2010
Expires: April 2011



     Using approximate authentication with Secure Real-time Transport
                              Protocol (SRTP)
                  draft-feher-avt-approx-auth-srtp-00.txt


Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 19, 2011.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors. All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document. Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.





Feher                   Expires April 19, 2011                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft             Approx-Auth-SRTP                October 2010


Abstract

   This document describes how to use an approximate authentication
   algorithm in the Secure Real-time Transport Protocol (SRTP) to
   provide integrity protection for the Real-time Transport Protocol
   (RTP) traffic.

   Approximate authentication is a class of authentication algorithms
   where the authentication does not require the exact match of the
   source and received data, but a parameter given, certain amount of
   deviation is acceptable.

Table of Contents


   1. Introduction...................................................2
   2. Conventions used in this document..............................4
      2.1. Stream ciphers and block ciphers..........................4
   3. SRTP message authentication with approximate authentication....4
      3.1. SRTP headers and context..................................5
      3.2. SRTP payload encryption...................................6
      3.3. SRTP payload approximate authentication...................6
      3.4. Message authentication tag encryption.....................6
      3.5. Key derivation for the algorithms.........................7
   4. SRTCP message authentication...................................7
   5. Security Considerations........................................8
   6. IANA Considerations............................................8
   7. References.....................................................8
      7.1. Normative References......................................8
      7.2. Informative References....................................9
   8. Acknowledgments................................................9

1. Introduction

   Message authentication is a protection tool to protect the
   transmitted data during the transmission. The protection can signal
   whether the transmitted message is the same at the sender and the
   receiver or not. Due to this technique no modifications by
   adversaries and no natural transmission errors remain undetectable by
   the receiver. Message authentication often utilizes keyed
   cryptographic hash functions.

   In the case of wired data transmissions bit errors are rear, usually
   this channel is considered error free. In contrast, in the case of
   wireless channels bit errors during the transmission are common. The
   transmitted erroneous data frames are dropped by the receiver based
   on an integrity check. In order to avoid problems caused by these


Feher                   Expires April 19, 2011                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft             Approx-Auth-SRTP                October 2010


   drops, often an error correction protocol is applied at link level.
   The simplest error correction is to repeat the transmission when the
   receiver does not acknowledge the arrival of the transmitted data.
   This is used e.g. in WiFi unicast connections. However, there are
   certain scenarios where simple error correction is not applicable,
   and actually there is no error correction at all in this case. As an
   example, in the case of multicast WiFi transmissions, which are often
   used to transmit audio and video data, there is no protection against
   drops caused by natural bit errors.

   Nowadays there are already available technologies that are able to
   cope with bit errors. Even if bit error correction is not possible,
   errors can be concealed. Depending on the amount of errors, the
   experienced results of bit error concealments could be better than
   dropping whole packets. Bit errors are even supported on transport
   layers with protocols, such as UDP-Lite [RFC3828]. This latter
   document also mentions radio technologies (e.g. [3GPP]) that permit
   partially damaged frames in the MAC layer.

   Overall, there are real scenarios, where audio and video data are
   transmitted during error prone radio channels. Due to the error
   resilience and error concealment techniques in the decoders, users
   may benefit from the received, but not dropped damaged packets.
   However, when the user selects secure audio or video transmission,
   using SRTP [RFC3711] with a cryptographic hash based authentication,
   all the damaged packets should be dropped as they fail the
   authentication. For this reason, flows protected with current SRTP
   algorithms are not able to profit from the damaged packets.

   Approximate authentication is a class of authentication algorithms
   where the authentication does not require the exact match of the
   source and received data [DONGVU][FEHER][GRAVISH]. The user is able
   to give a threshold for the number of mismatching bits, and if the
   number of errors is below of such threshold, then the packet is
   authenticated. Authenticating a modified packet is not necessarily a
   security problem. When the authentication threshold is low, then the
   adversary is not able to spoof the whole content. Assuming that the
   content is encrypted, the adversary cannot perform predictable
   content spoofing. No hijacking is possible either. As a maximum, the
   adversary may turn down the quality of the transmitted media by
   modifying some bits in the stream, but this impact should be small
   compared to the case, where damaged packets are dropped.







Feher                   Expires April 19, 2011                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft             Approx-Auth-SRTP                October 2010


2. Conventions used in this document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [RFC2119].

   In this document, these words will appear with that interpretation
   only when in ALL CAPS. Lower case uses of these words are not to be
   interpreted as carrying RFC-2119 significance.

2.1. Stream ciphers and block ciphers

   In this draft ciphers are mentioned at several places. Basically
   ciphers could be block ciphers or stream ciphers. The differences
   between the two types of ciphers are:

   o  Block ciphers deal with larger blocks of information (i.e. usually
      64 or 128 bit blocks), while stream ciphers work bit by bit.

   o  Stream ciphers have memory

   It is possible to convert block ciphers to stream ciphers back and
   forth, so it might not be obvious when a certain cipher in a certain
   operation mode is a block cipher or a stream cipher. Further on in
   this document, the stream ciphers refer to cryptographic algorithms
   that use some function (i.e. mostly the XOR function) to combine a
   pseudorandom number generator (PRNG) with a plaintext/ciphertext
   stream. They are also called as combiner-type algorithms in some NSA
   documents. Block ciphers refer to algorithms that operate on groups
   of bits of a fixed length, termed blocks. An important property of a
   block cipher is the avalanche effect, in the meaning that a slight
   change in the ciphertext causes a significant change in the decoded
   plaintext.

   According to the previous distinction, AES-ICM (i.e. AES block cipher
   in Integer Counter Mode) is considered as a stream cipher, while AES-
   CBC (i.e. AES block cipher in Cipher-block Chaining mode) is
   considered as block cipher.

3. SRTP message authentication with approximate authentication

   During the approximate authentication procedure, at the source side,
   a message authentication tag will be calculated and inserted to the
   authentication part of the SRTP message. This authentication takes
   care of the message header and payload separately. For security
   reason the message authentication tag is encrypted.



Feher                   Expires April 19, 2011                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft             Approx-Auth-SRTP                October 2010


   At the receiver side the included message authentication tag is
   decrypted and compared to the code that is calculated over the
   received message, same way as it was on the sender side. When the
   difference is below the given threshold, then the message is
   authenticated, otherwise the error audit message "AUTHENTICATION
   FAILURE" MUST be returned.

   The calculation of the message authentication tag:

   Authentication tag =

      E_k1(H_k2(SRTP header||ROC) + AA_k3(SRTP payload))),

   where E is an encryption algorithm using a block cipher, H is a
   cryptographic hash algorithm and AA is the approximate authentication
   algorithm. Their keys are k1, k2 and k3 respectively. These subkeys
   are generated using the negotiated authentication key.

   The acceptance threshold parameter extends SRTP context. The value of
   the parameter SHOULD be decided during the negotiation of other
   parameters.

3.1. SRTP headers and context

   In the SRTP message the authentication covers the header and the
   payload. The header section of the SRTP packet is considered as
   highly error sensitive. Furthermore, a possible attack against
   sequence number and other fields makes the header sensitive from
   security point of view as well. Thus, the SRTP header part requires
   perfect authentication, so it MUST be authenticated using a
   cryptographic hash function (e.g. HMAC-SHA1 [RFC2104]).

   To perform the header authentication, a cryptographic hash function
   MUST be used. When the size of the message authentication tag (n_tag)
   is shorter than the output of the hash function, then only the
   leftmost n_tag bit SHOULD be considered. Otherwise, when the message
   authentication tag is longer than the hash output, then the hash
   value SHOULD be repeated along the length of the message
   authentication tag.

   According to RFC3711, in the case of SRTP, the authentication should
   cover the ROC value from the cryptographic context as well. Since ROC
   is a sensitive data in terms of security, it requires perfect
   authentication. For this reason the ROC is concatenated to the SRTP
   header and the cryptographic hash function covers them both.




Feher                   Expires April 19, 2011                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft             Approx-Auth-SRTP                October 2010


3.2. SRTP payload encryption

   The approximate authentication of the message allows the successful
   authentication of the packet regardless a small number of bit errors
   in the payload. In order to circumvent content spoofing attacks, it
   is RECOMMENDED to encrypt the content. When the content is encrypted,
   the encryption algorithm MUST be a stream cipher. In other cases, due
   to the significant change caused by the avalanche effect, using
   approximate authentication is meaningless.

   Since the encrypted payload use a stream cipher for the encryption
   procedure, there is no need for padding. Due to the nature of
   approximate authentication, as padding length can be spoofed, padding
   is risky. In fact, RTP padding MUST be disabled, so the packet SHOULD
   NOT contain any RTP padding or RTP pad count fields.

3.3. SRTP payload approximate authentication

   The approximate authentication algorithm creates a checksum like
   authentication code. Using the code of the transmitted payload and
   the code calculated at the sender side, it is possible to deduce to
   the amount of modifications in the payload. The approximate
   authentication is not necessarily an error detection code, therefore
   it may happen that the exact number of differences cannot be
   signaled. In this situation the code gives an approximate value only,
   hence the name is approximate authentication.

   Calculating the approximate authentication code MAY require the need
   of ROC and SEQ from the cryptographic context. Together with these
   values and the key associated to the approximate authentication, it
   is possible to perform packet specific cryptographic operations
   safely.

3.4. Message authentication tag encryption

   The encryption of the message authentication tag is necessary, since
   the approximate authentication field might be subject of spoofing
   attacks. The encryption procedure can provide protection against
   spoofing. Stream ciphers are inappropriate for this protection, since
   this way the attacker can perform predictable changes in the
   decrypted authentication tag. The encryption algorithm used here MUST
   be a block cipher.

   It is possible that the length of the message authentication tag is
   not the multiple of the block size, which the block cipher defines.
   Block ciphers having a block size larger than the message
   authentication tag length MUST NOT be used. The output of the block


Feher                   Expires April 19, 2011                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft             Approx-Auth-SRTP                October 2010


   cipher cannot be cut, just like hash outputs. Otherwise, there are
   two options. When the length of the message authentication tag is
   exactly the same as the block size, then any block cipher can be
   used. When the length of the message authentication tag is greater
   than the block size, then the Ciphertext stealing (CTS) operation
   mode [CTS] MUST be used. Using the CTS method, the size of the
   message authentication tag should not be aligned to the block size.

   For short message authentication tags, it is RECOMMENDED to select a
   block cipher that has 64 bit block size (e.g. BLOWFISH [BF]).

   During the transmission the message authentication tag may suffer bit
   error damage. Due to the avalanche effect in block ciphers, the
   authentication will fail in this case.

3.5. Key derivation for the algorithms

   The encryption algorithm, used to encrypt the message authentication
   tag, the cryptographic hash function, used to protect the SRTP header
   and the approximate authentication algorithm, used to protect the
   SRTP payload require keys. The encryption algorithm MUST have a key,
   while at the hash function and at the approximate authentication,
   keys are OPTIONAL only. Despite these algorithms may work without a
   key, keyed algorithms are RECOMMENDED increasing the security. These
   three keys are called subkeys and managed by algorithms described in
   SRTP.

   The subkeys MUST be generated using the authentication key (the k_a
   parameter in RFC3711) via the key derivation method defined in
   RFC3711. The key derivation MUST use the AES-CM PRF, which is
   mandatory to implement in SRTP. There are new labels defined for the
   new keys. For the encryption key the <label> = 0x06, for the hash
   function <label> = 0x07 and for the approximate authentication
   <label> = 0x08.

   The length of the subkeys should be defined together with the
   particular approximate authentication algorithm.

4. SRTCP message authentication

   The approximate authentication is valid only for SRTP messages. SRTCP
   SHOULD NOT use approximate authentication. In the SRTCP messages
   there are no data that could be used with bit damages. For this
   reason approximate authentication is not applicable.

   SRTCP is out of scope of this document.



Feher                   Expires April 19, 2011                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft             Approx-Auth-SRTP                October 2010


5. Security Considerations

   The security considerations in RFC3711 apply to this document as
   well.

   Section 9.5 of RFC3711 considers weak authentication in terms of
   security. The approximate authentication can be considered as a weak
   authentication, since due to its nature, it authenticates modified
   messages. It is impossible to get know whether the source of the
   modification is an adversary or it is a natural error.

   SRTP MAY be used with weak authentication, where it is an acceptable
   security risk, and it is impractical to provide strong message
   authentication. The risks associated with exercising the weak
   authentication need to be considered by a security audit prior to its
   use for a particular application or environment. Further details can
   be found in RFC3711.

6. IANA Considerations

   SRTP uses cryptographic transforms which a key management protocol
   signals. It is the task of each such protocol to register the
   cryptographic transforms or suites of transforms with IANA. This
   draft defines no new cryptographic transforms or suites of
   transforms, therefore IANA considerations can be omitted.

   IANA will register new crypto suites into the subregistry for SRTP
   crypto suites, when a particular approximate authentication
   algorithm will be proposed.

7. References

7.1. Normative References

   [RFC2119] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
             Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC2234] Crocker, D. and Overell, P.(Editors), "Augmented BNF for
             Syntax Specifications: ABNF", RFC 2234, Internet Mail
             Consortium and Demon Internet Ltd., November 1997.

   [CTS]     Schneier, Bruce, "Applied Cryptography", Second Edition,
             John Wiley and Sons, New York, 1996.  Errata: on page 195,
             line 13, the reference number should be [402].





Feher                   Expires April 19, 2011                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft             Approx-Auth-SRTP                October 2010


7.2. Informative References

   [RFC2104] Krawczyk, H., Bellare, M. and R. Canetti, "HMAC:  Keyed-
             Hashing for Message Authentication", RFC 2104, February
             1997.

   [RFC3828] Larzon, L-A., Degermark, M., Pink, S., Jonsson, L-E., and
             G. Fairhurst, "The Lightweight User Datagram Protocol (UDP-
             Lite)", RFC 3828, July 2004.

   [3GPP]    "Technical Specification Group Services and System Aspects;
             Quality of Service (QoS) concept and architecture", TS
             23.107 V5.9.0, Technical Specification 3rd Generation
             Partnership Project, June 2003.

   [BF]      B. Schneier, "Description of a New Variable-Length Key, 64-
             Bit Block Cipher (Blowfish)", Fast Software Encryption,
             Cambridge Security Workshop Proceedings (December 1993),
             Springer-Verlag, 1994, pp. 191-204.

   [DONGVU]  Dongvu Tonien, Reihaneh Safavi-Naini, Peter Nickolas, Yvo
             Desmedt, "Unconditionally Secure Approximate Message
             Authentication", IWCC, 2009, pp. 233-247

   [FEHER]   Gabor Feher, Istvan Olah, "Enhancing wireless video
             streaming using lightweight approximate authentication",
             Multimedia Systems Journal (MMS), 2008, Vol 14(3), pp. 167-
             177

   [GRAVISH] Liehua Xie, Gonzalo R. Arce, R. F. Graveman, "Approximate
             image message authentication codes", IEEE Transactions on
             Multimedia (TMM), 2001, Vol. 3(2), pp. 242-252

8. Acknowledgments

   This draft is based on the experience gained in the OPTIMIX research
   project. The research leading to these results has received funding
   from the European Union's Seventh Framework Programme ([FP7/2007-
   2013]) under grant agreement no ICT-214625.

   This document was prepared using 2-Word-v2.0.template.dot.








Feher                   Expires April 19, 2011                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft             Approx-Auth-SRTP                October 2010


Authors' Addresses

   Gabor Feher
   Budapest University of Technology and Economics
   H-1117 Budapest, Magyar tudosok krt. 2., HUNGARY
   Email: feher10@tmit.bme.hu











































Feher                   Expires April 19, 2011                [Page 10]

