


Network Working Group                                        B. Sarikaya
Internet-Draft                                                Huawei USA
Intended status: Standards Track                           July 16, 2012
Expires: January 17, 2013


                       Multicast Support for 6rd
              draft-sarikaya-softwire-6rdmulticast-04.txt

Abstract

   This memo specifies 6rd's multicast component so that IPv6 hosts can
   receive multicast data from IPv6 servers.  In 6rd encapsulation
   solution, multicast communication is completely integrated into 6rd
   tunnel. 6rd Customer Edge router is extended with Multicast Listener
   Discovery (MLD) protocol Proxy entity.  MLD Proxy receives join
   requests from 6rd IPv6 hosts and sends them upstream in 6rd's IPv4 in
   IPv6 tunnel to 6rd Border Relay (BR).  This tunnel is used to
   exchange MLD messages to establish multicast state at 6rd BR so that
   6rd BR can use 6rd's IPv4 in IPv6 tunnel to send IPv6 multicast data
   to 6rd CEs.  At the CEs, multicast data is decapsulated and MLD Proxy
   delivers it to IPv6 hosts based on MLD group membership state.  In
   6rd Translation Multicast based solution, the protocol is based on
   proxying MLD at the 6rd Customer Edge router and then translating MLD
   messages to IGMP messages and sending them upstream to a network
   which supports IPv4 multicast. 6rd Border Relay is multicast router
   and IGMP-MLD translator.  It translates IGMP join back to MLD join
   message and sends it to multicast source.  IPv6 Multicast data
   received at 6rd Border Relay is translated into IPv4 multicast data
   and then sent to IPv4 multicast tree downstream to 6rd Customer Edge
   which translates back to IPv6 multicast data then delivers to the
   hosts.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."




Sarikaya                Expires January 17, 2013                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft          Multicast Support for 6rd              July 2012


   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 17, 2013.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2012 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.



































Sarikaya                Expires January 17, 2013                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft          Multicast Support for 6rd              July 2012


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   3.  Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   4.  Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     4.1.  6rd Tunneling Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     4.2.  Translation Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   5.  6rd Tunneling Multicast Operation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     5.1.  Tunnel Interface Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     5.2.  Avalanche Problem  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   6.  6rd Translation Multicast Operation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     6.1.  Solution Based on Layer 2 Multicast Support  . . . . . . . 11
     6.2.  Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   7.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   8.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   9.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   10. References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     10.1. Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     10.2. Informative references . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16






























Sarikaya                Expires January 17, 2013                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft          Multicast Support for 6rd              July 2012


1.  Introduction

   With IPv4 address depletion on the horizon, many techniques are being
   standardized for IPv6 migration including 6rd [RFC5969]. 6rd enables
   IPv6 hosts to communicate with external hosts using IPv4 only legacy
   ISP network. 6rd Customer Edge (CE) device's LAN side is dual stack
   and WAN side is IPv4 only.  CE tunnels IPv6 packets received from the
   LAN side to 6rd Border Relays (BR) after encapsulating IPv6 packet in
   an IPv4 packet.  BRs have anycast IPv4 addresses and receive
   encapsulated packets from CEs over a virtual interface. 6rd operation
   is stateless.  Packets are received/ sent independent of each other
   and no state needs to be maintained.

   It should be noted that there is no depletion problem for IPv4
   address space allocated for any source multicast and source specific
   multicast [RFC3171].  This document is not motivated by the depletion
   of IPv4 multicast addresses.

   6rd as defined in [RFC5969] and [RFC5569] is unicast only.  It does
   not support multicast.  In this document we specify how multicast
   from home IPv6 users can be supported in 6rd.  This is what is meant
   by 6rd multicast protocol.

   In 6rd encapsulation approach, 6rd multicast is integrated into 6rd
   unicast solution. 6rd customer premise equipment (CPE) is extended to
   support MLD proxy [RFC4605] which receives MLD Membership Report
   messages requesting to join a multicast group and tunnels aggregated
   join requests upstream to the 6rd Border Router (BR) using IPv6 in
   IPv4 encapsulation. 6rd Border Router is extended to support MLD
   querrier sends join requests upstream towards the multicast source(s)
   and becomes part of the multicast tree and thus receives IPv6
   multicast data. 6rd Border Router encapsulates IPv6 multicast data
   using 6rd's IPv6 in IPv4 encapsulation and sends to each member CPE.
   CPE decapsulates the packet and MLD proxy sends IPv6 multicast data
   downstream to the member hosts.

   In the translation approach, native IPv4 multicast support in the
   network between Customer Edge routers and Border Router can be
   exploited.  Translation protocol requires MLD to IGMP translation at
   the Customer Edge and IGMP to MLD translation at the border router.
   Border router needs to translate IPv6 multicast data into IPv4
   multicast data and Customer Edge router needs to translate IPv4
   multicast data back into IPv6 multicast data.

   In both approaches, 6rd's CE to CE forwarding feature is not used.






Sarikaya                Expires January 17, 2013                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft          Multicast Support for 6rd              July 2012


2.  Terminology

   This document uses the terminology defined in [RFC5969], [RFC5569],
   [RFC3810], [RFC3376] and [I-D.ietf-softwire-dslite-multicast].


3.  Requirements

   This section states requirements on 6rd multicast support protocol.

   IPv6 hosts connected to 6rd CE router MUST be able to join multicast
   groups in IPv6 and receive multicast data.

   Both any source multicast (ASM) and source specific multicast (SSM)
   MUST be supported.

   6rd multicast MUST NOT introduce the need to use IPv4 addresses
   thereby contributing to the public IPv4 address depletion.

   In case of translation solution, 6rd CE MUST support MLD Proxy as
   defined in [RFC4605]. 6rd CE MAY support IGMP Proxy.

   In case of proxy solution, 6rd BR MUST support MLD Querier. 6rd CE
   MAY support IGMP Querier.


4.  Architecture

   In 6rd, there are hosts (possibly IPv4/ IPv6 dual stack) served by
   6rd Customer Edge device.  CE is dual stack facing the hosts and IPv4
   only facing the network or WAN side.  At the boundary of the network
   there is 6rd Border Relay.  BR receives IPv6 packets tunneled in IPv4
   from CE and decapsulates them and sends them out to IPv6 network.

   Unicast 6rd is stateless.  Each IPv6 packet sent by CE treated
   separately and different packets from the same CE may go to different
   BRs.  CE encapsulates IPv6 packet in IPv4 with destination address
   set to BR address (usually anycast IPv4 address).  BRs are placed
   where IPv6 native connectivity exists.  BR receives the encapsulated
   packet and decapsulates and send it to IPv6 network.  CEs are
   configured with 6rd Prefixes from ISPs prefix and with a number of BR
   IPv4 addresses.  Each host is given a prefix which contains 6rd
   Prefix and the host's IPv4 prefix.  BR receives IPv6 packets
   addressed to this ISP and from the destination address it extracts
   the destination host's IPv4 address and uses this address as
   destination address and encapsulates the IPv6 packet in IPv4 and
   sends it to IPv4-only network.




Sarikaya                Expires January 17, 2013                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft          Multicast Support for 6rd              July 2012


   6rd considers IPv4-only network as an NBMA link from IPv6 point of
   view and all 6rd CEs and BRs are defined as off-link neighbors from
   one other.

4.1.  6rd Tunneling Architecture

   In 6rd, there are hosts (possibly IPv4/ IPv6 dual stack) served by
   6rd Customer Edge device.  CE is dual stack facing the hosts and IPv4
   only facing the network or WAN side.  At the boundary of the network
   there is 6rd Border Relay.  BR receives IPv6 packets tunneled in IPv4
   from CE and decapsulates them and sends them out to IPv6 network.

   In order to support multicast, the CE implements MLD Proxy function
   [RFC4605].  IPv6 hosts send their join requests (MLD Membership
   Report messages) to CE.  CE as a proxy sends aggregated Report
   messages upstream towards BR in unicast using IPv6 in IPv4
   encapsulation.



           Dual Stack Hosts                                   IPv4
                  +----+                                      Network
                  | H1 |                 IPv4
                  +----+      +-----+    only       +-------+     +
                  +----+      | CE  |    network -- |   BR  |
                  | H2 |   ---| MLD |--- IPv6       |   MLD |    IPv6
                  +----+      |Proxy|    in         |Querier|   Network
                  +----+      +-----+    IPv4       +-------+
                  | H3 |                Encapsulation
                  +----+



        Figure 1: Architecture of 6rd Tunneling Multicast Protocol

   BR is the default multicast querier for CE.  BR implements multicast
   router function or it could be another MLD proxy.

   All the elements of 6rd multicast support system are shown in
   Figure 1.

4.2.  Translation Architecture

   In order to support multicast, CE implements MLD Proxy [RFC4605] and
   MLD to IGMP translation function.  IPv6 hosts send their join
   requests (MLD Membership Report messages) to CE.  CE as a proxy sends
   aggregated IGMP Report messages upstream towards BR.




Sarikaya                Expires January 17, 2013                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft          Multicast Support for 6rd              July 2012


   In order to support SSM, MLDv2 and IGMPv3 MUST be supported by the
   host, CE and BR.

   BR is the default multicast querier for CE.  BR implements IGMP to
   MLD translation function and multicast router function or it could be
   another MLD proxy.

   It is assumed that IPv4 only network to which CE and BR are connected
   supports native IPv4 multicast.

   All the elements of 6rd translation-based multicast support system
   are shown in Figure 2.


        Dual Stack Hosts                                                       IPv4
               +----+                                                          Network
               | H1 |                            IPv4
               +----+      +----------------+    only   +------------------+
               +----+      | CE     MLD     |   network |IGMP   BR         |      +
               | H2 |   ---| MLD   IGMP     |-----------| MLD        MLD   |    IPv6
               +----+      |Proxy Translator|           |Translator Querier|   Network
               +----+      +----------------+           +------------------+
               | H3 |
               +----+


            Figure 2: Architecture of 6rd Translation Multicast


5.  6rd Tunneling Multicast Operation

   In this section we specify how the host can subscribe and receive
   IPv6 multicast data from IPv6 content providers based on the
   architecture defined in Figure 1.

   The hosts will send their subscription requests for IPv6 multicast
   groups upstream to the default router, i.e.  Costumer Edge device.
   After subscribing the group, the host can receive multicast data from
   the CE.  The host implements MLD protocol's host part.

   Customer Edge device is MLD Proxy.  After receiving the first MLD
   Report message requesting subscription to an IPv6 multicast group, CE
   establishes a tunnel interface with a Border Relay.  The tunnel is
   IPv4 based but it will carry IP traffic, MLD messages back and forth
   and IPv6 multicast data messages downstream.

   CE is regular MLD proxy and it keeps MLD proxy membership database.
   CE inserts multicast forwarding state on the incoming interface, and



Sarikaya                Expires January 17, 2013                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft          Multicast Support for 6rd              July 2012


   merges state updates into the MLD proxy membership database.  CE
   updates or remove elements from the database as required.  CE will
   then send an aggregated Report via the upstream tunnel to the BR when
   the membership database changes.

   CE answers MLD queries from BR based on the membership database.
   CE's downstream link follows the traditional multipoint channel
   forwarding and does not pose any specific problems.

   CE receives IPv6 multicast data from the BR tunneled over the tunnel
   interface.  CE decapsulates the packet and then forwards it
   downstream.  Each member host receives the data packet based on Layer
   2 multicast interface.  No packet duplication is necessary.

   Border Relay acts as the default multicast querier for all CEs that
   have established an IPv4 tunnel with it.  In order to keep a
   consistent multicast state between a CE and BR, once a CE is
   connected it will stay connected until the state becomes empty.
   After that point, the CE may establish another tunnel to a different
   BR.

   According to aggregated MLD reports received from a CE, BR
   establishes group/source-specific multicast forwarding states at its
   corresponding downstream tunnel interfaces.  After that, BR maintains
   or removes the state as required by the aggregated reports received
   from CE.

   At the upstream interface, BR procures for aggregated multicast
   membership maintenance.  Based on the multicast-transparent
   operations of the CEs, the BR treats its tunnel interfaces as
   multicast enabled downstream links, serving zero to many listening
   nodes.

   When BR receives MLD join requests from downstream CEs BR sends PIM
   join message upstream towards multicast source(s).  This results in a
   multicast tree formation and BR is at the leaf of the multicast tree
   which enables BR to receive IPv6 multicast data sent by the source.

   Multicast traffic arriving at the BR is transparently forwarded
   according to its multicast forwarding information base.  Multicast
   data is first replicated according to MLD multicast group state and
   then forwarded in IPv6-in-IPv4 tunnel from BR to the corresponding
   CE.








Sarikaya                Expires January 17, 2013                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft          Multicast Support for 6rd              July 2012


5.1.  Tunnel Interface Considerations

   IPv6 in IPv4 tunneling is performed as specified in [RFC4213].
   Considerations specified in [RFC5969] apply.  Packets upstream from
   CE carry only MLD signaling messages and they are not expected to
   fragmentation.  However packets downstream, i.e. multicast data to CE
   may be subject to fragmentation.

   Source and destination addresses of MLD messages in IPv6-in-IPv4
   tunnel from CE is as follows:

   Source address of IPv4 header is CE WAN interface IPv4 address,
   destination address is BR anycast address when an invite message is
   sent to group G. Subsequent messages to group G contain BR unicast
   address as destination address.

   Source address of inner MLD message is the link local address.
   Destination address is all MLDv2-capable multicast routers or FF02:0:
   0:0:0:0:0:16 for MLD Version 2 Multicast Listener Reports.

   Source and destination addresses of MLD messages in IPv6-in-IPv4
   softwire from BR is as follows:

   Source address of IPv4 header is BR IPv4 unicast address, destination
   address is CE IPv4 address.

   Source address of inner MLD message is the link local address,
   destination address is link-scope all-nodes multicast address, or
   FF02::1 for General Queries or IPv6 multicast group address for
   specific queries.

   Source address of IPv6 multicast data is unicast IPv6 address of the
   multicast source, e.g. the content provider, destination address is
   IPv6 multicast group address.

5.2.  Avalanche Problem

   In Section 5, multicast data is replicated to all interfaces, i.e. to
   all member CEs at the BR.  This replication (often called avalanche
   problem) can be very costly if there are very large number of
   downstream member CEs such as in IPTV application, see Appendix A in
   [I-D.ietf-softwire-dslite-multicast].

   In 6rd tunneling multicast, avalanche problem can be reduced by
   careful network partitioning.  More BRs can be deployed in areas
   where IPv6 users are increasing in numbers.  Deploying BRs colocating
   it at the access network gateway such as at the Border Network
   Gateway (BNG) is another possibility.



Sarikaya                Expires January 17, 2013                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft          Multicast Support for 6rd              July 2012


   In 6rd tunneling multicast operation, CEs are enabled to exploit
   multiple BRs that can be deployed in the network by using BR anycast
   address anytime they send an upstream MLD join request and then using
   the same BR that received the join message in subsequent MLD messages
   by using the same BR's unicast address.


6.  6rd Translation Multicast Operation

   In this section we specify how the host can subscribe and receive
   IPv6 multicast data from IPv6 content providers based on the
   architecture defined in Figure 1.

   The hosts will send their subscription requests for IPv6 multicast
   groups upstream to the default router, i.e.  Costumer Edge device.
   After subscribing the group, the host can receive multicast data from
   the CE.  The host implements MLD protocol's host part.

   Customer Edge device is MLD Proxy.  After receiving the first MLD
   Report message requesting subscription to an IPv6 multicast group, CE
   translates MLD Membership Report message into IGMP Membership report
   message and sends it upstream only if joining a new group is needed.

   Address translation in generating IGMP Membership report message is
   done as follows: Destination address is copied from the last 32 bits
   of IPv6 multicast group address.  CE inserts IPv4 address of its WAN
   interface into the source address.  It is assumed that IPv6 multicast
   group address in MLD Report message conforms to the addressing scheme
   described in [I-D.ietf-mboned-64-multicast-address-format], i.e. for
   any-source and source-specific multicast address format.

   Source addresses in MLDv2 payload are translated as follows:
   Multicast source addresses in MLD Membership Report message MUST use
   uPrefix64, i.e. 64:ff9b::/96 defined in [RFC6052]. uPrefix64
   facilitates translation into IPv4 source address to be used in IGMPv3
   Membership Report message for source-specific multicast, i.e. by
   extracting the last 32 bits of IPv6 source address.

   IGMP Report message is received by IGMP Querier/Proxy upstream on the
   link (normally this node is Broadband Network Gateway, BNG in
   broadband networks).  IGMP Querier/Proxy sends IGMPv3 Report message
   to the neighboring routers to join the group.  In networks where PIM
   is supported, IGMP Report message may be received by PIM Designated
   Router.  PIM router sends PIMv4 join message to join IPv4 group.

   The border router that receives the join message translates the
   message into MLD.  IPv6 Multicast group address is obtained from the
   destination address to join IPv6 group for any-source multicast.  For



Sarikaya                Expires January 17, 2013               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft          Multicast Support for 6rd              July 2012


   source-specific multicast, IPv6 source address is generated after
   obtaining IPv4 source address of Membership Report message's Group
   Record Source Address field.  BR sends PIMv6 join message upstream
   towards the source.

   BR MUST act as the designated router to which the source of the
   source-specific IGMP join message is connected.  BR MUST act as the
   rendez-vous point (RP) of the multicast group for the any-source
   multicast IGMP join message.  Normally there is one such BR in an
   operator's network.  An IPv4 multicast tree eventually forms in the
   network between CE and BR and IPv6 multicast tree upstream from BR
   for the same ASM or SSM group.

   IPv6 multicast data received from the source at the border router is
   translated into IPv4.  The last 32 bits of the source and destination
   address fields determine the source and destination addresses of IPv4
   multicast data packet.  This packet is sent downstream on the
   multicast tree already formed for this IPv4 multicast group.

   Multicast data packet address translation follows the rules in
   [I-D.ietf-mboned-64-multicast-address-format] for the multicast group
   address and [RFC6052] for source-specific multicast source address,
   i.e. using uPrefix64.  For any-source multicast, Border Router
   inserts an IPv4 source address, different for each source.

   Packet header translation follows the rules in [RFC6145].
   Fragmentation and reassembly are handled as described in [RFC6145].
   After IPv4 multicast data packet is sent downstream from BR it may be
   fragmented by the routers.

   CE receives IPv4 multicast data packet, possibly in fragments and
   reassembles the fragments.  CE translates IPv4 multicast data packet
   back to IPv6 multicast data packet.  Address translation is done
   following [I-D.ietf-mboned-64-multicast-address-format] for multicast
   group addresses and [RFC6052] for unicast SSM source addresses.
   Header translation is done as in [RFC6145].

   IPv6 multicast data is sent on the home link to the host(s).  IEEE
   802.3 or IEEE 802.11 multicast link support usually handles this
   delivery in Layer 2 without any packet duplication if there are more
   than one members to the any-source multicast group or SSM source and
   multicast group.

6.1.  Solution Based on Layer 2 Multicast Support

   In this section we assume that Layer 2 multicast is supported in the
   network.  Layer 2 multicast support is done in order to forward
   multicast data downstream to the ports of Layer 2 devices, i.e.



Sarikaya                Expires January 17, 2013               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft          Multicast Support for 6rd              July 2012


   switches that requested a multicast group instead of flooding the
   data to all the ports.

   In the switches called snooping switches, multicast MAC address based
   filters are setup which link Layer 2 multicast groups to the egress
   ports.  IGMP snooping switches are commonly used in operators
   networks, most commonly at the access nodes (AN)
   [I-D.ietf-6man-lineid].

   When an IGMP Report message is received, the bridge will setup a
   multicast filter entry that allows (in case of a join message) or
   prevents (in case of a leave message) packets to flow the port on
   which the IGMP Report message was received.  In terms of IPv4
   multicast addresses, the mapping is not unique as 32 IPv4 multicast
   addresses map to a single Ethernet multicast MAC address [RFC4541].

   The main functionality of a snooping switch is to forward multicast
   data packets based on the filters that are setup, i.e. to those
   egress ports with multicast groups downstream and also to the router
   ports.

   In a 6rd network the snooping switches MUST detect IGMP packets sent
   upstream by CE and set the filtering rules accordingly.  When IPv4
   data packets are received the IGMP snooping switches forward these
   packets towards all CEs that have members, effectively achieving
   packet duplication at the access node level.

6.2.  Analysis

   An analysis of the translation solution reveals the following:

   Translation solution imposes a requirement on the IPv6 source-
   specific multicast sources to use uPrefix64 compatible source
   addresses.  This requirement can not be satified with simple
   configuration of the CPE router and Border Router.

   In the case of any-source multicast, the border router must use a
   public IPv4 address distinctively to represent each IPv6 any-source
   multicast source.

   In deployments which use IGMP routers not PIM routers, source-
   specific multicast can be supported only if all routers have been
   upgraded to IGMPv3 and no IGMPv1 or IGMPv2 systems are present.
   Otherwise the operation reverts to the older version of IGMP to
   preserve compatibility and thus SSM can not be supported.  With the
   use of PIM routers, this is avoided.

   Border router must act as the designated router or the rendez-vous



Sarikaya                Expires January 17, 2013               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft          Multicast Support for 6rd              July 2012


   point for IPv4/IPv6 multicast group and this may lead to the use of a
   single border router in the network instead of load sharing with
   various border routers.


7.  Security Considerations

   6rd Translation Multicast control and data message security are as
   described in [RFC5969].  The threats and their mitigation described
   in [RFC5969] apply to multicast communication as well.


8.  IANA Considerations

   TBD.


9.  Acknowledgements

   We would like to specially thank Mark Townsley for his constructive
   comments.  Steve Wright's online and very many offline comments
   helped us improve the document.


10.  References

10.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC2629]  Rose, M., "Writing I-Ds and RFCs using XML", RFC 2629,
              June 1999.

   [RFC4605]  Fenner, B., He, H., Haberman, B., and H. Sandick,
              "Internet Group Management Protocol (IGMP) / Multicast
              Listener Discovery (MLD)-Based Multicast Forwarding
              ("IGMP/MLD Proxying")", RFC 4605, August 2006.

   [RFC2491]  Armitage, G., Schulter, P., Jork, M., and G. Harter, "IPv6
              over Non-Broadcast Multiple Access (NBMA) networks",
              RFC 2491, January 1999.

   [RFC3810]  Vida, R. and L. Costa, "Multicast Listener Discovery
              Version 2 (MLDv2) for IPv6", RFC 3810, June 2004.

   [RFC3376]  Cain, B., Deering, S., Kouvelas, I., Fenner, B., and A.
              Thyagarajan, "Internet Group Management Protocol, Version



Sarikaya                Expires January 17, 2013               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft          Multicast Support for 6rd              July 2012


              3", RFC 3376, October 2002.

   [RFC5569]  Despres, R., "IPv6 Rapid Deployment on IPv4
              Infrastructures (6rd)", RFC 5569, January 2010.

   [RFC5969]  Townsley, W. and O. Troan, "IPv6 Rapid Deployment on IPv4
              Infrastructures (6rd) -- Protocol Specification",
              RFC 5969, August 2010.

   [RFC4213]  Nordmark, E. and R. Gilligan, "Basic Transition Mechanisms
              for IPv6 Hosts and Routers", RFC 4213, October 2005.

   [RFC4286]  Haberman, B. and J. Martin, "Multicast Router Discovery",
              RFC 4286, December 2005.

   [RFC4541]  Christensen, M., Kimball, K., and F. Solensky,
              "Considerations for Internet Group Management Protocol
              (IGMP) and Multicast Listener Discovery (MLD) Snooping
              Switches", RFC 4541, May 2006.

   [RFC6052]  Bao, C., Huitema, C., Bagnulo, M., Boucadair, M., and X.
              Li, "IPv6 Addressing of IPv4/IPv6 Translators", RFC 6052,
              October 2010.

   [RFC6145]  Li, X., Bao, C., and F. Baker, "IP/ICMP Translation
              Algorithm", RFC 6145, April 2011.

   [I-D.ietf-mboned-64-multicast-address-format]
              Boucadair, M., Qin, J., Lee, Y., Venaas, S., Li, X., and
              M. Xu, "IPv6 Multicast Address Format With Embedded IPv4
              Multicast Address",
              draft-ietf-mboned-64-multicast-address-format-02 (work in
              progress), May 2012.

   [I-D.ietf-mboned-auto-multicast]
              Bumgardner, G., "Automatic Multicast Tunneling",
              draft-ietf-mboned-auto-multicast-14 (work in progress),
              June 2012.

   [I-D.ietf-softwire-dslite-multicast]
              Qin, J., Boucadair, M., Jacquenet, C., Lee, Y., and Q.
              Wang, "Multicast Extensions to DS-Lite Technique in
              Broadband Deployments",
              draft-ietf-softwire-dslite-multicast-02 (work in
              progress), May 2012.






Sarikaya                Expires January 17, 2013               [Page 14]

Internet-Draft          Multicast Support for 6rd              July 2012


10.2.  Informative references

   [RFC3171]  Albanna, Z., Almeroth, K., Meyer, D., and M. Schipper,
              "IANA Guidelines for IPv4 Multicast Address Assignments",
              RFC 3171, August 2001.

   [I-D.ietf-6man-lineid]
              Krishnan, S., Kavanagh, A., Varga, B., Ooghe, S., and E.
              Nordmark, "The Line Identification Destination Option",
              draft-ietf-6man-lineid-05 (work in progress), June 2012.









































Sarikaya                Expires January 17, 2013               [Page 15]

Internet-Draft          Multicast Support for 6rd              July 2012


Author's Address

   Behcet Sarikaya
   Huawei USA
   5340 Legacy Dr. Building 175
   Plano, TX  75074

   Phone:
   Email: sarikaya@ieee.org










































Sarikaya                Expires January 17, 2013               [Page 16]

