


Network Working Group                                        B. Sarikaya
Internet-Draft                                                Huawei USA
Intended status: Standards Track                           March 7, 2011
Expires: September 8, 2011


             Multicast Support for Dual Stack Lite and 6RD
           draft-sarikaya-softwire-dslite6rdmulticast-00.txt

Abstract

   This memo specifies modifications required to DS-Lite and 6RD so that
   both IPv4/ IPv6 hosts can receive multicast data from IPv4/ IPv6
   servers.

   The DS-Lite solution is based on DS-Lite Basic Bridging BroadBand
   element (B4) proxying IGMP and then tunneling IGMP messages to DS-
   Lite Address Family Transition Router element (AFTR).  IPv4 multicast
   data received at AFTR is tunneled to B$ and then delivered to the
   hosts.  IPv6 multicast and MLD can be supported in a similar way.

   The 6RD protocol is based on proxying MLD at the 6RD Customer Edge
   and then tunneling MLD messages to 6RD Border Relays where IPv6
   multicast routing is supported.  Multicast data received at 6RD
   Border Relay is tunneled to 6RD Customer Edge node and then delivered
   to the hosts.  We show that IPv4 multicast and IGMP can be supported
   in a similar way.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 8, 2011.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the



Sarikaya                Expires September 8, 2011               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft     Multicast Support for DS-Lite - 6RD        March 2011


   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   3.  Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   4.  Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   5.  DS-Lite Multicast Operation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     5.1.  Tunnel Interface Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     5.2.  Supporting IPv6 Multicast in DS-Lite . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   6.  6RD Multicast Operation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     6.1.  Tunnel Interface Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     6.2.  Supporting IPv4 Multicast in 6RD . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   7.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   8.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   9.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   10. References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     10.1. Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     10.2. Informative references . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12



















Sarikaya                Expires September 8, 2011               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft     Multicast Support for DS-Lite - 6RD        March 2011


1.  Introduction

   With IPv4 address depletion on the horizon, many techniques are being
   standardized for IPv6 migration including DS-Lite
   [I-D.ietf-softwire-dual-stack-lite] and 6RD [RFC5969].  DS-Lite
   enables IPv4 hosts to communicate with external hosts using IPv6 only
   network and moves the traditional NAT to the network.  B4 element's
   LAN side is dual stack and WAN side is IPv6 only.  B4 tunnels IPv4
   packets received from the LAN side to AFTR element after
   encapsulating IPv4 packet in an IPv6 packet.  AFTR decapsulates the
   packet, does a NAT operation and then sends the packet out to IPv4
   public internet.

   6RD enables IPv6 hosts to communicate with external hosts using IPv4
   only legacy ISP network. 6RD Customer Edge (CE) device's LAN side is
   dual stack and WAN side is IPv4 only.  CE tunnels IPv6 packets
   received from the LAN side to 6RD Border Relays (BR) after
   encapsulating IPv6 packet in an IPv4 packet.  BRs have anycast IPv4
   addresses and receive encapsulated packets from CEs over a virtual
   interface. 6RD operation is stateless.  Packets are received/ sent
   independent of each other and no state needs to be maintained.

   DS-Lite as defined in [I-D.ietf-softwire-dual-stack-lite] is unicast
   only, it does not support multicast.  In this document we specify how
   multicast from home IPv4 users can be supported in DS-Lite.  We also
   show how IPv6 multicast can be supported for home IPv6 users in DS-
   Lite.

   6RD as defined in [RFC5969] and [RFC5569] is unicast only.  It does
   not support multicast.  In this document we specify how multicast
   from home IPv6 users can be supported in 6RD.  We also show how IPv4
   multicast can be supported for home IPv4 users.  Both solutions use
   IPv6 and IPv4 multicast addressing and do not require any new
   multicast address prefixes such as IPv4-embedded IPv6 multicast
   addresses to be allocated.


2.  Terminology

   This document uses the terminology defined in [RFC5969], [RFC5569],
   [RFC3810] and [RFC3376].


3.  Requirements

   This section states requirements on DS-Lite and 6RD multicast support
   protocol.




Sarikaya                Expires September 8, 2011               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft     Multicast Support for DS-Lite - 6RD        March 2011


   DS-Lite B4 MUST support IGMP Proxy as defined in [RFC4605].  DS-Lite
   B4 MAY support MLD Proxy.

   DS-Lite AFTR MUST support IGMP Querrier.  DS-Lite AFTR MAY support
   MLD Querrier.

   6RD CE MUST support MLD Proxy as defined in [RFC4605]. 6RD CE MAY
   support IGMP Proxy.

   6RD BR MUST support MLD Querrier. 6RD CE MAY support IGMP Querrier.

   Both any source multicast (ASM) and source specific multicast (SSM)
   MUST be supported.


4.  Architecture

   In DS-Lite, there are hosts (possibly IPv4/ IPv6 dual stack) served
   by B4 element.  B4 is dual stack facing the hosts and IPv6 only
   facing the network or WAN side.  At the boundary of the network there
   is AFTR.  AFTR receives IPv4 packets tunneled in IPv6 from B4 and
   decapsulates them and sends them out to IPv4 network.

   In order to support multicast B4 implements IGMP Proxy function
   [RFC4605].  IPv4 hosts send their join requests (IGMP Membership
   Report messages) to B4.  B4 as a proxy sends aggregated Report
   messages upstream towards AFTR.

   AFTR is the default multicast querier for B4.  AFTR implements
   multicast router function or it could be another IGMP proxy.

   All the elements of DS-Lite multicast support system are shown in
   Figure 1.


           Dual Stack Hosts                                   IPv4
                  +----+                                      Network
                  | H1 |                 IPv6
                  +----+      +-----+    only       +-------+     +
                  +----+      | B4  |    network -- |  AFTR |
                  | H2 |   ---| IGMP|---            |  IGMP |    IPv6
                  +----+      |Proxy|               |Querier|   Network
                  +----+      +-----+               +-------+
                  | H3 |
                  +----+






Sarikaya                Expires September 8, 2011               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft     Multicast Support for DS-Lite - 6RD        March 2011


           Figure 1: Architecture of DS-Lite Multicast Protocol

   In 6RD, there are hosts (possibly IPv4/ IPv6 dual stack) served by
   6RD Customer Edge device.  CE is dual stack facing the hosts and IPv4
   only facing the network or WAN side.  At the boundary of the network
   there is 6RD Border Relay.  BR receives IPv6 packets tunneled in IPv4
   from CE and decapsulates them and sends them out to IPv6 network.

   In order to support multicast CE implements MLD Proxy function
   [RFC4605].  IPv6 hosts send their join requests (MLD Membership
   Report messages) to CE.  CE as a proxy sends aggregated Report
   messages upstream towards BR.



           Dual Stack Hosts                                   IPv4
                  +----+                                      Network
                  | H1 |                 IPv4
                  +----+      +-----+    only       +-------+     +
                  +----+      | CE  |    network -- |   BR  |
                  | H2 |   ---| MLD |---            |   MLD |    IPv6
                  +----+      |Proxy|               |Querier|   Network
                  +----+      +-----+               +-------+
                  | H3 |
                  +----+



             Figure 2: Architecture of 6RD Multicast Protocol

   BR is the default multicast querier for CE.  BR implements multicast
   router function or it could be another MLD proxy.

   All the elements of 6RD multicast support system are shown in
   Figure 2.


5.  DS-Lite Multicast Operation

   In this section we specify how the host can subscribe and receive
   IPv4 multicast data from IPv4 content providers based on the
   architecture defined in Section 4.

   The hosts will send their subscription requests for IPv4 multicast
   groups upstream to the default router, i.e.  B4 Element.  After
   subscribing to the group, the host can receive multicast data from
   the B4.  The host implements IGMP protocol's host part.




Sarikaya                Expires September 8, 2011               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft     Multicast Support for DS-Lite - 6RD        March 2011


   B4 Element is IGMP Proxy.  After receiving the first IGMP Report
   message requesting subscription to an IPv4 multicast group, B4
   establishes a tunnel interface with a AFTR.  The tunnel is IPv6 based
   but it will carry IP traffic, IGMP messages back and forth and IPv4
   multicast data messages downstream.  This is similar to
   [I-D.ietf-multimob-pmipv6-base-solution] but the operation is much
   simpler.  In DS-Lite environment there is no requirement to handle
   host mobility.  B4 does not have to keep more than one tunnel
   interfaces, a single interface is sufficient.  IGMP Proxy at the B4
   does not have to have more than one proxy instances, a single
   instance is sufficient.

   B4 is regular IGMP proxy and it keeps IGMP proxy membership database.
   B4 inserts multicast forwarding state on the incoming interface, and
   merges state updates into the IGMP proxy membership database.  B4
   updates or removes elements from the database as required.  B4 will
   then send an aggregated Report via the upstream tunnel to the AFTR
   when the membership database changes.

   B4 answers IGMP queries from AFTR based on the membership database.
   B4's downstream link follows the traditional multipoint channel
   forwarding and does not pose any specific problems.

   B4 receives IPv4 multicast data from the AFTR tunneled over the
   tunnel interface.  B4 decapsulates the packet and then forwards it
   downstream.  Each member host receives the data packet based on Layer
   2 multicast interface.  No packet duplication is necessary.

   AFTR acts as the as the default multicast querier for all B4s that
   have established an IPv6 tunnel with it.  In order to keep a
   consistent multicast state between a B4 and AFTR, once a B4 is
   connected it will stay connected until the state becomes empty.
   After that point, the B4 may continue to use the tunnel for IPv4
   unicast traffic.

   According to aggregated IGMP reports received from a B4, AFTR
   establishes group/source-specific multicast forwarding states at its
   corresponding downstream tunnel interfaces.  After that, AFTR
   maintains or removes the state as required by the aggregated reports
   received from B4.

   At the upstream interface, AFTR procures for aggregated multicast
   membership maintenance.  Based on the multicast-transparent
   operations of the B4s, the AFTR treats its tunnel interfaces as
   multicast enabled downstream links, serving zero to many listening
   nodes.

   Multicast traffic arriving at the AFTR is transparently forwarded



Sarikaya                Expires September 8, 2011               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft     Multicast Support for DS-Lite - 6RD        March 2011


   according to its multicast forwarding information base.  Multicast
   data is first replicated and then forwarded in IPv4-in-IPv6 tunnel
   from AFTR to the corresponding B4.

5.1.  Tunnel Interface Considerations

   Legacy IPv4 in IPv6 tunneling is performed as in [RFC2473].
   Considerations specified in [I-D.ietf-softwire-dual-stack-lite]
   apply.  Packets upstream from B4 carry only IGMP signaling messages
   and they are not expected to fragmentation.  However packets
   downstream, i.e. multicast data to B4 may be subject to
   fragmentation.

5.2.  Supporting IPv6 Multicast in DS-Lite

   IPv6 multicast can be supported in a way similar to IPv4 as described
   in Section 5.  B4 Element has MLD Proxy function.  Proxy operation
   for MLD [RFC3810] is described in [RFC4605].

   B4 receives MLD join requests from the hosts and then sends
   aggregated MLD Report messages upstream in an IPv6 in IPv6 tunnel.
   Tunnel addressing is in IPv6 and is as described in
   [I-D.ietf-softwire-dual-stack-lite].  Multicast membership database
   is maintained for all active IPv6 multicast groups the hosts
   subscribe.

   AFTR is MLD querier or another MLD Proxy.  It serves all B4s
   downstream and treats its tunnel interfaces as multicast enabled
   downstream links, serving zero to many listening nodes.  Multicast
   membership database is maintained based on the aggregated Reports
   received from downstream tunnel interfaces.

   IPv6 multicast data received from the multicast Single Source
   Multicast or Any Source Multicast sources are replicated according to
   the multicast membership database and the data packets are tunneled
   to the B4s that have one or more members of this multicast group.

   B4s receive multicast data upstream in the B4-AFTR tunnel and
   decapsulate it and then forward the packet downstream.  Each member
   host receive IPv6 multicast data packet from its Layer 2 interface.


6.  6RD Multicast Operation

   In this section we specify how the host can subscribe and receive
   IPv6 multicast data from IPv6 content providers based on the
   architecture defined in Section 4.




Sarikaya                Expires September 8, 2011               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft     Multicast Support for DS-Lite - 6RD        March 2011


   The hosts will send their subscription requests for IPv6 multicast
   groups upstream to the default router, i.e.  Costumer Edge device.
   After subscribing the group, the host can receive multicast data from
   the CE.  The host implements MLD protocol's host part.

   Customer Edge device is MLD Proxy.  After receiving the first MLD
   Report message requesting subscription to an IPv6 multicast group, CE
   establishes a tunnel interface with a Border Relay.  The tunnel is
   IPv4 based but it will carry IP traffic, MLD messages back and forth
   and IPv6 multicast data messages downstream.  This is similar to
   [I-D.ietf-multimob-pmipv6-base-solution] but the operation is much
   simpler.  In 6RD environment there is no requirement to handle host
   mobility.  CE does not have to keep more than one tunnel interfaces,
   a single interface is sufficient.  MLD Proxy at the CE does not have
   to have more than one proxy instances, a single instance is
   sufficient.

   CE is regular MLD proxy and it keeps MLD proxy membership database.
   CE inserts multicast forwarding state on the incoming interface, and
   merges state updates into the MLD proxy membership database.  CE
   updates or remove elements from the database as required.  CE will
   then send an aggregated Report via the upstream tunnel to the BR when
   the membership database changes.

   CE answers MLD queries from BR based on the membership database.
   CE's downstream link follows the traditional multipoint channel
   forwarding and does not pose any specific problems.

   CE receives IPv6 multicast data from the BR tunneled over the tunnel
   interface.  CE decapsulates the packet and then forwards it
   downstream.  Each member host receives the data packet based on Layer
   2 multicast interface.  No packet duplication is necessary.

   Border Relay acts as the as the default multicast querier for all CEs
   that have established an IPv4 tunnel with it.  In order to keep a
   consistent multicast state between a CE and BR, once a CE is
   connected it will stay connected until the state becomes empty.
   After that point, the CE may establish another tunnel to a different
   BR.

   According to aggregated MLD reports received from a CE, BR
   establishes group/source-specific multicast forwarding states at its
   corresponding downstream tunnel interfaces.  After that, BR maintains
   or removes the state as required by the aggregated reports received
   from CE.

   At the upstream interface, BR procures for aggregated multicast
   membership maintenance.  Based on the multicast-transparent



Sarikaya                Expires September 8, 2011               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft     Multicast Support for DS-Lite - 6RD        March 2011


   operations of the CEs, the BR treats its tunnel interfaces as
   multicast enabled downstream links, serving zero to many listening
   nodes.

   Multicast traffic arriving at the BR is transparently forwarded
   according to its multicast forwarding information base.  Multicast
   data is first replicated and then forwarded in IPv6-in-IPv4 tunnel
   from BR to the corresponding CE.

6.1.  Tunnel Interface Considerations

   IPv6 in IPv4 tunneling is performed as specified in [RFC4213].
   Considerations specified in [RFC5969] apply.  Packets upstream from
   CE carry only MLD signaling messages and they are not expected to
   fragmentation.  However packets downstream, i.e. multicast data to CE
   may be subject to fragmentation.

6.2.  Supporting IPv4 Multicast in 6RD

   IPv4 multicast can be supported in a way similar to IPv6 as described
   in Section 6. 6RD Customer Edge device has IGMP Proxy function.
   Proxy operation for IGMP [RFC3376] is described in [RFC4605].

   CE receives IGMP join requests from the hosts and then sends
   aggregated IGMP Report messages upstream in an IPv4 in IPv4 tunnel.
   Tunnel addressing is in IPv4 and is as described in [RFC5969].
   Multicast membership database is maintained for all active IPv4
   multicast groups the hosts subscribe.

   6RD Border Relay is IGMP querier or another IGMP Proxy.  It serves
   all CEs downstream and treats its tunnel interfaces as multicast
   enabled downstream links, serving zero to many listening nodes.
   Multicast membership database is maintained based on the aggregated
   Reports received from downstream tunnel interfaces.

   IPv4 multicast data received from the multicast Single Source
   Multicast or Any Source Multicast sources are replicated according to
   the multicast membership database and the data packets are tunneled
   to the CEs that have one or more members of this multicast group.

   CEs receive multicast data upstream in the CE-BR tunnel and
   decapsulate it and then forward the packet downstream.  Each member
   host receive IPv4 multicast data packet from its Layer 2 interface.


7.  Security Considerations

   TBD.



Sarikaya                Expires September 8, 2011               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft     Multicast Support for DS-Lite - 6RD        March 2011


8.  IANA Considerations

   TBD.


9.  Acknowledgements

   TBD.


10.  References

10.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC2629]  Rose, M., "Writing I-Ds and RFCs using XML", RFC 2629,
              June 1999.

   [RFC4605]  Fenner, B., He, H., Haberman, B., and H. Sandick,
              "Internet Group Management Protocol (IGMP) / Multicast
              Listener Discovery (MLD)-Based Multicast Forwarding
              ("IGMP/MLD Proxying")", RFC 4605, August 2006.

   [RFC3810]  Vida, R. and L. Costa, "Multicast Listener Discovery
              Version 2 (MLDv2) for IPv6", RFC 3810, June 2004.

   [RFC3376]  Cain, B., Deering, S., Kouvelas, I., Fenner, B., and A.
              Thyagarajan, "Internet Group Management Protocol, Version
              3", RFC 3376, October 2002.

   [RFC5569]  Despres, R., "IPv6 Rapid Deployment on IPv4
              Infrastructures (6rd)", RFC 5569, January 2010.

   [RFC5969]  Townsley, W. and O. Troan, "IPv6 Rapid Deployment on IPv4
              Infrastructures (6rd) -- Protocol Specification",
              RFC 5969, August 2010.

   [RFC2473]  Conta, A. and S. Deering, "Generic Packet Tunneling in
              IPv6 Specification", RFC 2473, December 1998.

   [RFC4213]  Nordmark, E. and R. Gilligan, "Basic Transition Mechanisms
              for IPv6 Hosts and Routers", RFC 4213, October 2005.

   [I-D.ietf-softwire-dual-stack-lite]
              Durand, A., Droms, R., Woodyatt, J., and Y. Lee, "Dual-
              Stack Lite Broadband Deployments Following IPv4



Sarikaya                Expires September 8, 2011              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft     Multicast Support for DS-Lite - 6RD        March 2011


              Exhaustion", draft-ietf-softwire-dual-stack-lite-07 (work
              in progress), March 2011.

   [I-D.ietf-multimob-pmipv6-base-solution]
              Schmidt, T., Waehlisch, M., and S. Krishnan, "Base
              Deployment for Multicast Listener Support in PMIPv6
              Domains", draft-ietf-multimob-pmipv6-base-solution-07
              (work in progress), December 2010.

10.2.  Informative references









































Sarikaya                Expires September 8, 2011              [Page 11]

Internet-Draft     Multicast Support for DS-Lite - 6RD        March 2011


Author's Address

   Behcet Sarikaya
   Huawei USA
   1700 Alma Dr. Suite 500
   Plano, TX  75075

   Phone: +1 972-509-5599
   Email: sarikaya@ieee.org










































Sarikaya                Expires September 8, 2011              [Page 12]


