



Internet Engineering Task Force                              B. Sarikaya
Internet-Draft                                                   T. Tsou
Intended status: Informational                 Huawei Technologies (USA)
Expires: March 15, 2014                                            H. Ji
                                                           China Telecom
                                                                 C. Zhou
                                                     Huawei Technologies
                                                      September 11, 2013


                   IPv6 Multicast in a 6rd Deployment
                draft-sarikaya-softwire-6rdmulticast-06

Abstract

   This memo specifies 6rd's multicast component so that IPv6 hosts can
   receive multicast data from IPv6 servers.  In the 6rd encapsulation
   solution, multicast communication is completely integrated into the
   6rd tunnel.  In the 6rd translation solution, the protocol is based
   on proxying MLD at the 6rd Customer Edge router interworking the MLD
   messages to IGMP messages and sending them upstream through a network
   which supports IPv4 multicast.  The 6rd Border Relay is a multicast
   router and interworks the IGMP to MLD for onward propasgation toward
   the IPv6 multicast source.  IPv6 Multicast data received at 6rd
   Border Relay is translated into IPv4 multicast data and and delivered
   through the IPv4 multicast tree downstream to the 6rd Customer Edge.
   The latter translates it back to IPv6 multicast data then delivers it
   to the hosts.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on March 15, 2014.

Copyright Notice




Sarikaya, et al.         Expires March 15, 2014                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft     IPv6 Multicast in a 6rd Deployment     September 2013


   Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   3.  Requirements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   4.  Architecture  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     4.1.  6rd Tunneling Architecture  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     4.2.  Translation Architecture  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   5.  6rd Tunneling Multicast Operation . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     5.1.  Tunnel Interface Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     5.2.  Avalanche Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   6.  6rd Translation Multicast Operation . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     6.1.  Solution Based on Layer 2 Multicast Support . . . . . . .  10
     6.2.  Analysis  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   7.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   8.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   9.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   10. References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
     10.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
     10.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13

1.  Introduction

   With IPv4 address depletion on the horizon, many techniques are being
   standardized for IPv6 migration including 6rd [RFC5969]. 6rd enables
   IPv6 hosts to communicate with external hosts using an IPv4-only
   legacy ISP network.  The 6rd Customer Edge (CE) device's LAN side is
   dual stack and the WAN side is IPv4 only.  The CE tunnels IPv6
   packets received from the LAN side to 6rd Border Relays (BR) after
   encapsulating them as IPv4 packets.  The BRs have anycast IPv4
   addresses and receive encapsulated packets from CEs over a virtual
   interface. 6rd operation is stateless.  Packets are received/ sent
   independently of each other and no state needs to be maintained.




Sarikaya, et al.         Expires March 15, 2014                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft     IPv6 Multicast in a 6rd Deployment     September 2013


   It should be noted that there is no depletion problem for IPv4
   address space allocated for any source multicast and source specific
   multicast [RFC3171].  This document is not motivated by the depletion
   of IPv4 multicast addresses.

   6rd as defined in [RFC5969] and [RFC5569] is unicast only.  It does
   not support multicast.  In this document we specify how multicast
   from home IPv6 users can be supported in 6rd.  This is what is meant
   by 6rd multicast protocol.

   In the 6rd encapsulation approach, 6rd multicast is integrated into
   the 6rd unicast solution. 6rd customer premise equipment (CPE) is
   extended to support an MLD proxy [RFC4605].  This proxy receives MLD
   Membership Report messages [RFC4601] requesting to join a multicast
   group from its subtended hosts.  It tunnels aggregated join requests
   upstream to the 6rd Border Router (BR) using IPv6 in IPv4
   encapsulation.  The 6rd Border Router is extended to support an MLD
   querier, which sends join requests upstream towards the multicast
   source(s, becomes part of the multicast tree, and thus receives IPv6
   multicast data.  The 6rd Border Router encapsulates the IPv6
   multicast data using 6rd's IPv6 in IPv4 encapsulation and sends it to
   each member CPE that has joined the stream concerned.  The CPE
   decapsulates the packet and the MLD proxy sends the IPv6 multicast
   data downstream to the member hosts.

   In the translation approach, native IPv4 multicast support in the
   network between Customer Edge routers and Border Router can be
   exploited.  The translation approach requires MLD to IGMP
   interworking at the Customer Edge and IGMP to MLD interworking at the
   border router.  The border router needs to translate IPv6 multicast
   data into IPv4 multicast data and the Customer Edge router needs to
   translate IPv4 multicast data back into IPv6 multicast data.

   6rd's CE to CE forwarding feature is not used in either approach.

2.  Terminology

   This document uses the terminology defined in [RFC5969], [RFC5569],
   [RFC3810], [RFC3376], and [I-D.ietf-softwire-dslite-multicast].

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].

3.  Requirements

   This section states requirements on 6rd multicast support protocol.




Sarikaya, et al.         Expires March 15, 2014                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft     IPv6 Multicast in a 6rd Deployment     September 2013


   IPv6 hosts connected to 6rd CE router MUST be able to join multicast
   groups in IPv6 and receive multicast data.

   Both any source multicast (ASM) and source specific multicast (SSM)
   MUST be supported.

   6rd multicast MUST NOT introduce the need to use more IPv4 addresses,
   thereby contributing to public IPv4 address depletion.

4.  Architecture

   In 6rd, IPv6 or IPv4/IPv6 dual stack hosts are served by the 6rd
   Customer Edge device (CE).  The CE is dual stack facing the hosts and
   IPv4 only facing the network or WAN side.  The CE tunnels IPv6
   packets in IPv4 to the 6rd Border Relay (BR).  The BR decapsulates
   the tunneled packets and forwards them to the IPv6 network.  In the
   reverse direction, the BR receives IPv6 packets from the IPv6 network
   tunnels them in IPv4 to the CE.  The CE decapsulates the IPv6 packets
   and forwards them to the hosts.

   Unicast 6rd is stateless.  Each IPv6 packet sent by the CE is treated
   separately and different packets from the same CE may go to different
   BRs.  The CE encapsulates IPv6 packets in IPv4 with the IPv4
   destination address set to the BR address (usually an anycast IPv4
   address).  BRs are placed where IPv6 native connectivity exists to
   other networks.  A CE is configured with its own IPv4 address (public
   or private), with a 6rd IPv6 prefix from which the CE's IPv4 address
   can be derived, and with one or more BR IPv4 addresses.  When the BR
   receives IPv6 packets addressed to the CE, it extracts the CE's IPv4
   address from the destination IPv6 address and uses this address as
   the destination address for the IPv4 encapsulation of the IPv6
   packet.  6rd views the IPv4-only network as an NBMA link from the
   IPv6 point of view and all 6rd CEs and BRs are defined as off-link
   neighbors from one other.

4.1.  6rd Tunneling Architecture

   In order to support multicast, the CE implements an MLD Proxy
   function [RFC4605].  IPv6 hosts send their join requests (MLD
   Membership Report messages) to CE.  The CE as a proxy sends
   aggregated Report messages upstream towards BR in unicast using IPv6
   in IPv4 encapsulation.


   Dual Stack Hosts                              IPv4
   +----+                                      Network
   | H1 |                 IPv4
   +----+      +-----+    only       +-------+     +



Sarikaya, et al.         Expires March 15, 2014                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft     IPv6 Multicast in a 6rd Deployment     September 2013


   +----+      | CE  |    network -- |   BR  |
   | H2 |   ---| MLD |--- IPv6       |   MLD |    IPv6
   +----+      |Proxy|    in         |Querier|   Network
   +----+      +-----+    IPv4       +-------+
   | H3 |                Encapsulation
   +----+

        Figure 1: Architecture of 6rd Tunneling Multicast Protocol

   The BR is the default multicast querier for the CE.  The BR
   implements a multicast router function or it could be another MLD
   proxy.

   All the elements of 6rd multicast support system are shown in Figure
   1.

4.2.  Translation Architecture

   In order to support multicast, CE implements MLD Proxy [RFC4605] and
   MLD to IGMP interworking function
   [ID.perreault-igmp-mld-translation].  IPv6 hosts send their join
   requests (MLD Membership Report messages) to CE.  CE as a proxy sends
   aggregated IGMP Report messages upstream towards BR.

   In order to support SSM, MLDv2 [RFC3810] and IGMPv3 [RFC3376] must be
   supported by the CE and BR, and MLDv2 must be supported by the host.

   The BR is the default multicast querier for the CE.  The BR
   implements an IGMP to MLD interworking function and multicast router
   function or it could be another MLD proxy.

   It is assumed that the IPv4 only network to which the CE and the BR
   are connected supports native IPv4 multicast.

   All the elements of 6rd translation-based multicast support system
   are shown in Figure 2.















Sarikaya, et al.         Expires March 15, 2014                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft     IPv6 Multicast in a 6rd Deployment     September 2013


   Dual Stack Hosts                                              IPv4
   +----+                                                       Network
   | H1 |                            IPv4
   +----+      +----------------+    only   +------------------+
   +----+      | CE     MLD     |   network |IGMP   BR         |  +
   | H2 |   ---| MLD   IGMP     |-----------| MLD        MLD   |
   +----+      |Proxy Translator|           |Translator Querier|
   +----+      +----------------+           +------------------+
   | H3 |                                                        IPv6
   +----+                                                       Network

         Figure 2: Architecture of 6rd Translation-Based Multicast

5.  6rd Tunneling Multicast Operation

   In this section we specify how the host can subscribe and receive
   IPv6 multicast data from IPv6 content providers based on the
   architecture defined in Figure 1.

   The hosts will send their subscription requests for IPv6 multicast
   groups upstream to the default router, i.e., Costumer Edge device.
   After subscribing the group, the host can receive multicast data from
   the CE.  The host implements MLD protocol's host part.

   The Customer Edge device is an MLD Proxy.  After receiving the first
   MLD Report message requesting subscription to an IPv6 multicast
   group, the CE establishes a tunnel interface with a Border Relay.
   The tunnel is IPv4 based but it will carry MLD messages back and
   forth and IPv6 multicast data messages downstream.

   The CE is a regular MLD proxy and it keeps an MLD proxy membership
   database.  The CE inserts multicast forwarding state on the incoming
   interface, and merges state updates into the MLD proxy membership
   database.  The CE updates or remove elements from the database as
   required.  The CE will then send an aggregated Report via the
   upstream tunnel to the BR when the membership database changes.

   The CE answers MLD queries from the BR based on the membership
   database.  The CE's downstream link follows the traditional
   multipoint channel forwarding and does not pose any specific
   problems.

   The CE receives IPv6 multicast data from the BR tunneled over the
   tunnel interface.  The CE decapsulates the packet and then forwards
   it downstream.  Each member host receives the data packet based on
   the Layer 2 multicast interface.  No packet duplication is necessary.





Sarikaya, et al.         Expires March 15, 2014                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft     IPv6 Multicast in a 6rd Deployment     September 2013


   The Border Relay acts as the default multicast querier for all CEs
   that have established an IPv4 tunnel with it.  In order to keep a
   consistent multicast state between a CE and BR, once a CE is
   connected it will stay connected until the state becomes empty.
   After that point, the CE may establish another tunnel to a different
   BR.

   According to aggregated MLD reports received from subtending CEs, the
   BR establishes group/source-specific multicast forwarding states at
   its corresponding downstream tunnel interfaces.  After that, the BR
   maintains or removes the state as required by the aggregated reports
   received from CEs.

   At the upstream interface, the BR procures for aggregated multicast
   membership maintenance.  Based on the multicast-transparent
   operations of the CEs, the BR treats its tunnel interfaces as
   multicast enabled downstream links, serving zero to many listening
   nodes.

   When the BR receives MLD join requests from downstream CEs, the BR
   sends PIM join messages upstream towards multicast source(s).  This
   results in a multicast tree formation where the BR is at the leaf of
   the multicast tree, enabling the BR to receive IPv6 multicast data
   sent by the source.

   Multicast traffic arriving at the BR is transparently forwarded
   according to its multicast forwarding information base.  Multicast
   data is first replicated according to MLD multicast group state and
   then forwarded in IPv6-in-IPv4 tunnels from the BR to the
   corresponding CEs.

5.1.  Tunnel Interface Considerations

   IPv6 in IPv4 tunneling is performed as specified in [RFC4213].
   Considerations specified in [RFC5969] apply.  Packets passing
   upstream from the CE carry only MLD signaling messages and they are
   not expected to be fragmented.  However packets downstream, i.e.,
   multicast data to the CEs, may be subject to fragmentation.

   Source and destination addresses of MLD messages in IPv6-in-IPv4
   tunnel from CE are as follows:

   o  The source address of IPv4 header is the CE WAN interface IPv4
      address.  The destination address is the BR anycast address when
      an invite message is sent to group G. Subsequent messages to group
      G contain the BR unicast address as destination address.





Sarikaya, et al.         Expires March 15, 2014                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft     IPv6 Multicast in a 6rd Deployment     September 2013


   o  The source address of the inner MLD message is the link local
      address.  The destination address is all MLDv2-capable multicast
      routers or FF02::16 for MLD Version 2 Multicast Listener Reports.

   The source and destination addresses of MLD messages in the IPv6- in-
   IPv4 softwire from BR are as follows:

   o  The source address of the IPv4 header is the BR IPv4 unicast
      address.  The destination address is the CE IPv4 address.  This
      also holds for multicast data.

   o  The source address of the inner MLD message is the link local
      address.  The destination address is the link-scope all-nodes
      multicast address (FF02::1) for General Queries, or the IPv6
      multicast group address for specific queries.

   The source address of IPv6 multicast data is the unicast IPv6 address
   of the multicast source, e.g., the content provider.  The destination
   address is the3 IPv6 multicast group address.

5.2.  Avalanche Problem

   In Section 5.1, multicast data is replicated to all interfaces, i.e.,
   to all member CEs at the BR.  This replication (often called
   avalanche problem) can be very costly if is a very large number of
   downstream member CEs such as in the IPTV application.  See
   Appendix A in [I-D.ietf-softwire-dslite-multicast].

   In 6rd tunneling multicast, the avalanche problem can be reduced by
   careful network partitioning.  More BRs can be deployed in areas
   where IPv6 users are increasing in numbers.  Deploying BRs by
   collocating them with the access network gateway as with the Border
   Network Gateway (BNG) is another possibility.

   In the 6rd tunneling multicast operation, CEs are enabled to exploit
   multiple BRs that can be deployed in the network by using the BR
   anycast address any time they send an upstream MLD join request and
   then using the same BR that received the join message in subsequent
   MLD messages by using the same BR's unicast address.

6.  6rd Translation Multicast Operation

   In this section we specify how the host can subscribe and receive
   IPv6 multicast data from IPv6 content providers based on the
   architecture defined in Figure 2.

   The hosts will send their subscription requests for IPv6 multicast
   groups upstream to the default router, i.e., the Costumer Edge



Sarikaya, et al.         Expires March 15, 2014                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft     IPv6 Multicast in a 6rd Deployment     September 2013


   device.  After subscribing the group, the host can receive multicast
   data from the CE.  The host implements the MLD protocol's host part.

   The Customer Edge device is an MLD Proxy.  After receiving the first
   MLD Report message requesting subscription to an IPv6 multicast
   group, the CE interworks the MLD Membership Report message to an IGMP
   Membership report message.  It sends it upstream only if joining a
   new group is needed.

   Address translation in generating an IGMP Membership report message
   is done as follows: the destination address is copied from the last
   32 bits of IPv6 multicast group address.  The CE inserts the IPv4
   address of its WAN interface into the source address.  It is assumed
   that the IPv6 multicast group address in MLD Report message conforms
   to the addressing scheme described in
   [I-D.ietf-mboned-64-multicast-address-format], for any-source and
   source-specific multicast address formats.

   Source addresses in the MLDv2 payload are translated as follows.
   Multicast source addresses in MLD Membership Report message MUST use
   uPrefix64, i.e. 64:ff9b::/96 defined in [RFC6052].  uPrefix64
   facilitates translation into an IPv4 source address to be used in
   IGMPv3 Membership Report messages for source-specific multicast,
   i.e., by extracting the last 32 bits of IPv6 source address.

   The IGMP Report message is received by the IGMP Querier/Proxy
   upstream on the link.  (Normally this node is the Broadband Network
   Gateway, BNG in broadband networks.)  The IGMP Querier/Proxy sends
   IGMPv3 Report message to the neighboring routers to join the group.
   In networks where PIM is supported, the IGMP Report message may be
   received by the PIM Designated Router.  The PIM router sends a PIMv4
   join message to join an IPv4 group.

   The border router that receives the join message translates the
   message into MLD.  To join an IPv6 group for any-source multicast,
   the IPv6 Multicast group address is obtained from the destination
   address.  For source-specific multicast, the IPv6 source address is
   generated after obtaining the IPv4 source address of Membership
   Report message's Group Record Source Address field.  The BR sends the
   PIMv6 join message upstream towards the source.

   The BR MUST act as the designated router to which the source of the
   source-specific IGMP join message is connected.  The BR MUST act as
   the rendez-vous point (RP) of the multicast group for the any-source
   multicast IGMP join message.  Normally there is one such BR in an
   operator's network.  An IPv4 multicast tree eventually forms in the
   network between the CE and BR and an IPv6 multicast tree upstream
   from the BR for the same ASM or SSM group.



Sarikaya, et al.         Expires March 15, 2014                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft     IPv6 Multicast in a 6rd Deployment     September 2013


   IPv6 multicast data received at the border router from the source is
   translated into IPv4.  The last 32 bits of the source and destination
   address fields determine the source and destination addresses of the
   IPv4 multicast data packet.  This packet is sent downstream on the
   multicast tree already formed for this IPv4 multicast group.

   Multicast data packet address translation follows the rules in
   [I-D.ietf-mboned-64-multicast-address-format] for the multicast group
   address and [RFC6052] for source- specific multicast source address,
   i.e. using uPrefix64.  For any- source multicast, the Border Router
   inserts an IPv4 source address, different for each source.

   Packet header translation follows the rules in [RFC6145].
   Fragmentation and reassembly are handled as described in [RFC6145].
   After the IPv4 multicast data packet is sent downstream from the BR
   it may be fragmented by the routers.

   The CE receives the IPv4 multicast data packet, possibly in
   fragments, and reassembles the fragments.  The CE translates the IPv4
   multicast data packet back to an IPv6 multicast data packet.  Address
   translation is done following
   [I-D.ietf-mboned-64-multicast-address-format] for multicast group
   addresses and [RFC6052] for unicast SSM source addresses.  Header
   translation is done as in [RFC6145].

   IPv6 multicast data is sent on the home link to the host(s).  IEEE
   802.3 or IEEE 802.11 multicast link support usually handles this
   delivery in Layer 2 without any packet duplication if there are more
   than one members to the any-source multicast group or SSM source and
   multicast group.

6.1.  Solution Based on Layer 2 Multicast Support

   In this section we assume that Layer 2 multicast is supported in the
   network.  Layer 2 multicast support is done in order to forward
   multicast data downstream to the ports of Layer 2 devices, i.e.
   switches that requested a multicast group instead of flooding the
   data to all the ports.

   In the switches, called snooping switches, multicast MAC address
   based filters are set up which link layer 2 multicast groups to the
   egress ports.  IGMP snooping switches are commonly used in operators'
   networks, most commonly at the access nodes (AN) [RFC6788].

   When an IGMP Report message is received, the bridge will set up a
   multicast filter entry that allows (in case of a join message) or
   prevents (in case of a leave message) packets to flow on the port on
   which the IGMP Report message was received.  In terms of IPv4



Sarikaya, et al.         Expires March 15, 2014                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft     IPv6 Multicast in a 6rd Deployment     September 2013


   multicast addresses, the mapping is not unique as 32 IPv4 multicast
   addresses map to a single Ethernet multicast MAC address [RFC4541].

   The main functionality of a snooping switch is to forward multicast
   data packets based on the filters that are setup, i.e. to those
   egress ports with multicast groups downstream and also to the router
   ports.

   In a 6rd network the snooping switches must detect IGMP packets sent
   upstream by the CE and set the filtering rules accordingly.  When
   IPv4 data packets are received the IGMP snooping switches forward
   these packets towards all CEs that have members, effectively
   achieving packet duplication at the access node level.

6.2.  Analysis

   An analysis of the translation solution reveals the following:\

   o  The translation solution imposes a requirement on the IPv6 source-
      specific multicast sources to use uPrefix64 compatible source
      addresses.  This requirement cannot be satified with simple
      configuration of the CPE router and Border Router.

   o  In the case of any-source multicast, the border router must use a
      public IPv4 address distinctively to represent each IPv6 any-
      source multicast source.

   o  In deployments which use IGMP routers, not PIM routers, source-
      specific multicast can be supported only if all routers have been
      upgraded to IGMPv3 and no IGMPv1 or IGMPv2 systems are present.
      Otherwise the operation reverts to the older version of IGMP to
      preserve compatibility and thus SSM can not be supported.  With
      the use of PIM routers, this is avoided.

   o  The border router must act as the designated router or the rendez-
      vous point for the IPv4/IPv6 multicast group and this may lead to
      the use of a single border router in the network instead of load
      sharing with various border routers.

7.  Security Considerations

   6rd Translation Multicast control and data message security are as
   described in [RFC5969].  The threats and their mitigation described
   in [RFC5969] apply to multicast communication as well.

8.  IANA Considerations

   TBD.



Sarikaya, et al.         Expires March 15, 2014                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft     IPv6 Multicast in a 6rd Deployment     September 2013


9.  Acknowledgements

   We would like to specially thank Mark Townsley for his constructive
   comments.  Steve Wright's online and very many offline comments
   helped us improve the document.

10.  References

10.1.  Normative References

   [I-D.ietf-mboned-64-multicast-address-format]
              Boucadair, M., Qin, J., Lee, Y., Venaas, S., Li, X., and
              M. Xu, "IPv4-Embedded IPv6 Multicast Address Format (Work
              in progress)", August 2012.

   [I-D.ietf-mboned-auto-multicast]
              Bumgardner, G., "Automatic Multicast Tunneling (work in
              progress)", June 2012.

   [I-D.ietf-softwire-dslite-multicast]
              Qin, J., Boucadair, M., Jacquenet, C., Lee, Y., and Q.
              Wang, "Delivery of IPv4 Multicast Services to IPv4 Clients
              over an IPv6 Multicast Network", draft-ietf-softwire-
              dslite-multicast-05 (work in progress), April 2013.

   [ID.perreault-igmp-mld-translation]
              Perrault, S. and T. Tsou, "Internet Group Management
              Protocol (IGMP) / Multicast Listener Discovery (MLD)-Based
              Multicast Translation ("IGMP/MLD Translation") (Work in
              progress)", February 2013.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC2491]  Armitage, G., Schulter, P., Jork, M., and G. Harter, "IPv6
              over Non-Broadcast Multiple Access (NBMA) networks", RFC
              2491, January 1999.

   [RFC2629]  Rose, M., "Writing I-Ds and RFCs using XML", RFC 2629,
              June 1999.

   [RFC3376]  Cain, B., Deering, S., Kouvelas, I., Fenner, B., and A.
              Thyagarajan, "Internet Group Management Protocol, Version
              3", RFC 3376, October 2002.

   [RFC3810]  Vida, R. and L. Costa, "Multicast Listener Discovery
              Version 2 (MLDv2) for IPv6", RFC 3810, June 2004.




Sarikaya, et al.         Expires March 15, 2014                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft     IPv6 Multicast in a 6rd Deployment     September 2013


   [RFC4213]  Nordmark, E. and R. Gilligan, "Basic Transition Mechanisms
              for IPv6 Hosts and Routers", RFC 4213, October 2005.

   [RFC4286]  Haberman, B. and J. Martin, "Multicast Router Discovery",
              RFC 4286, December 2005.

   [RFC4541]  Christensen, M., Kimball, K., and F. Solensky,
              "Considerations for Internet Group Management Protocol
              (IGMP) and Multicast Listener Discovery (MLD) Snooping
              Switches", RFC 4541, May 2006.

   [RFC4601]  Fenner, B., Handley, M., Holbrook, H., and I. Kouvelas,
              "Protocol Independent Multicast - Sparse Mode (PIM-SM):
              Protocol Specification (Revised)", RFC 4601, August 2006.

   [RFC4605]  Fenner, B., He, H., Haberman, B., and H. Sandick,
              "Internet Group Management Protocol (IGMP) / Multicast
              Listener Discovery (MLD)-Based Multicast Forwarding ("IGMP
              /MLD Proxying")", RFC 4605, August 2006.

   [RFC5569]  Despres, R., "IPv6 Rapid Deployment on IPv4
              Infrastructures (6rd)", RFC 5569, January 2010.

   [RFC5969]  Townsley, W. and O. Troan, "IPv6 Rapid Deployment on IPv4
              Infrastructures (6rd) -- Protocol Specification", RFC
              5969, August 2010.

   [RFC6052]  Bao, C., Huitema, C., Bagnulo, M., Boucadair, M., and X.
              Li, "IPv6 Addressing of IPv4/IPv6 Translators", RFC 6052,
              October 2010.

   [RFC6145]  Li, X., Bao, C., and F. Baker, "IP/ICMP Translation
              Algorithm", RFC 6145, April 2011.

10.2.  Informative References

   [RFC3171]  Albanna, Z., Almeroth, K., Meyer, D., and M. Schipper,
              "IANA Guidelines for IPv4 Multicast Address Assignments",
              RFC 3171, August 2001.

   [RFC6788]  Krishnan, S., Kavanagh, A., Varga, B., Ooghe, S., and E.
              Nordmark, "The Line-Identification Option", RFC 6788,
              November 2012.

Authors' Addresses






Sarikaya, et al.         Expires March 15, 2014                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft     IPv6 Multicast in a 6rd Deployment     September 2013


   B. Sarikaya
   Huawei Technologies (USA)
   5340 Legacy Dr. Building 175
   Plano, TX  75024
   USA

   Email: sarikaya@ieee.org


   Tina Tsou
   Huawei Technologies (USA)
   2330 Central Expressway
   Santa Clara, CA  95050
   USA

   Phone: +1 408 330 4424
   Email: Tina.Tsou.Zouting@huawei.com
   URI:   http://tinatsou.weebly.com/contact.html


   Hui Ji
   China Telecom
   NO19.North Street
   Beijing, Chaoyangmen,Dongcheng District
   P.R. China

   Email: jihui@chinatelecom.com.cn


   Cathy Zhou
   Huawei Technologies
   Bantian, Longgang District
   Shenzhen  518129
   P.R. China

   Email: cathy.zhou@huawei.com















Sarikaya, et al.         Expires March 15, 2014                [Page 14]
