A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3035

        Title:      MPLS using LDP and ATM VC Switching
        Author(s):  B. Davie, J. Lawrence, K. McCloghrie, Y. Rekhter,
                    E. Rosen, G. Swallow, P. Doolan
        Status:     Standards Track
        Date:       January 2001
        Mailbox:    bsd@cisco.com, pdoolan@ennovatenetworks.com,
                    jlawrenc@cisco.com, kzm@cisco.com,
                    yakov@juniper.net, erosen@cisco.com,
                    swallow@cisco.com  
        Pages:      20
        Characters: 46463
        Updates/Obsoletes/SeeAlso:  None

        I-D Tag:    draft-ietf-mpls-atm-04.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.isi.edu/in-notes/rfc3035.txt


The Multiprotocol Label Switching (MPLS) Architecture discusses a
way in which Asynchronous Transfer Mode (ATM) switches may be used as
Label Switching Routers.  The ATM switches run network layer routing
algorithms (such as Open Shortest Path First (OSPF), Intermediate
System to Intermediate System (IS-IS), etc.), and their data
forwarding is based on the results of these routing algorithms.  No
ATM-specific routing or addressing is needed.  ATM switches used in
this way are known as ATM-LSRs (Label Switching Routers).
 
This document extends and clarifies the relevant portions of and
by specifying in more detail the procedures which to be used when
distributing labels to or from ATM-LSRs, when those labels represent
Forwarding Equivalence Classes (FECs) for which the routes are
determined on a hop-by-hop basis by network layer routing algorithms. 
 
This document also specifies the MPLS encapsulation to be used when
sending labeled packets to or from ATM-LSRs.

This document is a product of the Multiprotocol Label Switching
Working Group of the IETF.

This is now a Proposed Standard Protocol.

This document specifies an Internet standards track protocol for
the Internet community, and requests discussion and suggestions
for improvements.  Please refer to the current edition of the
"Internet Official Protocol Standards" (STD 1) for the
standardization state and status of this protocol.  Distribution
of this memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.

