A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3471

        Title:      Generalized Multi-Protocol Label Switching (GMPLS)
                    Signaling Functional Description
        Author(s):  L. Berger, Editor
        Status:     Standards Track
        Date:       January 2003
        Mailbox:    lberger@movaz.com
        Pages:      34
        Characters: 72746
        Updates/Obsoletes/SeeAlso:    None

        I-D Tag:    draft-ietf-mpls-generalized-signaling-09.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3471.txt


This document describes extensions to Multi-Protocol Label Switching
(MPLS) signaling required to support Generalized MPLS.  Generalized
MPLS extends the MPLS control plane to encompass time-division (e.g.,
Synchronous Optical Network and Synchronous Digital Hierarchy,
SONET/SDH), wavelength (optical lambdas) and spatial switching (e.g.,
incoming port or fiber to outgoing port or fiber).  This document
presents a functional description of the extensions.  Protocol
specific formats and mechanisms, and technology specific details are
specified in separate documents.

This document is a product of the Common Control Measurement Plane
(ccamp) Working Group of the IETF.

This is a Proposed Standard Protocol.

This document specifies an Internet standards track protocol for
the Internet community, and requests discussion and suggestions
for improvements.  Please refer to the current edition of the
"Internet Official Protocol Standards" (STD 1) for the
standardization state and status of this protocol.  Distribution
of this memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.

