A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3036

        Title:      LDP Specification
        Author(s):  L. Andersson, P. Doolan, N. Feldman, A. Fredette,
                    B. Thomas
        Status:     Standards Track
        Date:       January 2001
        Mailbox:    loa.andersson@nortelnetworks.com,
                    pdoolan@ennovatenetworks.com, nkf@us.ibm.com,
                    fredette@photonex.com, rhthomas@cisco.com 
        Pages:      132
        Characters: 274855 
        Updates/Obsoletes/SeeAlso:  None

        I-D Tag:    draft-ietf-mpls-ldp-11.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.isi.edu/in-notes/rfc3036.txt


The architecture for Multi Protocol Label Switching (MPLS) is
described in RFC 3031.  A fundamental concept in MPLS is that two
Label Switching Routers (LSRs) must agree on the meaning of the labels
used to forward traffic between and through them.  This common
understanding is achieved by using a set of procedures, called a label
distribution protocol, by which one LSR informs another of label
bindings it has made.  This document defines a set of such procedures
called LDP (for Label Distribution Protocol) by which LSRs distribute
labels to support MPLS forwarding along normally routed paths.

This document is a product of the Multiprotocol Label Switching
Working Group of the IETF.

This is now a Proposed Standard Protocol.

This document specifies an Internet standards track protocol for
the Internet community, and requests discussion and suggestions
for improvements.  Please refer to the current edition of the
"Internet Official Protocol Standards" (STD 1) for the
standardization state and status of this protocol.  Distribution
of this memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.
