A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3215

        Title:      LDP State Machine
        Author(s):  C. Boscher, P. Cheval, L. Wu, E. Gray
        Status:     Informational
        Date:       January 2002
        Mailbox:    christophe.boscher@alcatel.fr,
                    pierrick.cheval@space.alcatel.fr, liwwu@cisco.com,
                    eric.gray@sandburst.com 
        Pages:      78
        Characters: 117278
        Updates/Obsoletes/SeeAlso:  NONE

        I-D Tag:    draft-ietf-mpls-ldp-state-04.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3215.txt


This document provides state machine tables for ATM (Asynchronous
Transfer Mode) switch LSRs.  In the current LDP specification, there
is no state machine specified for processing LDP messages.  We think
that defining a common state machine is very important for
interoperability between different LDP and CR-LDP implementations.

We begin in section 1 by defining a list of terminologies.  Then in
section 2, we propose two sets of state machine tables for ATM switch
LSRs that use downstream-on-demand mode, one method can be used for
non-vc merge capable ATM LSRs, while the other one can be used for
the vc-merge capable ATM LSRs.  In section 3, we provides a state
machine for downstream unsolicited mode ATM LSRs.

We focus on the LDP state machines and the associated control blocks
used for establishing and maintaining LSPs.  We do not describe state
machines for the "LDP controller" that is in charge of LDP session
initialization, address mapping messages management, routing
interface, etc. that is defined in the LDP specification.

Even though the state machines in this document are specific for
ATM-LSR, they can be easily adapted for other types of LSRs.

This document is a product of the Multiprotocol Label Switching
Working Group of the IETF.

This memo provides information for the Internet community.  It does
not specify an Internet standard of any kind.  Distribution of this
memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.
