A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3469

        Title:      Framework for Multi-Protocol Label Switching
                    (MPLS)-based Recovery
        Author(s):  V. Sharma, F. Hellstrand (Editors)
        Status:     Informational
        Date:       February 2003
        Mailbox:    v.sharma@ieee.org, fiffi@nortelnetworks.com
        Pages:      40
        Characters: 89331
        Updates/Obsoletes/SeeAlso:    None

        I-D Tag:    draft-ietf-mpls-recovery-frmwrk-08.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3469.txt


Multi-protocol label switching (MPLS) integrates the label swapping
forwarding paradigm with network layer routing.  To deliver reliable
service, MPLS requires a set of procedures to provide protection of
the traffic carried on different paths.  This requires that the label
switching routers (LSRs) support fault detection, fault notification,
and fault recovery mechanisms, and that MPLS signaling support the
configuration of recovery.  With these objectives in mind, this
document specifies a framework for MPLS based recovery.  Restart
issues are not included in this framework.

This document is a product of the Multiprotocol Label Switching
Working Group of the IETF.

This memo provides information for the Internet community.  It does
not specify an Internet standard of any kind.  Distribution of this
memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.