A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3209

        Title:      RSVP-TE: Extensions to RSVP for LSP Tunnels
        Author(s):  D. Awduche, L. Berger, D. Gan, T. Li,
                    V. Srinivasan, G. Swallow
        Status:     Standards Track
        Date:       December 2001
        Mailbox:    awduche@movaz.com, lberger@movaz.com,
                    dhg@juniper.net, tli@procket.com,
                    vsriniva@cosinecom.com, swallow@cisco.com
        Pages:      61
        Characters: 132264
        Updates/Obsoletes/SeeAlso:  None

        I-D Tag:    draft-ietf-mpls-rsvp-lsp-tunnel-09.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3209.txt


This document describes the use of RSVP (Resource Reservation
Protocol), including all the necessary extensions, to establish
label-switched paths (LSPs) in MPLS (Multi-Protocol Label Switching).
Since the flow along an LSP is completely identified by the label
applied at the ingress node of the path, these paths may be treated as
tunnels.  A key application of LSP tunnels is traffic engineering with
MPLS as specified in RFC 2702.

We propose several additional objects that extend RSVP, allowing the
establishment of explicitly routed label switched paths using RSVP as
a signaling protocol.  The result is the instantiation of
label-switched tunnels which can be automatically routed away from
network failures, congestion, and bottlenecks.

This document is a product of the Multiprotocol Label Switching
Working Group of the IETF.

This is now a Proposed Standard Protocol.

This document specifies an Internet standards track protocol for
the Internet community, and requests discussion and suggestions
for improvements.  Please refer to the current edition of the
"Internet Official Protocol Standards" (STD 1) for the
standardization state and status of this protocol.  Distribution
of this memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.
