


MPLS                                                       D. Frost, Ed.
Internet-Draft                                            S. Bryant, Ed.
Intended status: Informational                             Cisco Systems
Expires: October 22, 2011                                 April 20, 2011


  A Packet Loss and Delay Measurement Profile for MPLS-based Transport
                                Networks
                draft-ietf-mpls-tp-loss-delay-profile-03

Abstract

   Procedures and protocol mechanisms to enable the efficient and
   accurate measurement of packet loss, delay, and throughput in MPLS
   networks are defined in RFC XXXX.

   The MPLS Transport Profile (MPLS-TP) is the set of MPLS protocol
   functions applicable to the construction and operation of packet-
   switched transport networks.

   This document describes a profile of the general MPLS loss, delay,
   and throughput measurement techniques that suffices to meet the
   specific requirements of MPLS-TP.

   This document is a product of a joint Internet Engineering Task Force
   (IETF) / International Telecommunication Union Telecommunication
   Standardization Sector (ITU-T) effort to include an MPLS Transport
   Profile within the IETF MPLS and Pseudowire Emulation Edge-to-Edge
   (PWE3) architectures to support the capabilities and functionalities
   of a packet transport network as defined by the ITU-T.

   This Informational Internet-Draft is aimed at achieving IETF
   Consensus before publication as an RFC and will be subject to an IETF
   Last Call.

   [RFC Editor, please remove this note before publication as an RFC and
   insert the correct Streams Boilerplate to indicate that the published
   RFC has IETF consensus.]

   [RFC Editor, please replace XXXX with the RFC number assigned to
   draft-ietf-mpls-loss-delay.]

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering



Frost & Bryant          Expires October 22, 2011                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft     MPLS-TP Loss and Delay Measurement         April 2011


   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on October 22, 2011.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


1.  Introduction

   Procedures for the measurement of packet loss, delay, and throughput
   in MPLS networks are defined in [I-D.ietf-mpls-loss-delay].  This
   document describes a profile, i.e. a simplified subset, of these
   procedures that suffices to meet the specific requirements of MPLS-
   based transport networks [RFC5921] as defined in [RFC5860].  This
   profile is presented for the convenience of implementors who are
   concerned exclusively with the transport network context.

   The use of the profile specified in this document is purely optional.
   Implementors wishing to provide enhanced functionality that is within
   the scope of [I-D.ietf-mpls-loss-delay] but outside the scope of this
   profile may do so, whether or not the implementation is restricted to
   the transport network context.

   The assumption of this profile is that the devices involved in a
   measurement operation are configured for measurement by a means
   external to the measurement protocols themselves, for example via a
   Network Management System (NMS) or separate configuration protocol.




Frost & Bryant          Expires October 22, 2011                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft     MPLS-TP Loss and Delay Measurement         April 2011


   This document is a product of a joint Internet Engineering Task Force
   (IETF) / International Telecommunication Union Telecommunication
   Standardization Sector (ITU-T) effort to include an MPLS Transport
   Profile within the IETF MPLS and Pseudowire Emulation Edge-to-Edge
   (PWE3) architectures to support the capabilities and functionalities
   of a packet transport network as defined by the ITU-T.


2.  MPLS-TP Measurement Considerations

   Several of the considerations discussed in [I-D.ietf-mpls-loss-delay]
   can be disregarded in the more restrictive context of MPLS-TP:

   o  Equal Cost Multipath considerations (Section 2.7.3 of
      [I-D.ietf-mpls-loss-delay])

   o  Considerations for direct LM in the presence of Label Switched
      Paths constructed via the Label Distribution Protocol (LDP) or
      utilizing Penultimate Hop Popping (Section 2.7.6 of
      [I-D.ietf-mpls-loss-delay])


3.  Packet Loss Measurement (LM) Profile

   When an LM session is externally configured, the values of several
   protocol parameters can be fixed in advance at the endpoints involved
   in the session, so that negotiation of these parameters is not
   required.  These parameters, and their default values as specified by
   this profile, are as follows:

   Parameter                                 Default Value
   ----------------------------------------- --------------------------
   Query control code                        In-band response requested
   Byte/packet Count (B) Flag                Packet count
   Traffic-Class-specific (T) Flag           Traffic-class-scoped
   Origin Timestamp Format (OTF)             IEEE 1588 version 1

   A simple implementation may assume that external configuration will
   ensure that both ends of the communication are using the default
   values for these parameters.  Implementations are, however, strongly
   advised to validate the values of these parameters in received
   messages so that configuration inconsistencies can be detected and
   reported.

   LM message rates (and test message rates, when inferred LM is used)
   should be configurable by the network operator on a per-channel
   basis.  The following intervals should be supported:




Frost & Bryant          Expires October 22, 2011                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft     MPLS-TP Loss and Delay Measurement         April 2011


   Message Type   Supported Intervals
   -------------- ------------------------------------------------------
   LM Message     100 milliseconds, 1 second, 10 seconds, 1 minute, 10
                  minutes
   Test Message   10 milliseconds, 100 milliseconds, 1 second, 10
                  seconds, 1 minute


4.  Packet Delay Measurement (DM) Profile

   When a DM session is externally configured, the values of several
   protocol parameters can be fixed in advance at the endpoints involved
   in the session, so that negotiation of these parameters is not
   required.  These parameters, and their default values as specified by
   this profile, are as follows:

   Parameter                                  Default Value
   ------------------------------------------ --------------------------
   Query control code                         In-band response requested
   Querier Timestamp Format (QTF)             IEEE 1588 version 1
   Responder Timestamp Format (RTF)           IEEE 1588 version 1
   Responder's Preferred Timestamp Format     IEEE 1588 version 1
   (RPTF)

   This profile uses the MPLS Delay Measurement (DM) Channel Type in the
   Associated Channel Header (ACH).

   A simple implementation may assume that external configuration will
   ensure that both ends of the communication are using the default
   values for these parameters.  Implementations are, however, strongly
   advised to validate the values of these parameters in received
   messages so that configuration inconsistencies can be detected and
   reported.

   DM message rates should be configurable by the network operator on a
   per-channel basis.  The following message intervals should be
   supported: 1 second, 10 seconds, 1 minute, 10 minutes.


5.  Security Considerations

   This document delineates a subset of the procedures specified in
   [I-D.ietf-mpls-loss-delay], and as such introduces no new security
   considerations in itself.  The security considerations discussed in
   [I-D.ietf-mpls-loss-delay] apply also to the profile presented in
   this document.





Frost & Bryant          Expires October 22, 2011                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft     MPLS-TP Loss and Delay Measurement         April 2011


6.  IANA Considerations

   This document introduces no new IANA considerations.


7.  References

7.1.  Normative References

   [I-D.ietf-mpls-loss-delay]
              Frost, D. and S. Bryant, "Packet Loss and Delay
              Measurement for MPLS Networks",
              draft-ietf-mpls-loss-delay-01 (work in progress),
              February 2011.

   [RFC5586]  Bocci, M., Vigoureux, M., and S. Bryant, "MPLS Generic
              Associated Channel", RFC 5586, June 2009.

   [RFC5860]  Vigoureux, M., Ward, D., and M. Betts, "Requirements for
              Operations, Administration, and Maintenance (OAM) in MPLS
              Transport Networks", RFC 5860, May 2010.

7.2.  Informative References

   [RFC5921]  Bocci, M., Bryant, S., Frost, D., Levrau, L., and L.
              Berger, "A Framework for MPLS in Transport Networks",
              RFC 5921, July 2010.


Authors' Addresses

   Dan Frost (editor)
   Cisco Systems

   Email: danfrost@cisco.com


   Stewart Bryant (editor)
   Cisco Systems

   Email: stbryant@cisco.com










Frost & Bryant          Expires October 22, 2011                [Page 5]

