


      
      
     Network Working Group                                  Hing-Kam Lam 
     Internet Draft                                       Alcatel-Lucent 
     Expires: March, 2010                                Scott Mansfield 
     Intended Status: Standards Track                          Eric Gray 
                                                                Ericsson 
                                                         August 31, 2009 
                                         
                    MPLS TP Network Management Requirements 
                        draft-ietf-mpls-tp-nm-req-03.txt 


     Status of this Memo 

        This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance 
        with the provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79. 

        Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet 
        Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working 
        groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute working 
        documents as Internet-Drafts. 

        Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
        months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other 
        documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-
        Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than as "work 
        in progress." 

        The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
             http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 

        The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
             http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html 

        This Internet-Draft will expire on March 31, 2010. 

     Abstract 

        This document specifies the requirements for the management of 
        equipment used in networks supporting an MPLS Transport Profile 
        (MPLS-TP). The requirements are defined for specification of 
        network management aspects of protocol mechanisms and procedures 
        that constitute the building blocks out of which the MPLS 
        transport profile is constructed.  That is, these requirements 
        indicate what management capabilities need to be available in 
        MPLS for use in managing the MPLS-TP. This document is intended 
        to identify essential network management capabilities, not to 
        specify what functions any particular MPLS implementation 
        supports.  
      
      
      
     Gray, et al              Expires March, 2010              [Page 1] 
      




     Internet-Draft         MPLS-TP NM Requirements        August, 2009 
         

     Table of Contents 

         
        1. Introduction........................................3 
           1.1. Terminology.....................................4 
        2. Management Interface Requirements......................6 
        3. Management Communication Channel (MCC) Requirements.......6 
        4. Management Communication Network (MCN) Requirements.......6 
        5. Fault Management Requirements..........................8 
           5.1. Supervision Function.............................8 
           5.2. Validation Function..............................9 
           5.3. Alarm Handling Function..........................10 
              5.3.1. Alarm Severity Assignment....................10 
              5.3.2. Alarm Suppression ..........................10 
              5.3.3. Alarm Reporting............................10 
              5.3.4. Alarm Reporting Control.....................11 
        6. Configuration Management Requirements..................11 
           6.1. System Configuration............................11 
           6.2. Control Plane Configuration......................12 
           6.3. Path Configuration..............................12 
           6.4. Protection Configuration.........................13 
           6.5. OAM Configuration...............................13 
        7. Performance Management Requirements....................14 
           7.1. Path Characterization Performance Metrics..........14 
           7.2. Performance Measurement Instrumentation............16 
              7.2.1. Measurement Frequency.......................16 
              7.2.2. Measurement Scope ..........................16 
        8. Security Management Requirements......................16 
           8.1. Management Communication Channel Security..........16 
           8.2. Signaling Communication Channel Security...........17 
           8.3. Distributed Denial of Service ....................17 
        9. Security Considerations..............................18 
        10. IANA Considerations................................18 
        11. Acknowledgments....................................18 
        12. References........................................18 
           12.1. Normative References...........................18 
           12.2. Informative References..........................19 
        Author's Addresses.....................................21 
        Copyright Statement....................................21 
        Acknowledgment........................................22 
        Appendix A - Communication Channel (CCh) Examples..........23 
         





      
      
     Gray, et al              Expires March, 2010              [Page 2] 
         




     Internet-Draft         MPLS-TP NM Requirements        August, 2009 
         

     1. Introduction 

        This document specifies the requirements for the management of 
        equipment used in networks supporting an MPLS Transport Profile 
        (MPLS-TP). The requirements are defined for specification of 
        network management aspects of protocol mechanisms and procedures 
        that constitute the building blocks out of which the MPLS 
        transport profile is constructed.  That is, these requirements 
        indicate what management capabilities need to be available in 
        MPLS for use in managing the MPLS-TP. This document is intended 
        to identify essential network management capabilities, not to 
        specify what functions any particular MPLS implementation 
        supports.   

        This document also leverages management requirements specified 
        in ITU-T G.7710/Y.1701 [1] and RFC 4377 [2], and attempts to 
        comply with best common practice as defined in [14].  

        ITU-T G.7710/Y.1701 defines generic management requirements for 
        transport networks. RFC 4377 specifies the OAM requirements, 
        including OAM-related network management requirements, for MPLS 
        networks.  

        This document is a product of a joint ITU-T and IETF effort to 
        include an MPLS Transport Profile (MPLS-TP) within the IETF MPLS 
        and PWE3 architectures to support capabilities and functionality 
        of a transport network as defined by ITU-T. 

        The requirements in this document derive from two sources: 

          1) MPLS and PWE3 architectures as defined by IETF, and 

          2) packet transport networks as defined by ITU-T. 

        Requirements for management of equipment in MPLS-TP networks are 
        defined herein.  Related functions of MPLS and PWE3 are defined 
        elsewhere (and are out of scope in this document). 

        This document expands on the requirements in [1] and [2] to 
        cover fault, configuration, performance, and security management 
        for MPLS-TP networks, and the requirements for object and 
        information models needed to manage MPLS-TP Networks and Network 
        Elements. 

        In writing this document, the authors assume the reader is 
        familiar with references [12] and [15]. 

      
      
     Gray, et al              Expires March, 2010              [Page 3] 
         




     Internet-Draft         MPLS-TP NM Requirements        August, 2009 
         

     1.1. Terminology 

        Although this document is not a protocol specification, the key 
        words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
        "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in 
        this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [5] 
        and are to be interpreted as instructions to protocol designers 
        producing solutions that satisfy the requirements set out in 
        this document.   

        Anomaly: The smallest discrepancy which can be observed between 
        actual and desired characteristics of an item. The occurrence of 
        a single anomaly does not constitute an interruption in ability 
        to perform a required function. Anomalies are used as the input 
        for the Performance Monitoring (PM) process and for detection of 
        defects (from [21], 3.7). 

        Communication Channel (CCh): A logical channel between network 
        elements (NEs) that can be used - e.g. - for management or 
        control plane applications. The physical channel supporting the 
        CCh is technology specific.  See Appendix A. 

        Data Communication Network (DCN): A network that supports Layer 
        1 (physical layer), Layer 2 (data-link layer), and Layer 3 
        (network layer) functionality for distributed management 
        communications related to the management plane, for distributed 
        signaling communications related to the control plane, and other 
        operations communications (e.g., order-wire/voice 
        communications, software downloads, etc.).  

        Defect: The density of anomalies has reached a level where the 
        ability to perform a required function has been interrupted. 
        Defects are used as input for performance monitoring, the 
        control of consequent actions, and the determination of fault 
        cause (from [21], 3.24). 

        Failure: The fault cause persisted long enough to consider the 
        ability of an item to perform a required function to be 
        terminated. The item may be considered as failed; a fault has 
        now been detected (from [21], 3.25).  

        Fault: A fault is the inability of a function to perform a 
        required action. This does not include an inability due to 
        preventive maintenance, lack of external resources, or planned 
        actions (from [21], 3.26). 


      
      
     Gray, et al              Expires March, 2010              [Page 4] 
         




     Internet-Draft         MPLS-TP NM Requirements        August, 2009 
         

        Fault Cause: A single disturbance or fault may lead to the 
        detection of multiple defects. A fault cause is the result of a 
        correlation process which is intended to identify the defect 
        that is representative of the disturbance or fault that is 
        causing the problem (from [21], 3.27). 

        Fault Cause Indication (FCI): An indication of a fault cause. 

        Management Communication Channel (MCC): A CCh dedicated for 
        management plane communications.  

        Management Communication Network (MCN): A DCN supporting 
        management plane communication is referred to as a Management 
        Communication Network (MCN).  

        MPLS-TP NE: A network element (NE) that supports the functions 
        of MPLS necessary to participate in an MPLS-TP based transport 
        service. See [8] for further information on functionality 
        required to support MPLS-TP. 

        MPLS-TP network: a network in which MPLS-TP NEs are deployed.  

        OAM, On-Demand and Proactive: One feature of OAM that is largely 
        a management issue is control of OAM; on-demand and proactive 
        are modes of OAM mechanism operation defined - for example - in 
        Y.1731 ([22] - 3.45 and 3.44 respectively) as: 

           . On-demand OAM - OAM actions which are initiated via manual 
             intervention for a limited time to carry out diagnostics. 
             On-demand OAM can result in singular or periodic OAM 
             actions during the diagnostic time interval. 

           . Proactive OAM - OAM actions which are carried on 
             continuously to permit timely reporting of fault and/or 
             performance status. 

        (Note that it is possible for specific OAM mechanisms to only 
        have a sensible use in either on-demand or proactive mode.) 

        Operations System (OS): A system that performs the functions 
        that support processing of information related to operations, 
        administration, maintenance, and provisioning (OAM&P) for the 
        networks, including surveillance and testing functions to 
        support customer access maintenance. 

        Signaling Communication Channel (SCC): A CCh dedicated for 
        control plane communications. The SCC may be used for GMPLS/ASON 
      
      
     Gray, et al              Expires March, 2010              [Page 5] 
         




     Internet-Draft         MPLS-TP NM Requirements        August, 2009 
         

        signaling and/or other control plane messages (e.g., routing 
        messages).  

        Signaling Communication Network (SCN): A DCN supporting control 
        plane communication is referred to as a Signaling Communication 
        Network (SCN). 

     2. Management Interface Requirements  

        This document does not specify which management interface 
        protocol should be used as the standard protocol for managing 
        MPLS-TP networks. Managing an end-to-end connection across 
        multiple operator domains where one domain is managed (for 
        example) via NETCONF/XML ([16]) or SNMP/SMI ([17]), and another 
        domain via CORBA/IDL ([18]), is allowed.  

        For the management interface to the management system, an MPLS-
        TP NE MAY actively support more than one management protocol in 
        any given deployment. For example, an MPLS-TP NE may use one 
        protocol for configuration and another for monitoring. The 
        protocols to be supported are at the discretion of the operator.  

     3. Management Communication Channel (MCC) Requirements 

        Specifications SHOULD define support for management connectivity 
        with remote MPLS-TP domains and NEs, as well as with termination 
        points located in NEs under the control of a third party network 
        operator.  See ITU-T G.8601 [23] for example scenarios in multi-
        carrier multi-transport-technology environments. 

        For management purpose, every MPLS-TP NE MUST connect to an OS. 
        The connection MAY be direct (e.g. - via a software, hardware or 
        proprietary protocol connection) or indirect (via another MPLS-
        TP NE). In this document, any management connection that is not 
        via another MPLS-TP NE is a direct management connection.  When 
        an MPLS-TP NE is connected indirectly to an OS, an MCC MUST be 
        supported between that MPLS-TP NE and any MPLS-TP NE(s) used to 
        provide the connection to an OS.   

         

     4. Management Communication Network (MCN) Requirements 

        Entities of the MPLS-TP management plane communicate via a DCN, 
        or more specifically via the MCN. The MCN connects management 
        systems with management systems, management systems with MPLS-TP 

      
      
     Gray, et al              Expires March, 2010              [Page 6] 
         




     Internet-Draft         MPLS-TP NM Requirements        August, 2009 
         

        NEs, and (in the indirect connectivity case discussed in section 
        3) MPLS-TP NEs with MPLS-TP NEs.  

        RFC 5586 (Error! Reference source not found.) defines a Generic 
        Associated Channel (G-ACh) to enable the realization of a 
        communication channel (CCh) between adjacent MPLS-TP NEs for 
        management and control. Reference [7] describes how the G-ACh 
        may be used to provide infrastructure that forms part of the MCN 
        and SCN. It also explains how MCN and SCN messages are 
        encapsulated, carried on the G-ACh, and decapsulated for 
        delivery to management or signaling/routing control plane 
        components on a label switching router (LSR). 

        ITU-T G.7712/Y.1703 [6], section 7, describes the transport DCN 
        architecture and requirements. The MPLS-TP MCN MUST support the 
        requirements (in reference [6]) for: 

          - CCh access functions specified in section 7.1.1; 

          - MPLS-TP SCC data-link layer termination functions specified 
             in section 7.1.2.3; 

          - MPLS-TP MCC data-link layer termination functions specified 
             in section 7.1.2.4; 

          - Network layer PDU into CCh data-link frame encapsulation 
             functions specified in section 7.1.3; 

          - Network layer PDU forwarding (7.1.6), interworking (7.1.7) 
             and encapsulation (7.1.8) functions, as well as tunneling 
             (7.1.9) and routing (7.1.10) functions specified in [6]. 

        As a practical matter, MCN connections will typically have 
        addresses. See the section on addressing in [15] for further 
        information. 

        In order to have the MCN operate properly, a number of 
        management functions for the MCN are needed, including: 

          . Retrieval of DCN network parameters to ensure compatible 
             functioning, e.g. packet size, timeouts, quality of 
             service, window size, etc.; 

          . Establishment of message routing between DCN nodes;  

          . Management of DCN network addresses; 

      
      
     Gray, et al              Expires March, 2010              [Page 7] 
         




     Internet-Draft         MPLS-TP NM Requirements        August, 2009 
         

          . Retrieval of operational status of the DCN at a given node; 

          . Capability to enable/disable access by an NE to the DCN. 
             Note that this is to allow isolating a malfunctioning NE 
             from impacting the rest of the network. 

     5. Fault Management Requirements 

        The Fault Management functions within an MPLS-TP NE enable the 
        supervision, detection, validation, isolation, correction, and 
        reporting of abnormal operation of the MPLS-TP network and its 
        environment. 

     5.1. Supervision Function 

        The supervision function analyses the actual occurrence of a 
        disturbance or fault for the purpose of providing an appropriate 
        indication of performance and/or detected fault condition to 
        maintenance personnel and operations systems. 

        The MPLS-TP NE MUST support supervision of the OAM mechanisms 
        that are deployed for supporting the OAM requirements defined in 
        [1]. 

        The MPLS-TP NE MUST support the following data-plane forwarding 
        path supervision functions:  

          . Supervision of loop-checking functions used to detect loops 
             in the data-plane forwarding path (which result in non-
             delivery of traffic, wasting of forwarding resources and 
             unintended self-replication of traffic); 

          . Supervision of failure detection; 

        The MPLS-TP NE MUST support the capability to configure data-
        plane forwarding path related supervision mechanisms to perform 
        on-demand or proactively.  

        The MPLS-TP NE MUST support supervision for software processing  
        e.g., processing faults, storage capacity, version mismatch, 
        corrupted data and out of memory problems, etc. 

        The MPLS-TP NE MUST support hardware-related supervision for 
        interchangeable and non-interchangeable unit, cable, and power 
        problems.  


      
      
     Gray, et al              Expires March, 2010              [Page 8] 
         




     Internet-Draft         MPLS-TP NM Requirements        August, 2009 
         

        The MPLS-TP NE SHOULD support environment-related supervision 
        for temperature, humidity, etc.  

     5.2. Validation Function 

        Validation is the process of integrating Fault Cause indications 
        into Failures. A Fault Cause Indication (FCI) indicates a 
        limited interruption of the required transport function. A Fault 
        Cause is not reported to maintenance personnel because it might 
        exist only for a very short time. Note that some of these events 
        are summed up in the Performance Monitoring process (see section 
        7), and when this sum exceeds a configured value, a threshold 
        crossing alert (report) can be generated. 

        When the Fault Cause lasts long enough, an inability to perform 
        the required transport function arises. This failure condition 
        is subject to reporting to maintenance personnel and/or an OS 
        because corrective action might be required. Conversely, when 
        the Fault Cause ceases after a certain time, clearing of the 
        Failure condition is also subject to reporting. 

        The MPLS-TP NE MUST perform persistency checks on fault causes 
        before it declares a fault cause a failure.  

        The MPLS-TP NE SHOULD provide a configuration capability for 
        control parameters associated with performing the persistency 
        checks described above. 

        An MPLS-TP NE MAY provide configuration parameters to control 
        reporting, and clearing, of failure conditions. 

        A data-plane forwarding path failure MUST be declared if the 
        fault cause persists continuously for a configurable time (Time-
        D). The failure MUST be cleared if the fault cause is absent 
        continuously for a configurable time (Time-C).   

        Note: As an example, the default time values might be as 
        follows: 

           Time-D = 2.5 +/- 0.5 seconds 

           Time-C = 10 +/- 0.5 seconds 

        These time values are as defined in G.7710 [1]. 

        MIBs - or other object management semantics specifications - 
        defined to enable configuration of these timers SHOULD 
      
      
     Gray, et al              Expires March, 2010              [Page 9] 
         




     Internet-Draft         MPLS-TP NM Requirements        August, 2009 
         

        explicitly provide default values and MAY provide guidelines on 
        ranges and value determination methods for scenarios where the 
        default value chosen might be inadequate. In addition, such 
        specifications SHOULD define the level of granularity at which 
        tables of these values are to be defined.  

        Implementations MUST provide the ability to configure the 
        preceding set of timers, and SHOULD provide default values to 
        enable rapid configuration. Suitable default values, timer 
        ranges, and level of granularity are out of scope in this 
        document and form part of the specification of fault management 
        details. Timers SHOULD be configurable per NE for broad 
        categories (for example, defects and/or fault causes), and MAY 
        be configurable per-interface on an NE and/or per individual 
        defect/fault cause. 

        The failure declaration and clearing MUST be time stamped. The 
        time-stamp MUST indicate the time at which the fault cause is 
        activated at the input of the fault cause persistency (i.e. 
        defect-to-failure integration) function, and the time at which 
        the fault cause is deactivated at the input of the fault cause 
        persistency function. 

     5.3. Alarm Handling Function 

     5.3.1. Alarm Severity Assignment 

        Failures can be categorized to indicate the severity or urgency 
        of the fault.  

        An MPLS-TP NE SHOULD support the ability to assign severity 
        (e.g., Critical, Major, Minor, Warning) to alarm conditions via 
        configuration. 

        See G.7710 [1], section 7.2.2 for more detail on alarm severity 
        assignment. 

     5.3.2. Alarm Suppression 

        Alarms can be generated from many sources, including OAM, device 
        status, etc. 

        An MPLS-TP NE MUST support suppression of alarms based on 
        configuration.  



      
      
     Gray, et al              Expires March, 2010             [Page 10] 
         




     Internet-Draft         MPLS-TP NM Requirements        August, 2009 
         

     5.3.3. Alarm Reporting 

        Alarm Reporting is concerned with the reporting of relevant 
        events and conditions, which occur in the network (including the 
        NE, incoming signal, and external environment). 

        Local reporting is concerned with automatic alarming by means of 
        audible and visual indicators near the failed equipment.  

        An MPLS-TP NE MUST support local reporting of alarms. 

        The MPLS-TP NE MUST support reporting of alarms to an OS. These 
        reports are either autonomous reports (notifications) or reports 
        on request by maintenance personnel. The MPLS-TP NE SHOULD 
        report local (environmental) alarms to a network management 
        system. 

        An MPLS-TP NE supporting one or more other networking 
        technologies (e.g. - Ethernet, SDH/SONET, MPLS) over MPLS-TP 
        MUST be capable of translating an MPLS-TP defects into failure 
        conditions that are meaningful to the client layer, as described 
        in RFC 4377 [2], section 4.7. 

     5.3.4. Alarm Reporting Control 

        Alarm Reporting Control (ARC) supports an automatic in-service 
        provisioning capability. Alarm reporting can be turned off on a 
        per-managed entity (e.g., LSP) basis to allow sufficient time 
        for customer service testing and other maintenance activities in 
        an "alarm free" state. Once a managed entity is ready, alarm 
        reporting is automatically turned on. 

        An MPLS-TP NE SHOULD support the Alarm Reporting Control 
        function for controlling the reporting of alarm conditions. 

        See G.7710 [1] (section 7.1.3.2) and RFC 3878 [24] for more 
        information about ARC.    

     6. Configuration Management Requirements 

        Configuration Management provides functions to identify, collect 
        data from, provide data to and control NEs.  Specific 
        configuration tasks requiring network management support include 
        hardware and software configuration, configuration of NEs to 
        support transport paths (including required working and 
        protection paths), and configuration of required path 
        integrity/connectivity and performance monitoring (i.e. - OAM). 
      
      
     Gray, et al              Expires March, 2010             [Page 11] 
         




     Internet-Draft         MPLS-TP NM Requirements        August, 2009 
         

     6.1. System Configuration 

        The MPLS-TP NE MUST support the configuration requirements 
        specified in G.7710 [1] section 8.1 for hardware.  

        The MPLS-TP NE MUST support the configuration requirements 
        specified in G.7710 [1] section 8.2 for software.  

        The MPLS-TP NE MUST support the configuration requirements 
        specified in G.7710 [1] section 8.13.2.1 for local real time 
        clock functions. 

        The MPLS-TP NE MUST support the configuration requirements 
        specified in G.7710 [1] section 8.13.2.2 for local real time 
        clock alignment with external time reference. 

        The MPLS-TP NE MUST support the configuration requirements 
        specified in G.7710 [1] section 8.13.2.3 for performance 
        monitoring of the clock function. 

     6.2. Control Plane Configuration 

        If a control plane is supported in an implementation of MPLS-TP, 
        the MPLS-TP NE MUST support the configuration of MPLS-TP control 
        plane functions by the management plane. Further detailed 
        requirements will be provided along with progress in defining 
        the MPLS-TP control plane in appropriate specifications. 

     6.3. Path Configuration 

        In addition to the requirement to support static provisioning of 
        transport paths (defined in [8], section 2.1 - General 
        Requirements - requirement 18), an MPLS-TP NE MUST support the 
        configuration of required path performance characteristic 
        thresholds (e.g. - Loss Measurement [LM], Delay Measurement [DM] 
        thresholds) necessary to support performance monitoring of the 
        MPLS-TP service(s). 

        In order to accomplish this, an MPLS-TP NE MUST support 
        configuration of LSP information (such as an LSP identifier of 
        some kind) and/or any other information needed to retrieve LSP 
        status information, performance attributes, etc. 

        If a control plane is supported, and that control plane includes 
        support for control-plane/management-plane hand-off for LSP 
        setup/maintenance, the MPLS-TP NE MUST support management of the 

      
      
     Gray, et al              Expires March, 2010             [Page 12] 
         




     Internet-Draft         MPLS-TP NM Requirements        August, 2009 
         

        hand-off of Path control. See, for example, references [19] and 
        [20]. 

        Further detailed requirements will be provided along with 
        progress in defining the MPLS-TP control plane in appropriate 
        specifications. 

        If MPLS-TP transport paths cannot be statically provisioned 
        using MPLS LSP and pseudo-wire management tools (either already 
        defined in standards or under development), further management 
        specifications MUST be provided as needed. 

     6.4. Protection Configuration 

        The MPLS-TP NE MUST support configuration of required path 
        protection information as follows: 

          . designate specifically identified LSPs as working or 
             protecting LSPs; 

          . define associations of working and protecting paths; 

          . operate/release manual protection switching; 

          . operate/release force protection switching; 

          . operate/release protection lockout; 

          . set/retrieve Automatic Protection Switching (APS) 
             parameters, including -  

            o  Wait to Restore time, 

            o  Protection Switching threshold information. 

             
     6.5. OAM Configuration 

        The MPLS-TP NE MUST support configuration of the OAM entities 
        and functions specified in [3]. 

        The MPLS-TP NE MUST support the capability to choose which OAM 
        functions are enabled. 

        For enabled OAM functions, the MPLS-TP NE MUST support the 
        ability to associate OAM functions with specific maintenance 
        entities.   
      
      
     Gray, et al              Expires March, 2010             [Page 13] 
         




     Internet-Draft         MPLS-TP NM Requirements        August, 2009 
         

        The MPLS-TP NE MUST support the capability to configure the OAM 
        entities/functions as part of LSP setup and tear-down, including 
        co-routed bidirectional point-to-point, associated bidirectional 
        point-to-point, and uni-directional (both point-to-point and 
        point-to-multipoint) connections.  

        The MPLS-TP NE MUST support the configuration of maintenance 
        entity identifiers (e.g. MEP ID and MIP ID) for the purpose of 
        LSP connectivity checking.  

        The MPLS-TP NE MUST support configuration of OAM parameters to 
        meet their specific operational requirements, such as whether - 

           1) one-time on-demand immediately or  

           2) one-time on-demand pre-scheduled or  

           3) on-demand periodically based on a specified schedule or 

           4) proactive on-going.  

        The MPLS-TP NE MUST support the enabling/disabling of the 
        connectivity check processing. The connectivity check process of 
        the MPLS-TP NE MUST support provisioning of the identifiers to 
        be transmitted and the expected identifiers. 

     7. Performance Management Requirements 

        Performance Management provides functions for the purpose of 
        Maintenance, Bring-into-service, Quality of service, and 
        statistics gathering.  

        This information could be used, for example, to compare behavior 
        of the equipment, MPLS-TP NE or network at different moments in 
        time to evaluate changes in network performance. 

        ITU-T Recommendation G.7710 [1] provides transport performance 
        monitoring requirements for packet-switched and circuit-switched 
        transport networks with the objective of providing coherent and 
        consistent interpretation of the network behavior in a multi-
        technology environment. The performance management requirements 
        specified in this document are driven by such an objective. 

     7.1. Path Characterization Performance Metrics 

        It MUST be possible to determine when an MPLS-TP based transport 
        service is available and when it is unavailable.   
      
      
     Gray, et al              Expires March, 2010             [Page 14] 
         




     Internet-Draft         MPLS-TP NM Requirements        August, 2009 
         

        From a performance perspective, a service is unavailable if 
        there is an indication that performance has degraded to the 
        extent that a configurable performance threshold has been 
        crossed and the degradation persists long enough (i.e. - the 
        indication persists for some amount of time - which is either 
        configurable, or well-known) to be certain it is not a 
        measurement anomaly. 

        Methods, mechanisms and algorithms for exactly how 
        unavailability is to be determined - based on collection of raw 
        performance data - are out of scope for this document.  

        The MPLS-TP NE MUST support collection and reporting of raw 
        performance data that MAY be used in determining the 
        unavailability of a transport service. 

        MPLS-TP MUST support the determination of the unavailability of 
        the transport service. The result of this determination MUST be 
        available via the MPLS-TP NE (at service termination points), 
        and determination of unavailability MAY be supported by the 
        MPLS-TP NE directly. To support this requirement, the MPLS-TP NE 
        management information model MUST include objects corresponding 
        to availability-state of services. 

        Transport network unavailability is based on Severely Errored 
        Seconds (SES) and Unavailable Seconds (UAS). ITU-T is 
        establishing definitions of unavailability generically 
        applicable to packet transport technologies, including MPLS-TP, 
        based on SES and UAS. Note that SES and UAS are already defined 
        for Ethernet transport networks in ITU-T Recommendation Y.1563 
        [25]. 

        The MPLS-TP NE MUST support collection of loss measurement (LM) 
        statistics. 

        The MPLS-TP NE MUST support collection of delay measurement (DM) 
        statistics. 

        The MPLS-TP NE MUST support reporting of Performance degradation 
        via fault management for corrective actions. "Reporting" in this 
        context could mean:  

           . reporting to an autonomous protection component to trigger 
             protection switching, 

           . reporting via a craft interface to allow replacement of a 
             faulty component (or similar manual intervention), 
      
      
     Gray, et al              Expires March, 2010             [Page 15] 
         




     Internet-Draft         MPLS-TP NM Requirements        August, 2009 
         

           . etc. 

        The MPLS-TP NE MUST support reporting of performance statistics 
        on request from a management system. 

     7.2. Performance Measurement Instrumentation 

     7.2.1. Measurement Frequency 

        For performance measurement mechanisms that support both 
        proactive and on-demand modes, the MPLS-TP NE MUST support the 
        capability to be configured to operate on-demand or proactively.  

     7.2.2. Measurement Scope 

        On measurement of packet loss and loss ratio: 

           . For bidirectional (both co-routed and associated) P2P 
             connections -  

            o on-demand measurement of single-ended packet loss, and 
               loss ratio, measurement is REQUIRED; 

            o proactive measurement of packet loss, and loss ratio, 
               measurement for each direction is REQUIRED. 

           . for unidirectional (P2P and P2MP) connection, proactive 
             measurement of packet loss, and loss ratio, is REQUIRED. 

        On Delay measurement:  

           . for unidirectional (P2P and P2MP) connection, on-demand 
             measurement of delay measurement is REQUIRED. 

           . for co-routed bidirectional (P2P) connection, on-demand 
             measurement of one-way and two-way delay is REQUIRED.  

           . for associated bidirectional (P2P) connection, on-demand 
             measurement of one-way delay is REQUIRED. 

     8. Security Management Requirements 

        The MPLS-TP NE MUST support secure management and control 
        planes. 



      
      
     Gray, et al              Expires March, 2010             [Page 16] 
         




     Internet-Draft         MPLS-TP NM Requirements        August, 2009 
         

     8.1. Management Communication Channel Security 

        Secure communication channels MUST be supported for all network 
        traffic and protocols used to support management functions.  
        This MUST include, at least, protocols used for configuration, 
        monitoring, configuration backup, logging, time synchronization, 
        authentication, and routing.  The MCC MUST support application 
        protocols that provide confidentiality and data integrity 
        protection.   

        The MPLS-TP NE MUST support the following: 

          - Use of open cryptographic algorithms (See RFC 3871 [4])  

          - Authentication - allow management connectivity only from 
             authenticated entities. 

          - Authorization - allow management activity originated by an 
             authorized entity, using (for example) an Access Control 
             List (ACL). 

          - Port Access Control - allow management activity received on 
             an authorized (management) port. 

     8.2. Signaling Communication Channel Security 

        Security requirements for the SCC are driven by considerations 
        similar to MCC requirements described in section 8.1.  

        Security Requirements for the control plane are out of scope for 
        this document and are expected to be defined in the appropriate 
        control plane specifications.  

        Management of control plane security MUST also be defined at 
        that time. 

     8.3. Distributed Denial of Service 

        A Denial of Service (DoS) attack is an attack that tries to 
        prevent a target from performing an assigned task, or providing 
        its intended service(s), through any means. A Distributed DoS 
        (DDoS) can multiply attack severity (possibly by an arbitrary 
        amount) by using multiple (potentially compromised) systems to 
        act as topologically (and potentially geographically) 
        distributed attack sources. It is possible to lessen the impact 
        and potential for DoS and DDoS by using secure protocols, 
        turning off unnecessary processes, logging and monitoring, and 
      
      
     Gray, et al              Expires March, 2010             [Page 17] 
         




     Internet-Draft         MPLS-TP NM Requirements        August, 2009 
         

        ingress filtering.  RFC 4732 [26] provides background on DOS in 
        the context of the Internet. 

        An MPLS-TP NE MUST support secure management protocols and 
        SHOULD do so in a manner the reduce potential impact of a DoS 
        attack. 

        An MPLS-TP NE SHOULD support additional mechanisms that mitigate 
        a DoS (or DDoS) attack against the management component while 
        allowing the NE to continue to meet its primary functions. 

     9. Security Considerations 

        Section 8 includes a set of security requirements that apply to 
        MPLS-TP network management. 

        Solutions MUST provide mechanisms to prevent unauthorized and/or 
        unauthenticated access to management capabilities and private 
        information by network elements, systems or users. 

        Performance of diagnostic functions and path characterization 
        involves extracting a significant amount of information about 
        network construction that the network operator might consider 
        private. 

     10. IANA Considerations 

        There are no IANA actions associated with this document. 

     11. Acknowledgments 

        The authors/editors gratefully acknowledge the thoughtful 
        review, comments and explanations provided by Adrian Farrel, 
        Alexander Vainshtein, Andrea Maria Mazzini, Ben Niven-Jenkins, 
        Bernd Zeuner, Dan Romascanu, Daniele Ceccarelli, Diego Caviglia, 
        Dieter Beller, He Jia, Leo Xiao, Maarten Vissers, Neil Harrison, 
        Rolf Winter, Yoav Cohen and Yu Liang. 

     12. References  

     12.1. Normative References 

        [1]   ITU-T Recommendation G.7710/Y.1701, "Common equipment 
              management function requirements", July, 2007. 



      
      
     Gray, et al              Expires March, 2010             [Page 18] 
         




     Internet-Draft         MPLS-TP NM Requirements        August, 2009 
         

        [2]   Nadeau, T., et al, "Operations and Management (OAM) 
              Requirements for Multi-Protocol Label Switched (MPLS) 
              Networks", RFC 4377, February 2006. 

        [3]   Vigoureux, M., et al, "Requirements for OAM in MPLS 
              Transport Networks", work in progress. 

        [4]   Jones, G., "Operational Security Requirements for Large 
              Internet Service Provider (ISP) IP Network 
              Infrastructure", RFC 3871, September 2004. 

        [5]   Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate 
              Requirement Levels", RFC 2119, March 1997. 

        [6]   ITU-T Recommendation G.7712/Y.1703, "Architecture and 
              specification of data communication network", June 2008. 

        [7]   Beller, D., et al, "An Inband Data Communication Network 
              For the MPLS Transport Profile", draft-ietf-mpls-tp-gach-
              dcn, work in progress.  

        [8]   Niven-Jenkins, B. et al, "MPLS-TP Requirements", draft-
              ietf-mpls-tp-requirements, work in progress. 

     12.2. Informative References 

        [9]   Chisholm, S. and D. Romascanu, "Alarm Management 
              Information Base (MIB)", RFC 3877, September 2004. 

        [10]  ITU-T Recommendation M.20, "Maintenance philosophy for 
              telecommunication networks", October 1992. 

        [11]  Telcordia, "Network Maintenance: Network Element and 
              Transport Surveillance Messages" (GR-833-CORE), Issue 5, 
              August 2004.  

        [12]  Bocci, M. et al, "A Framework for MPLS in Transport 
              Networks", draft-ietf-mpls-tp-framework, work in progress. 

        [13]  Bocci, M. et al, "MPLS Generic Associated Channel", RFC 
              5586, June 2009. 

        [14]  Harrington, D., "Guidelines for Considering Operations and 
              Management of New Protocols and Protocol Extensions", 
              draft-ietf-opsawg-operations-and-management, work in 
              progress. 

      
      
     Gray, et al              Expires March, 2010             [Page 19] 
         




     Internet-Draft         MPLS-TP NM Requirements        August, 2009 
         

        [15]  Mansfield, S. et al, "MPLS-TP Network Management 
              Framework", draft-ietf-mpls-tp-nm-framework, work in 
              progress. 

        [16]  Enns, R. et al, "NETCONF Configuration Protocol", draft-
              ietf-netconf-4741bis, work in progress. 

        [17]  McCloghrie, K. et al, "Structure of Management Information 
              Version 2 (SMIv2)", RFC 2578, April 1999. 

        [18]  OMG Document formal/04-03-12, "The Common Object Request 
              Broker: Architecture and Specification", Revision 3.0.3. 
              March 12, 2004. 

        [19]  Caviglia, D. et al, "Requirements for the Conversion 
              between Permanent Connections and Switched Connections in 
              a Generalized Multiprotocol Label Switching (GMPLS) 
              Network", RFC 5493, April 2009. 

        [20]  Caviglia, D. et al, "RSVP-TE Signaling Extension For The 
              Conversion Between Permanent Connections And Soft 
              Permanent Connections In A GMPLS Enabled Transport 
              Network", draft-ietf-ccamp-pc-spc-rsvpte-ext, work in 
              progress. 

        [21]  ITU-T Recommendation G.806, "Characteristics of transport 
              equipment - Description methodology and generic 
              functionality", January, 2009. 

        [22]  ITU-T Recommendation Y.1731, "OAM functions and mechanisms 
              for Ethernet based networks", February, 2008.  

        [23]  ITU-T Recommendation G.8601, "Architecture of service 
              management in multi bearer, multi carrier environment", 
              June 2006. 

        [24]  Lam, H., et al, "Alarm Reporting Control Management 
              Information Base (MIB)", RFC 3878, September 2004. 

        [25]  ITU-T Recommendation Y.1563, "Ethernet frame transfer and 
              availability performance", January 2009.  

        [26]  Handley, M., et al, "Internet Denial-of-Service 
              Considerations", RFC 4732, November 2006. 



      
      
     Gray, et al              Expires March, 2010             [Page 20] 
         




     Internet-Draft         MPLS-TP NM Requirements        August, 2009 
         

      Author's Addresses 

        Editors:  
         
        Eric Gray 
        Ericsson 
        900 Chelmsford Street 
        Lowell, MA, 01851 
        Phone: +1 978 275 7470 
        Email: Eric.Gray@Ericsson.com 

        Scott Mansfield 
        Ericsson 
        250 Holger Way 
        San Jose CA, 95134 
        +1 724 931 9316 
        EMail: Scott.Mansfield@Ericsson.com 
         
        Hing-Kam (Kam) Lam 
        Alcatel-Lucent 
        600-700 Mountain Ave 
        Murray Hill, NJ, 07974 
        Phone: +1 908 582 0672 
        Email: hklam@Alcatel-Lucent.com  
         
        Author(s): 
         
        Contributor(s): 
         
        Adrian Farrel 
        Old Dog Consulting 
        Email: adrian@olddog.co.uk 
         
     Copyright Statement 

        Copyright (c) 2009 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the 
        document authors.  All rights reserved. 

        This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal 
        Provisions Relating to IETF Documents in effect on the date of 
        publication of this document (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-
        info).  Please review these documents carefully, as they 
        describe your rights and restrictions with respect to this 
        document. 



      
      
     Gray, et al              Expires March, 2010             [Page 21] 
         




     Internet-Draft         MPLS-TP NM Requirements        August, 2009 
         

     Acknowledgment 

        Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the 
        Internet Society. 











































      
      
     Gray, et al              Expires March, 2010             [Page 22] 
         




     Internet-Draft         MPLS-TP NM Requirements        August, 2009 
         

     Appendix A- Communication Channel (CCh) Examples 

        A CCh may be realized in a number of ways. 

        1. The CCh may be provided by a link in a physically distinct 
        network.  That is, a link that is not part of the transport 
        network that is being managed. For example, the nodes in the 
        transport network may be interconnected in two distinct physical 
        networks: the transport network and the DCN. 

        This is a "physically distinct out-of-band CCh". 

        2. The CCh may be provided by a link in the transport network 
        that is terminated at the ends of the DCC and which is capable 
        of encapsulating and terminating packets of the management 
        protocols.  For example, in MPLS-TP a single-hop LSP might be 
        established between two adjacent nodes, and that LSP might be 
        capable of carrying IP traffic. Management traffic can then be 
        inserted into the link in an LSP parallel to the LSPs that carry 
        user traffic. 

        This is a "physically shared out-of-band CCh." 

        3. The CCh may be supported as its native protocol on the 
        interface alongside the transported traffic. For example, if an 
        interface is capable of sending and receiving both MPLS-TP and 
        IP, the IP-based management traffic can be sent as native IP 
        packets on the interface. 

        This is a "shared interface out-of-band CCh". 

        4. The CCh may use overhead bytes available on a transport 
        connection. For example, in TDM networks there are overhead 
        bytes associated with a data channel, and these can be used to 
        provide a CCh. It is important to note that the use of overhead 
        bytes does not reduce the capacity of the associated data 
        channel. 

        This is an "overhead-based CCh". 

        This alternative is not available in MPLS-TP because there is no 
        overhead available. 

        5. The CCh may provided by a dedicated channel associated with 
        the data link. For example, the generic associated label (GAL) 
        [13] may be used to label DCC traffic being exchanged on a data 

      
      
     Gray, et al              Expires March, 2010             [Page 23] 
         





     Internet-Draft         MPLS-TP NM Requirements        August, 2009 
         

        link between adjacent transport nodes, potentially in the 
        absence of any data LSP between those nodes. 

        This is a "data link associated CCh". 

        It is very similar to case 2, and by its nature can only span a 
        single hop in the transport network. 

        6. The CCh may be provided by a dedicated channel associated 
        with a data channel. For example, in MPLS-TP the GAL [13] may be 
        imposed under the top label in the label stack for an MPLS-TP 
        LSP to create a channel associated with the LSP that may carry 
        management traffic. This CCh requires the receiver to be capable 
        of demultiplexing management traffic from user traffic carried 
        on the same LSP by use of the GAL. 

        This is a "data channel associated CCh". 

        7. The CCh may be provided by mixing the management traffic with 
        the user traffic such that is indistinguishable on the link 
        without deep-packet inspection. In MPLS-TP this could arise if 
        there is a data-carrying LSP between two nodes, and management 
        traffic is inserted into that LSP. This approach requires that 
        the termination point of the LSP is able to demultiplex the 
        management and user traffic. Such might be possible in MPLS-TP 
        if the MPLS-TP LSP was carrying IP user traffic. 

        This is an "in-band CCh". 

        These realizations may be categorized as: 

          A. Out-of-fiber, out-of-band (types 1 and 2) 
          B. In-fiber, out-of-band (types 2, 3, 4, and 5) 
          C. In-band (types 6 and 7) 

        The MCN and SCN are logically separate networks and may be 
        realized by the same DCN or as separate networks. In practice, 
        that means that, between any pair of nodes, the MCC and SCC may 
        be the same link or separate links. 

        It is also important to note that the MCN and SCN do not need to 
        be categorised as in-band, out-of-band, etc. This definition 
        only applies to the individual links, and it is possible for 
        some nodes to be connected in the MCN or SCN by one type of 
        link, and other nodes by other types of link. Furthermore, a 

      
      
     Gray, et al              Expires March, 2010             [Page 24] 
         




     Internet-Draft         MPLS-TP NM Requirements        August, 2009 
         

        pair of adjacent nodes may be connected by multiple links of 
        different types. 

        Lastly note that the division of DCN traffic between links 
        between a pair of adjacent nodes is purely an implementation 
        choice. Parallel links may be deployed for DCN resilience or 
        load sharing. Links may be designated for specific use. For 
        example, so that some links carry management traffic and some 
        carry control plane traffic, or so that some links carry 
        signaling protocol traffic while others carry routing protocol 
        traffic. 

        It should be noted that the DCN may be a routed network with 
        forwarding capabilities, but that this is not a requirement. The 
        ability to support forwarding of management or control traffic 
        within the DCN may substantially simplify the topology of the 
        DCN and improve its resilience, but does increase the complexity 
        of operating the DCN. 

        See also RFC 3877 [9], ITU-T M.20 [10], and Telcordia document 
        GR-833-CORE [11] for further information. 

         
























      
      
     Gray, et al              Expires March, 2010             [Page 25] 
