    

   Network Working Group                                L. Fang, Ed. 
   Internet Draft                                      Cisco Systems 
   Intended status: Informational                           N. Bitar 
   Expires: December 11, 2012                                Verizon 
                                                            R. Zhang 
                                                      Alcatel Lucent 
                                                          M. DAIKOKU 
                                                                KDDI 
                                                              P. Pan 
                                                            Infinera 
                                                               
                                                                     
                                                       June 11, 2012 
 
 
                MPLS-TP Applicability; Use Cases and Design 
              draft-ietf-mpls-tp-use-cases-and-design-02.txt 
    
Abstract 
 
    
   This document provides applicability, use case studies and network 
   design considerations for Multiprotocol Label Switching Transport
   profile (MPLS-TP).  
    
   In the recent years, MPLS-TP has emerged as the technology of choice 
   for the new generation of packet transport. Many service providers 
   (SPs) are working to replace the legacy transport technologies, e.g. 
   SONET/SDH, TDM, and ATM technologies, with MPLS-TP for packet 
   transport, in order to achieve higher efficiency, lower operational 
   cost, while maintaining transport characteristics.  
    
   The use cases for MPLS-TP include Metro Ethernet access and 
   aggregation, Mobile backhaul, and packet optical transport. The 
   design considerations discussed in this documents ranging from 
   operational experience; standards compliance; technology maturity; 
   end-to-end forwarding and OAM consistency; compatibility with 
   IP/MPLS networks; multi-vendor interoperability; and optimization 
   vs. simplicity design trade off discussion. The general design 
   principle is to provide reliable, manageable, and scalable transport 
   solutions. 
     
 
 
Status of this Memo 
 
   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with 
   the provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.  
    
    
     
                                                              [Page 1] 
    
   MPLS-TP Use Case and Design Considerations                                    
   Expires December 2012 
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute 
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents 
   at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress. 
    
   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 11, 2012. 
 
    
Copyright Notice 
    
    
   Copyright (c) 2012 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the 
   document authors.  All rights reserved. 
    
   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal 
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents 
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of 
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents 
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with 
   respect to this document.  Code Components extracted from this 
   document must include Simplified BSD License text as described in 
   Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without 
   warranty as described in the Simplified BSD License. 
    
    
 
Table of Contents 
 
   1. Introduction ...................................................3                                                                       3 
   1.1.  Background and Motivation ...................................3                                                                       3 
   1.2.  Co-authors and contributors .................................3                                                                       5 
   2. Terminologies ..................................................5                                                                       5 
   3. Overview of MPLS-TP base functions .............................6                                                                       6 
   3.1.  MPLS-TP development principles ..............................6                                                                       6 
   3.2.  Data Plane ..................................................7                                                                       7 
   3.3.  Control Plane ...............................................7                                                                       7 
   3.4.  OAM .........................................................7                                                                       7 
   3.5.  Survivability ...............................................8                                                                       8 
   4. MPLS-TP Use Case Studies .......................................8                                                                       8 
   4.1.  Metro Access and Aggregation ...............................8                                                                       8 

     
                                                              [Page 2] 
    
    
   MPLS-TP Use Case and Design Considerations                                    
   Expires December 2012 
    
   4.2.  Packet Optical Transport ....................................9                                                                       9 
   4.3.  Mobile Backhaul ............................................10                                                                     10 
   5. Network Design Considerations .................................11                                                                     11 
   5.1.  IP/MPLS vs. MPLS-TP ........................................11                                                                     11 
   5.2.  Standards compliance .......................................11                                                                     12 
   5.3.  End-to-end MPLS OAM consistency ............................12                                                                      13 
   5.4.  PW Design considerations in MPLS-TP networks ...............13                                                                      13 
   5.5.  Proactive and event driven MPLS-TP OAM tools ...............13                                                                      14 
   5.6.  MPLS-TP and IP/MPLS Interworking considerations ............14                                                                      14 
   5.7.  Delay and delay variation ..................................14                                                                      14 
   5.8.  More on MPLS-TP Deployment Considerations ..................17                                                                      17 
   6. Security Considerations .......................................19                                                                      19 
   7. IANA Considerations ...........................................19                                                                      19 
   8. Normative References ..........................................19                                                                      19 
   9. Informative References ........................................19                                                                     19 
   10.  Author's Addresses...........................................20                                                                     20 
    
    
   Requirements Language 
    
   Although this document is not a protocol specification, the key 
   words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in 
   this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC 
   2119]. 
    
    
1. Introduction 
    
    
   1.1. Background and Motivation 
    
   This document provides case studies and network design 
   considerations for Multiprotocol Label Switching Transport Profile 
   (MPLS-TP).  
    
   In recent years, the urgency for moving from traditional transport 
   technologies, such as SONET/SDH, TDM/ATM, to new packet technologies 
   has been rising. This is largely due to the tremendous success of 
   data services, such as IPTV and IP Video for content downloading, 
   streaming, and sharing; rapid growth of mobile services, especially 
   smart phone applications; the continued growth of business VPNs and 
   residential broadband. The end of live for many legacy TDM devices 
   and the continuing network convergence effort are also key 
   contributing factors for transport moving toward packet 

     
                                                              [Page 3] 
    
    
   MPLS-TP Use Case and Design Considerations                                    
   Expires December 2012 
    
   technologies. After several years of heated debate on which packet 
   technology to use, MPLS-TP has emerged as the next generation 
   transport technology of choice for many service providers 
   worldwide.  
    
   MPLS-TP is based on MPLS technologies. MPLS-TP re-use a subset of 
   MPLS base functions, such as MPLS data forwarding, Pseudo-wire 
   encapsulation for circuit emulation, and GMPLS for LSP, tLDP for PW, 
   as dynamic control plane options; MPLS-TP extended current MPLS OAM 
   functions, such as BFD extension for Connectivity for proactive 
   Connectivity Check (CC) and Connectivity Verification (CV), and 
   Remote Defect Indication (RDI), LSP Ping Extension for on demand 
   Connectivity Check (CC) and Connectivity Verification (CV), fault 
   allocation, and remote integrity check. New tools are being defined 
   for alarm suppression with Alarm Indication Signal (AIS), and 
   trigger of switch over with Link Defect Indication (LDI).  
    
   The goal is to take advantage of the maturity of MPLS technology, 
   re-use the existing component when possible and extend the existing 
   protocols or create new procedures/protocols when needed to fully 
   satisfy the transport requirements.  
    
   The general requirements of MPLS-TP are provided in MPLS-TP 
   Requirements [RFC 5654], and the architectural framework are defined 
   in MPLS-TP Framework [RFC 5921]. This document intent to provide the 
   use case studies and design considerations from practical point of 
   view based on Service Providers deployments plans and field 
   implementations.  
    
   The most common use cases for MPLS-TP include Metro access and 
   aggregation, Mobile Backhaul, and Packet Optical Transport. MPLS-TP 
   data plane architecture, path protection mechanisms, and OAM 
   functionalities are used to support these deployment scenarios. 
   As part of MPLS family, MPLS-TP complements today's IP/MPLS 
   technologies; it closes the gaps in the traditional access and 
   aggregation transport to enable end-to-end packet technology 
   solutions in a cost efficient, reliable, and interoperable manner. 
    
   The unified MPLS strategy, using MPLS from core to aggregation and 
   access (e.g. IP/MPLS in the core, IP/MPLS or MPLS-TP in aggregation 
   and access) appear to be very attractive to many SPs. It streamlines 
   the operation, many help to reduce the overall complexity and 
   improve end-to-end convergence. It leverages the MPLS experience, 
   and enhances the ability to support revenue generating services. 
    
   The design considerations discussed in this document are generic. 
   While many design criteria are commonly apply to most of SPs, each 
   individual SP may place the importance of one aspect over another 
     
                                                              [Page 4] 
    
    
   MPLS-TP Use Case and Design Considerations                                    
   Expires December 2012 
    
   depending on the existing operational environment, what type of  
   applications need to be supported, the design objectives, the cost 
   constrain, and the network evolution plans.  
    
    
   1.2. Co-authors and contributors 
    
   Luyuan Fang, Cisco Systems        
   Nabil Bitar, Verizon 
   Raymond Zhang, Alcatel Lucent 
   Masahiro DAIKOKU, KDDI 
   Ping Pan, Infinera 
   Mach(Guoyi) Chen, Huawei Technologies 
   Dan Frost, Cisco Systems 
   Kam Lee Yap, XO Communications 
   Henry Yu, Time W Telecom  
   Jian Ping Zhang, China Telecom, Shanghai 
   Nurit Sprecher, Nokia Siemens Networks 
   Lei Wang, Telenor 
 
 
    
2. Terminologies 
    
      AIS       Alarm Indication Signal 
      APS       Automatic Protection Switching 
      ATM       Asynchronous Transfer Mode 
      BFD       Bidirectional Forwarding Detection 
      CC        Continuity Check 
      CE Customer Edge device 
      CV        Connectivity Verification 
      CM        Configuration Management 
      DM        Packet delay measurement 
      ECMP      Equal Cost Multi-path 
      FM        Fault Management 
      GAL       Generic Alert Label 
      G-ACH     Generic Associated Channel 
      GMPLS     Generalized Multi-Protocol Label Switching 
      LB        Loopback 
      LDP       Label Distribution Protocol   
      LM        Packet loss measurement 
      LSP       Label Switched Path 
      LT        Link trace   
      MEP       Maintenance End Point 
      MIP       Maintenance Intermediate Point 
      MP2MP     Multi-Point to Multi-Point connections 
      MPLS      Multi-Protocol Label Switching 
      MPLS-TP   MPLS transport profile 
     
                                                              [Page 5] 
    
    
   MPLS-TP Use Case and Design Considerations                                    
   Expires December 2012 
    
      OAM       Operations, Administration, and Management 
      P2P       Point to Multi-Point connections 
      P2MP      Point to Point connections    
      PE         Provider-Edge device 
      PHP       Penultimate Hop Popping 
      PM        Performance Management 
      PW         Pseudowire 
      RDI       Remote Defect Indication 
      RSVP-TE   Resource Reservation Protocol with Traffic  
                Engineering Extensions 
      SLA       Service Level Agreement 
      SNMP      Simple Network Management Protocol 
      SONET     Synchronous Optical Network 
      S-PE      Switching Provider Edge 
      SRLG      Shared Risk Link Group 
      SM-PW     Multi-Segment PW 
      SS-PW     Signle-Segment PW 
      TDM       Time Division Multiplexing 
      TE         Traffic Engineering 
      tLDP      target LDP 
      TTL       Time-To-Live 
      T-PE      Terminating Provider Edge 
      VPN       Virtual Private Network 
    
    
 
3. Overview of MPLS-TP base functions  
    
   The section provides a summary view of MPLS-TP technology, 
   especially in comparison to the base IP/MPLS technologies. For 
   complete requirements and architecture definitions, please refer to 
   [RFC 5654] and [RFC 5921]. 
    
   3.1. MPLS-TP development principles  
    
   The principles for MPLS-TP development are: meeting transport 
   requirements; maintain transport characteristics; re-using the 
   existing MPLS technologies wherever possible to avoid duplicate the 
   effort; ensuring consistency and inter-operability of MPLS-TP and 
   IP/MPLS networks; developing new tools as necessary to fully meet 
   transport requirements.  
    
    
   MPLS-TP Technologies include four major areas: Data Plane, Control 
   Plane, OAM, and Survivability. The short summary is provided below. 
    
    

     
                                                              [Page 6] 
    
    
   MPLS-TP Use Case and Design Considerations                                    
   Expires December 2012 
    
   3.2. Data Plane 
    
   MPLS-TP re-used MPLS and PW architecture; and MPLS forwarding 
   mechanism;  
    
   MPLS-TP extended the LSP support from unidirectional to both bi-
   directional unidirectional support. 
    
   MPLS-TP defined PHP as optional, disallowed ECMP and MP2MP, only P2P 
   and P2MP are supported. 
    
    
   3.3. Control Plane 
    
   MPLS-TP allowed two control plane options:  
    
   Static: Using NMS for static provisioning;  
   Dynamic control plane for LSP: using GMPLS, OSPF-TE, RSVP-TE for 
   full automation; 
   Dymanic control plane for PW: using tLDP. 
   ACH concept in PW is extended to G-ACh for MPLS-TP LSP to support 
   in-band OAM. 
    
   Both Static and dynamic control plane options must allow control 
   plane, data plane, management plane separation. 
    
    
   3.4. OAM 
    
   OAM received most attention in MPLS-TP development; Many OAM 
   functions require protocol extensions or new development to meet the 
   transport requirements. 
    
   1) Continuity Check (CC), Continuity Verification (CV), and Remote 
   Integrity: 
   - Proactive CC and CV: Extended BFD 
   - On demand CC and CV: Extended LSP Ping 
   - Proactive Remote Integrity: Extended BFD 
   - On demand Remote Integrity: Extended LSP Ping 
    
   2) Fault Management:  
   - Fault Localization: Extended LSP Ping  
   - Alarm Suppression: created AIS  
   - Remote Defect Indication (RDI): Extended BFD 
   - Lock reporting: Created Lock Instruct 
   - Link defect Indication: Created LDI 
   - Static PW defect indication: Use Static PW status 
    
     
                                                              [Page 7] 
    
    
   MPLS-TP Use Case and Design Considerations                                    
   Expires December 2012 
    
   Performance Management:  
   - Loss Management: Create MPLS-TP loss/delay measurement 
   - Delay Measurement: Create MPLS-TP loss/delay measurement 
    
   MPLS-TP OAM tool set overview can be found at [OAM Tool Set]. 
    
   3.5. Survivability 
    
   - Deterministic path protection 
   - Switch over within 50ms 
   - 1:1, 1+1, 1:N protection 
   - Linear protection 
   - Ring protection 
   - Shared Mesh Protection 
    
   MPLS transport Profile Survivability Framework [RFC 6372] provides 
   more details on the subject. 
    
4. MPLS-TP Use Case Studies 
    
    
    
   4.1. Metro Access and Aggregation 
    
   The most common deployment cases observed in the field upto today is 
   using MPLS-TP for Metro access and aggregation. Some SPs are 
   building green field access and aggregation infrastructure, while 
   others are upgrading/replacing the existing transport infrastructure 
   with new packet technologies such as MPLS-TP.  
   The access and aggregation networks today can be based on ATM, TDM, 
   MSTP, or Ethernet technologies as later development. 
    
    
   Some other SPs announced their plans for replacing their ATM or TDM 
   aggregation networks with MPLS-TP technologies, simply because their 
   ATM / TDM aggregation networks are no longer suited to support the 
   rapid bandwidth growth, and they are expensive to maintain or may 
   also be and impossible expand due to End of Sale and End of Life 
   legacy equipments. Operators have to move forward with the next 
   generation packet technology, the adoption of MPLS-TP in access and 
   aggregation becomes a natural choice. The statistical muxing in 
   MPLS-TP helps to achieve higher efficiency comparing with the time 
   division scheme in the legacy technologies.  
    
   The unified MPLS strategy, using MPLS from core to aggregation and 
   access (e.g. IP/MPLS in the core, IP/MPLS or MPLS-TP in aggregation 
   and access) appear to be very attractive to many SPs. It streamlines 
   the operation, many help to reduce the overall complexity and 
     
                                                              [Page 8] 
    
    
   MPLS-TP Use Case and Design Considerations                                    
   Expires December 2012 
    
   improve end-to-end convergence. It leverages the MPLS experience, 
   and enhances the ability to support revenue generating services. 
    
   The current requirements from the SPs for ATM/TDM aggregation 
   replacement often include maintaining the current operational model, 
   with the similar user experience in NMS, supports current access 
   network (e.g. Ethernet, ADSL, ATM, STM, etc.), support the 
   connections with the core networks, support the same operational 
   feasibility even after migrating to MPLS-TP from ATM/TDM and 
   services (OCN, IP-VPN, E-VLAN, Dedicated line, etc.). MPLS-TP 
   currently defined in IETF are meeting these requirements to support 
   a smooth transition. 
    
   The green field network deployment is targeting using the state of 
   art technology to build most stable, scalable, high quality, high 
   efficiency networks to last for the next many years. IP/MPLS and 
   MPLS-TP are both good choices, depending on the operational model.    
    
   4.2. Packet Optical Transport 
    
   Many SP's transport networks consist of both packet and optical 
   portions. The transport operators are typically sensitive to network 
   deployment cost and operation simplicity. MPLS-TP is therefore a 
   natural fit in some of the transport networks, where the operators 
   can utilize the MPLS-TP LSP's (including the ones statically 
   provisioned) to manage user traffic as "circuits" in both packet and 
   optical networks. 
   Among other attributes, bandwidth management, protection/recovery 
   and OAM are critical in Packet/Optical transport networks. In the 
   context of MPLS-TP, each LSP is expected to be associated with a 
   fixed amount of bandwidth in terms of bps and/or time-slots. OAM is 
   to be performed on each individual LSP. For some of performance 
   monitoring (PM) functions, the OAM mechanisms need to be able 
   transmit and process OAM packets at very high frequency, as low as 
   several msec's. 
    
   Protection is another important element in transport networks. 
   Typically, ring and linear protection can be readily applied in 
   metro networks. However, as long-haul networks are sensitive to 
   bandwidth cost and tend to have mesh-like topology, shared mesh 
   protection is becoming increasing important. 
    
   Packet optical deployment plans in some SPs cases are using MPLS-TP 
   from long haul optical packet transport all the way to the 
   aggregation and access. 
    
    
    
     
                                                              [Page 9] 
    
    
   MPLS-TP Use Case and Design Considerations                                    
   Expires December 2012 
    
    
   4.3. Mobile Backhaul 
    
   Wireless communication is one of the fastest growing areas in 
   communication world wide. For some regions, the tremendous rapid 
   mobile growth is fueled with lack of existing land-line and cable 
   infrastructure. For other regions, the introduction of Smart phones 
   quickly drove mobile data traffic to become the primary mobile 
   bandwidth consumer, some SPs have already seen 85% of total mobile 
   traffic are data traffic.  
    
   MPLS-TP has been viewed as a suitable technology for Mobile 
   backhaul. 

   4.3.1. 2G and 3G Mobile Backhaul Support  
    
   MPLS-TP is commonly viewed as a very good fit for 2G)/3G Mobile 
   backhaul.  
    
   2G (GSM/CDMA) and 3G (UMTS/HSPA/1xEVDO) Mobile Backhaul Networks are 
   dominating mobile infrastructure today. 
    
   The connectivity for 2G/3G networks are Point to point. The logical 
   connections are hub-and-spoke. The physical construction of the 
   networks can be star topology or ring topology. In the Radio Access 
   Network (RAN), each mobile base station (BTS/Node B) is 
   communicating with one Radio Controller (BSC/RNC) only. These 
   connections are often statically set up.  
    
   Hierarchical Aggregation Architecture / Centralized Architecture are 
   often used for pre-aggregation and aggregation layers. Each 
   aggregation networks inter-connects with multiple access networks. 
   For example, single aggregation ring could aggregate traffic for 10 
   access rings with total 100 base stations.   
    
   The technology used today is largely ATM based. Mobile providers are 
   replacing the ATM RAN infrastructure with newer packet technologies. 
   IP RAN networks with IP/MPLS technologies are deployed today by many 
   SPs with great success. MPLS-TP is another suitable choice for 
   Mobile RAN. The P2P connection from base station to Radio Controller 
   can be set statically to mimic the operation today in many RAN 
   environments, in-band OAM and deterministic path protection would 
   support the fast failure detection and switch over to satisfy the 
   SLA agreement. Bidirectional LSP may help to simplify the 
   provisioning process. The deterministic nature of MPLS-TP LSP set up 
   can also help packet based synchronization to maintain predictable 
   performance regarding packet delay and jitters. 
     
                                                             [Page 10] 
    
    
   MPLS-TP Use Case and Design Considerations                                    
   Expires December 2012 
    
  4.3.2. LTE Mobile Backhaul 
 
   One key difference between LTE and 2G/3G Mobile networks is that the 
   logical connection in LTE is mesh while 2G/3G is P2P star 
   connections.  
    
   In LTE, the base stations eNB/BTS can communicate with multiple 
   Network controllers (PSW/SGW or ASNGW), and each Radio element can 
   communicate with each other for signal exchange and traffic offload 
   to wireless or Wireline infrastructures. 
    
   IP/MPLS may have a great advantage in any-to-any connectivity 
   environment. The use of mature IP or L3VPN technologies is 
   particularly common in the design of SP's LTE deployment plan. 
    
   MPLS-TP can also bring advantages with the in-band OAM and path 
   protection mechanism. MPLS-TP dynamic control-plane with GMPLS 
   signaling may bring additional advantages in the mesh environment 
   for real time adaptivities, dynamic topology changes, and network 
   optimization.  
    
   Since MPLS-TP is part of the MPLS family. Many component already 
   shared by both IP/MPLS and MPLS-TP, the line can be further blurred 
   by sharing more common features. For example, it is desirable for 
   many SPs to introduce the in-band OAM developed for MPLS-TP back 
   into IP/MPLS networks as an enhanced OAM option. Today's MPLS PW can 
   also be set statically to be deterministic if preferred by the SPs 
   without going through full MPLS-TP deployment. 
    

  4.3.3. WiMAX Backhaul 
   WiMAX Mobile backhaul shares the similar characteristics as LTE, 
   with mesh connections rather than P2P, star logical connections.  
    
    
    
 
5. Network Design Considerations  
    
   5.1. IP/MPLS vs. MPLS-TP 
    
   Questions one might hear: I have just built a new IP/MPLS network to 
   support multi-services, including L2/L3 VPNs, Internet service, 
   IPTV, etc. Now there is new MPLS-TP development in IETF. Do I need 
   to move onto MPLS-TP technology to state current with technologies? 
    

     
                                                             [Page 11] 
    
    
   MPLS-TP Use Case and Design Considerations                                    
   Expires December 2012 
    
   The answer is no. MPLS-TP is developed to meet the needs of 
   traditional transport moving towards packet. It is designed to 
   support the transport behavior coming with the long history. IP/MPLS 
   and MPLS-TP both are state of art technologies. IP/MPLS support both 
   transport (e.g. PW, RSVP-TE, etc.) and services (e.g L2/L3 VPNs, 
   IPTV, Mobile RAN, etc.), MPLS-TP provides transport only. The new 
   enhanced OAM features built in MPLS-TP should be share in both 
   flavors through future implementation.  
    
   Another common question: I need to evolve my ATM/TDM/SONET/SDH 
   networks into new packet technologies, but my operational force is 
   largely legacy transport, not familiar with new data technologies, 
   and I want to maintain the same operational model for the time 
   being, what should I do? The answer would be: MPLS-TP may be the 
   best choice today for the transition. 
    
   A few important factors need to be considered for IP/MPLS or MPLS-TP 
   include: 
    
   - Technology maturity (IP/MPLS is much more mature with 12 years 
   development)  
   - Operation experience (Work force experience, Union agreement, how 
   easy to transition to a new technology? how much does it cost?) 
   - Needs for Multi-service support on the same node (MPLS-TP provide 
   transport only, does not replace many functions of IP/MPLS) 
   - LTE, IPTV/Video distribution considerations (which path is the 
   most viable for reaching the end goal with minimal cost? but it also 
   meet the need of today's support) 
    
   5.2. Standards compliance 
    
   It is generally recognized by SPs that standards compliance are 
   important for driving the cost down and product maturity up, multi-
   vendor interoperability, also important to meet the expectation of 
   the business customers of SP's. 
    
   MPLS-TP is a joint work between IETF and ITU-T. In April 2008, IETF 
   and ITU-T jointly agreed to terminate T-MPLS and progress MPLS-TP as 
   joint work [RFC 5317]. The transport requirements would be provided 
   by ITU-T, the protocols would be developed in IETF.  
    
   Today, majority of the core set of MPLS-TP protocol definitions are 
   published as IETF RFCs already. It is important to deploy the 
   solutions based on the standards definitions, in order to ensure the 
   compatibility between MPLS-TP and IP/MPLS networks, and the 
   interoperability among different equipment by different vendors.  
    

     
                                                             [Page 12] 
    
    
   MPLS-TP Use Case and Design Considerations                                    
   Expires December 2012 
    
   Note that using non-standards, e.g. experimental code point is not 
   recommended practice, it bares the risk of code-point collision, as 
   indicated by [RFC 3692]: It can lead to interoperability problems 
   when the chosen value collides with a different usage, as it someday 
   surely will.  
    
    
   5.3. End-to-end MPLS OAM consistency 
    
   In the case Service Providers deploy end-to-end MPLS solution with 
   the combination of dynamic IP/MPLS and static or dynamic MPLS-TP 
   cross core, service edge, and aggregation/access networks, end-to-
   end MPLS OAM consistency becomes an essential requirements from many 
   Service Provider. The end-to-end MPLS OAM can only be achieved 
   through implementation of IETF MPLS-TP OAM definitions. 
    
    
   5.4. PW Design considerations in MPLS-TP networks 
    
   In general, PW works the same as in IP/MPLS network, both SS-PW and 
   MS-PW are supported.  
    
   For dynamic control plane, tLDP is used. For static provisioning is 
   used, PW status is a new PW OAM feature for failure notification.  
    
   In addition, both directions of a PW must be bound to the same 
   transport bidirectional LSP. 
    
   When multi-tier rings involved in the network topology, should S-PE 
   be used or not? It is a design trade-off. 
    
        . Pros for using S-PE 
             .  Domain isolation, may facilitate trouble shooting 
             .  the PW failure recovery may be quicker  
        .  Cons for using S-PE 
             .  Adds more complexity 
             .  If the operation simplicity is the high priority, some 
               SPs choose not to use S-PE, simply forming longer path 
               across primary and secondary rings. 
    
   Should PW protection for the same end points be considered? It is 
   another design trade-off. 
    
        . Pros for using PW protection 
             .  PW is protected when both working and protect LSPs 
               carrying the working PW fails as long as the protection 
               PW is following a diverse LSP path from the one 
               carrying the working PW.  
     
                                                             [Page 13] 
    
    
   MPLS-TP Use Case and Design Considerations                                    
   Expires December 2012 
    
        . Cons for using PW protection 
             . Adds more complexity, some may choose not to use if 
               protection against single point of failure is 
               sufficient. 
                
    
   5.5. Proactive and event driven MPLS-TP OAM tools 
    
   MPLS-TP provide both proactive tools and event drive OAM Tools.  
    
   E.g. in the proactive fashion, the BFD hellos can be sent every 3.3 
   ms as its lowest interval, 3 missed hellos would be trigger the 
   failure protection switch over. BFD sessions should be configured 
   for both working and protecting LSPs. 
    
   When Unidirectional Failure occurs, RDI will send the failure 
   notification to the opposite direction to trigger both end switch 
   over. 
 
   In the reactive fashion, when there is a fiber cut for example, LDI 
   message would be generated from the failure point and propagate to 
   MEP to trigger immediate switch over from working to protect path. 
   And AIS would propagate from MIP to MEP for alarm suppression. 
    
   Should both proactive and event driven OAM tools be used? The answer 
   is yes. 
    
   Should BFD timers be set as low as possible? It depends on the 
   applications. In many cases, it is not necessary. The lower the 
   times are, the faster the detection time, and also the higher 
   resource utilization. It is good to choose a balance point. 
 
 
 
   5.6. MPLS-TP and IP/MPLS Interworking considerations  
    
   Since IP/MPLS is largely deployment in most networks, MPLS-TP and 
   IP/MPLS interworking is a reality.  
    
   Typically, there is peer model and overlay model. 
    
   The inter-connection can be simply VLAN, or PW, or could be MPLS-TE. 
   A separate document is addressing the in the interworking issues, 
   please refer to the descriptions in [Interworking]. 
    
    
   5.7. Delay and delay variation  
    
     
                                                             [Page 14] 
    
    
   MPLS-TP Use Case and Design Considerations                                    
   Expires December 2012 
    
   Background/motivation: Telecommunication Carriers plan to replace 
   the aging TDM Services (e.g. legacy VPN services) provided by Legacy 
   TDM technologies/equipments to new VPN services provided by MPLS-TP 
   technologies/equipments with minimal cost. The Carriers cannot allow 
   any degradation of service quality, service operation Level, and 
   service availability when migrating out of Legacy TDM 
   technologies/equipments to MPLS-TP transport. The requirements from 
   the customers of these carriers are the same before and after the 
   migration.   
    

  5.7.1. Network Delay 
    
   From our recent observation, more and more Ethernet VPN customers 
   becoming very sensitive to the network delay issues, especially the 
   financial customers. Many of those customers has upgraded their 
   systems in their Data Centers, e.g., their accounting systems.  Some 
   of the customers built the special tuned up networks, i.e. Fiber 
   channel networks, in their Data Centers, this tripped more strict 
   delay requirements to the carriers. 
    
   There are three types of network delay: 
    
   1. Absolute Delay Time 
    
   Absolute Delay Time here is the network delay within SLA contract.  
   It means the customers have already accepted the value of the 
   Absolute Delay Time as part of the contract before the Private Line 
   Service is provisioned. 
    
   2. Variation of Absolute Delay Time (without network configuration 
   changes).  
    
   The variation under discussion here is mainly induced by the 
   buffering in network elements. 
    
   Although there is no description of Variation of Absolute Delay Time 
   on the contract, this has no practical impact on the customers who 
   contract for the highest quality of services available. The 
   bandwidth is guaranteed for those customers' traffic. 
    
   3. Relative Delay Time  
    
   Relative Delay Time is the difference of the Absolute Delay Time 
   between using working and protect path. 
    

     
                                                             [Page 15] 
    
    
   MPLS-TP Use Case and Design Considerations                                    
   Expires December 2012 
    
   Ideally, Carriers would prefer the Relative Delay Time to be zero, 
   for the following technical reasons and network operation 
   feasibility concerns.  
    
   The following are the three technical reasons:  
    
   Legacy throughput issue 
    
   In the case that Relative Delay Time is increased between FC 
   networks or TCP networks, the effective throughput is degraded.  The 
   effective throughput, though it may be recovered after revert back 
   to the original working path in revertive mode.   
    
   On the other hand, in that case that Relative Delay Time is 
   decreased between FC networks or TCP networks, buffering over flow 
   may occur at receiving end due to receiving large number of busty 
   packets.  As a consequence, effective throughput is degraded as 
   well.  Moreover, if packet reordering is occurred due to RTT 
   decrease, unnecessary packet resending is induced and effective 
   throughput is also further degraded.  Therefore, management of 
   Relative Delay Time is preferred, although this is known as the 
   legacy TCP throughput issue. 
    
   Locating Network Acceralators at CE 
    
   In order to improve effective throughput between customer's FC 
   networks over Ethernet private line service, some customer put "WAN 
   Accelerator" to increase throughput value.  For example, some WAN 
   Accelerators at receiving side may automatically send back "R_RDY" 
   in order to avoid decreasing a number of BBcredit at sending side, 
   and the other WAN Accelerators at sending side may have huge number 
   of initial BB credit. 
    
   When customer tunes up their CE by locating WAN Accelerator, for 
   example, when Relative Delay Time is changes, there is a possibility 
   that effective throughput is degraded.  This is because a lot of 
   packet destruction may be occurred due to loss of synchronization, 
   when change of Relative delay time induces packet reordering.  And, 
   it is difficult to re-tune up their CE network element automatically 
   when Relative Delay Time is changed, because only less than 50 ms 
   network down detected at CE. 
    
   Depending on the tuning up method, since Relative Delay Time affects 
   effective throughput between customer's FC networks, management of 
   Relative Delay Time is preferred. 
    
   c) Use of synchronized replication system 
    
     
                                                             [Page 16] 
    
    
   MPLS-TP Use Case and Design Considerations                                    
   Expires December 2012 
    
   Some strict customers, e.g. financial customers, implement 
   "synchronized replication system" for all data back-up and load 
   sharing.  Due to synchronized replication system, next data 
   processing is conducted only after finishing the data saving to both 
   primary and replication DC storage.  And some tuning function could 
   be applied at Server Network to increase throughput to the 
   replication DC and Client Network. Since Relative Delay Time affects 
   effective throughput, management of Relative Delay Time is 
   preferred. 
    
   The following are the network operational feasibility issues. 
    
   Some strict customers, e.g., financial customer, continuously 
   checked the private line connectivity and absolute delay time at 
   CEs.  When the absolute delay time is changed, that is Relative 
   delay time is increased or decreased, the customer would complain. 
    
   From network operational point of view, carrier want to minimize the 
   number of customers complains, MPLS-TP LSP provisioning with zero 
   Relative delay time is preferred and management of Relative Delay 
   Time is preferred. 
    
   Obviously, when the Relative Delay Time is increased, the customer 
   would complain about the longer delay. When the Relative Delay Time 
   is decreased, the customer expects to keep the lesser Absolute Delay 
   Time condition and would complain why Carrier did not provide the 
   best solution in the first place. Therefore, MPLS-TP LSP 
   provisioning with zero Relative Delay Time is preferred and 
   management of Relative Delay Time is preferred. 
    
   More discussion will be added on how to manage the Relative delay 
   time. 
    
    
    
   5.8. More on MPLS-TP Deployment Considerations 
    

   5.8.1. Network Modes Selection 
    
   When considering deployment of MPLS-TP in the network, possibly 
   couple of questions will come into mind, for example, where should 
   the MPLS-TP be deployed? (e.g., access, aggregation or core 
   network?) Should IP/MPLS be deployed with MPLS-TP simultaneously? If 
   MPLS-TP and IP/MPLS is deployed in the same network, what is the 
   relationship between MPLS-TP and IP/MPLS (e.g., peer or overlay?) 
   and where is the demarcation between MPLS-TP domain and IP/MPLS 
     
                                                             [Page 17] 
    
    
   MPLS-TP Use Case and Design Considerations                                    
   Expires December 2012 
    
   domain? The results for these questions depend on the real 
   requirements on how MPLS-TP and IP/MPLS are used to provide 
   services. For different services, there could be different choice.  
   According to the combination of MPLS-TP and IP/MPLS, here are some 
   typical network modes: 
    
   Pure MPLS-TP as the transport connectivity (E2E MPLS-TP), this 
   situation more happens when the network is a totally new constructed 
   network. For example, a new constructed packet transport network for 
   Mobile Backhaul, or migration from ATM/TDM transport network to 
   packet based transport network. 
    
   Pure IP/MPLS as transport connectivity (E2E IP/MPLS), this is the 
   current practice for many deployed networks. 
   MPLS-TP combines with IP/MPLS as the transport connectivity (Hybrid 
   mode). 
   
   Peer mode: some domains adopt MPLS-TP as the transport connectivity; 
   other domains adopt IP/MPLS as the transport connectivity. MPLS-TP 
   domains and IP/MPLS domains are interconnected to provide transport 
   connectivity. Considering there are a lot of IP/MPLS deployments in 
   the field, this mode may be the normal practice in the early stage 
   of MPLS-TP deployment.  
   
   Overlay mode:
   b-1: MPLS-TP as client of IP/MPLS, this is for the case where MPLS-
   TP domains are distributed and IP/MPLS do-main/network is used for 
   the connection of the distributed MPLS-TP domains. For examples, 
   there are some service providers who have no their own Backhaul 
   network, they have to rent the Backhaul network that is IP/MPLS 
   based from other service providers. 
    
   b-2: IP/MPLS as client of MPLS-TP, this is for the case where 
   transport network below the IP/MPLS network is a MPLS-TP based 
   network, the MPLS-TP network provides transport connectivity for the 
   IP/MPLS routers, the usage is analogous as today's ATM/TDM/SDH based 
   transport network that are used for providing connectivity for 
   IP/MPLS routers.  
    

   5.8.2. Provisioning Modes Selection 

   As stated in MPLS-TP requirements [RFC 5654], MPLS-TP network MUST 
   be possible to work without using Control Plane. And this does not 
   mean that MPLS-TP network has no control plane. Instead, operators 
   could deploy their MPLS-TP with static provisioning (e.g., CLI, NMS 
   etc.), dynamic control plane signaling (e.g., OSPF-TE/ISIS-TE, 
   GMPLS, LDP, RSVP-TE etc.), or combination of static and dynamic 
   provisioning (Hybrid mode). Each mode has its own pros and cons and 
   how to determine the right mode for a specific network mainly 
     
                                                             [Page 18] 
    
    
   MPLS-TP Use Case and Design Considerations                                    
   Expires December 2012 
    
   depends on the operators' preference. For the operators who are used 
   to operate traditional transport network and familiar with the 
   Transport-Centric operational model (e.g., NMS configuration without 
   control plane) may prefer static provisioning mode. The dynamic 
   provisioning mode is more suitable for the operators who are 
   familiar with the operation and maintenance of IP/MPLS network where 
   a fully dynamic control plane is used. The hybrid mode may be used 
   when parts of the network are provisioned with static way and the 
   other parts are controlled by dynamic signaling. For example, for 
   big SP, the network is operated and maintained by several different 
   departments who prefer to different modes, thus they could adopt 
   this hybrid mode to support both static and dynamic modes hence to 
   satisfy different requirements. Another example is that static 
   provisioning mode is suitable for some parts of the network and 
   dynamic provisioning mode is suitable for other parts of the 
   networks (e.g., static for access network, dynamic for metro 
   aggregate and core network).       
    
6. Security Considerations 
    
   General security considerations for MPLS and GMPLS networks are 
   addressed in Security Framework for MPLS and GMPLS Networks[RFC 5920]. 
   General MPLS-TP security considerations are described in MPLS-TP 
   Security Framework [MPLS-TP Sec FW]. No new security issues in this
   document.    
    
7. IANA Considerations 
    
   This document contains no new IANA considerations. 
   
8. Normative References 
    
   [RFC 5317]: Joint Working Team (JWT) Report on MPLS Architectural 
   Considerations for a Transport Profile, Feb. 2009.  
    
   [RFC 5654], Niven-Jenkins, B., et al, "MPLS-TP Requirements," RFC 
   5654, September 2009.    

9. Informative References 
   [RFC 2119] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate                    
   Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997. 
    
   [RFC 3692] T. Narten, "Assigning Experimental and Testing Numbers 
   Considered Useful", RFC 3692, Jan. 2004. 
    
   [RFC 5921] Bocci, M., ED.,  Bryant, S., ED., et al., Frost, D. ED.,  
   Levrau, L., Berger., L., "A Framework for MPLS in Transport," July 
   2010. 
     
                                                             [Page 19] 
    
    
   MPLS-TP Use Case and Design Considerations                                    
   Expires December 2012 
    
    
   [RFC 5920] Fang, L., ED., et al, "Security Framework for MPLS and 
   GMPLS Networks," July 2010. 
    
   [RFC 6372] Sprecher, N., Ferrel, A., MPLS transport Profile 
   Survivability Framework [RFC 6372], September 2011. 
    
   [OAM Tool Set] Sprecher, N., Fang, L., "An Overview of the OAM Tool 
   Set for MPLS Based Transport Networks,", draft-ietf-mpls-to-oam-
   analysis-09.txt, April 2012, work in progress.  
    
   [Interworking] Martinotti, R., et al., "Interworking between MPLS-TP 
   and IP/MPLS," draft-martinotti-mpls-tp-interworking-02.txt, June 
   2011.  
  
   [MPLS-TP Sec FW] Fang, L. ED., et al., "MPLS-TP Security Framework," 
   draft-ietf-mpls-tp-security-framework-03.txt, March 2012.
    
    
10.     Author's Addresses 
    
   Luyuan Fang 
   Cisco Systems, Inc. 
   111 Wood Ave. South 
   Iselin, NJ 08830 
   USA 
   Email: lufang@cisco.com    
                                                                        
   Nabil Bitar 
   Verizon 
   40 Sylvan Road 
   Waltham, MA 02145 
   USA 
   Email: nabil.bitar@verizon.com 
    
   Raymond Zhang 
   Alcatel-Lucent  
   701 Middlefield Road 
   Mountain View, CA 94043 
   Email: raymond.zhang@alcatel-lucent.com
    
   Masahiro DAIKOKU 
   KDDI corporation 
   3-11-11.Iidabashi, Chiyodaku, Tokyo 
   Japan 
   Email: ms-daikoku@kddi.com 
    
     
                                                             [Page 20] 
    
    
   MPLS-TP Use Case and Design Considerations                                    
   Expires December 2012 
    
   Kam Lee Yap 
   XO Communications 
   13865 Sunrise Valley Drive, 
   Herndon, VA 20171 
   Email: klyap@xo.com 
    
   Dan Frost 
   Cisco Systems, Inc. 
   Email:danfrost@cisco.com 
    
   Henry Yu 
   TW Telecom 
   10475 Park Meadow Dr. 
   Littleton, CO 80124 
   Email: henry.yu@twtelecom.com 
    
   Jian Ping Zhang   China Telecom, Shanghai    
   Room 3402, 211 Shi Ji Da Dao 
   Pu Dong District, Shanghai 
   China   Email: zhangjp@shtel.com.cn 
    
   Lei Wang 
   Telenor  
   Telenor Norway 
   Office Snaroyveien 
   1331 Fornedbu 
   Email: Lai.wang@telenor.com 
    
   Mach(Guoyi) Chen 
   Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd. 
   No. 3 Xinxi Road 
   Shangdi Information Industry Base 
   Hai-Dian District, Beijing 100085 
   China 
   Email: mach@huawei.com 
    
   Nurit Sprecher  
   Nokia Siemens Networks 
   3 Hanagar St. Neve Ne'eman B 
   Hod Hasharon, 45241 
   Israel 
   Email: nurit.sprecher@nsn.com 
 





     
                                                             [Page 21] 
    
