
A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3056

        Title:      Connection of IPv6 Domains via IPv4 Clouds 
        Author(s):  B. Carpenter, K. Moore
        Status:     Standards Track
        Date:       February 2001
        Mailbox:    brian@icair.org, moore@cs.utk.edu
        Pages:      23
        Characters: 54902
        Updates/Obsoletes/SeeAlso:  None

        I-D Tag:    draft-ietf-ngtrans-6to4-07.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3056.txt


This memo specifies an optional interim mechanism for IPv6 sites to
communicate with each other over the IPv4 network without explicit
tunnel setup, and for them to communicate with native IPv6 domains
via relay routers.  Effectively it treats the wide area IPv4 network
as a unicast point-to-point link layer.  The mechanism is intended as
a start-up transition tool used during the period of co-existence of
IPv4 and IPv6.  It is not intended as a permanent solution.
 
The document defines a method for assigning an interim unique IPv6
address prefix to any site that currently has at least one globally
unique IPv4 address, and specifies an encapsulation mechanism for
transmitting IPv6 packets using such a prefix over the global IPv4
network.
 
The motivation for this method is to allow isolated IPv6 domains or
hosts, attached to an IPv4 network which has no native IPv6 support,
to communicate with other such IPv6 domains or hosts with minimal
manual configuration, before they can obtain natuve IPv6
connectivity.  It incidentally provides an interim globally unique
IPv6 address prefix to any site with at least one globally unique
IPv4 address, even if combined with an IPv4 Network Address
Translator (NAT).

This document is a product of the Next Generation Transition Working
Group of the IETF.

This is now a Proposed Standard Protocol.

This document specifies an Internet standards track protocol for
the Internet community, and requests discussion and suggestions
for improvements.  Please refer to the current edition of the
"Internet Official Protocol Standards" (STD 1) for the
standardization state and status of this protocol.  Distribution
of this memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.

