
A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3053

        Title:      IPv6 Tunnel Broker
        Author(s):  A. Durand, P. Fasano, I. Guardini, D. Lento
        Status:     Informational
        Date:       January 2001
        Mailbox:    Alain.Durand@sun.com, paolo.fasano@cselt.it,
                    ivano.guardini@cselt.it, dlento@mail.tim.it
        Pages:      13
        Characters: 27336
        Updates/Obsoletes/SeeAlso:  None

        I-D Tag:    draft-ietf-ngtrans-broker-06.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3053.txt


The IPv6 global Internet as of today uses a lot of tunnels over
the existing IPv4 infrastructure.  Those tunnels are difficult to
configure and maintain in a large scale environment.  The 6bone has
proven that large sites and Internet Service Providers (ISPs) can do
it, but this process is too complex for the isolated end user who
already has an IPv4 connection and would like to enter the IPv6
world.  The motivation for the development of the tunnel broker model
is to help early IPv6 adopters to hook up to an existing IPv6 network
(e.g., the 6bone) and to get stable, permanent IPv6 addresses and DNS
names.  The concept of the tunnel broker was first presented at
Orlando's IETF in December 1998.  Two implementations were
demonstrated during the Grenoble IPng & NGtrans interim meeting in
February 1999.

This memo provides information for the Internet community.  It does
not specify an Internet standard of any kind.  Distribution of this
memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.

