 



INTERNET-DRAFT                                                  R. Huang
Intended Status: Standards Track                                  Huawei
Expires: December 30, 2013                                 June 28, 2013


   Use Case for Large Scale Measurements Used in Data Collection of 
                      Network Management Systems 
              draft-huang-lmap-data-collection-use-case-00


Abstract

   This document augments the use cases of large scale measurement of
   broadband performance (LMAP). It discusses measurements for a common
   platform which works for different usages including troubleshooting,
   performance understanding, quality evaluation and network adjusting. 

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as
   Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html


Copyright and License Notice

   Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors. All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document. Please review these documents
 


<Author>               Expires December 30, 2013                [Page 1]

INTERNET DRAFT              <Document Title>               June 28, 2013


   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document. Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.



Table of Contents

   1  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   3  Use Case for Data Collection of ISP Network Management 
      Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   3  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   4  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   5  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     5.1  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     5.2 Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6




























 


<Author>               Expires December 30, 2013                [Page 2]

INTERNET DRAFT              <Document Title>               June 28, 2013


1  Introduction

   To support new services in network and provide better service
   quality, ISPs have to reconstruct or update their network constantly,
   which makes the network more and more complex and irregular. ISPs
   eager to have a comprehensive network management system to make the
   complex network in control to achieve real-time network performance
   acquisition, rapidly and accurately diagnose network fault with low
   cost, and SLAs of users satisfaction. Traditional network management
   systems consist of many different measurement panels, some of which
   are measurements in isolated network probes to report serious faults
   and some of which are measurements initiated by end users or
   dedicated network devices to locate the problem happening in their
   service paths or to calculate their performance of subscribed
   services. However, running network is always invisible to either
   operators or users. Through these measurements, traditional network
   management system could only interpret some scattered and fragmentary
   periods and paths while can't draw the whole running network picture
   for operators. It is also hard for them to deal with some difficult
   and complicated faults, such as sudden transient performance decrease
   which won't trigger any alarms.

   This document introduces a new use case supplementing the use cases
   described in [LMAP-USECASE]. It discusses measurements for a common
   platform which works for different usages including troubleshooting,
   performance understanding, quality evaluation and network adjusting. 

2  Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].


3  Use Case for Data Collection of ISP Network Management Systems

   Network data collection is essential for effective network
   management. Precise data collection and reasonable data analysis and
   processing could provide necessary information for network
   performance management, fault management and quality of service
   monitoring. Lmap could be used in network data collection of network
   management system as a universal method to sufficiently manage data
   collecting activities. Rather, lmap could be implemented in an
   intelligent network management platform to obtain accurate sample
   data for creating visualized simulation network which simulates the
   real one. By doing this, the intelligent visualized platform could
   draw a whole running network picture for ISPs and provide the better
   capability for troubleshooting, monitoring performance, and even
 


<Author>               Expires December 30, 2013                [Page 3]

INTERNET DRAFT              <Document Title>               June 28, 2013


   network planning instead of doing all kinds of measurements in the
   real networks.

   This intelligent network management platform using lmap constantly
   collects traffic information and device states, e.g. queue
   information, from the network, analyses them, and creates some
   sampled snapshots of the real network. By some simulation algorithms,
   these sampled snapshots could form a simulation network which
   simulates the real network accurately if sufficient information is
   retrieved. Usages, such as troubleshooting and quality monitoring,
   could run on the simulation network instead of using extra probes and
   measurement in the real network. For example, to learn what happened
   at a certain past time, ISPs could simply use the sampled snapshots
   of that time to infer the whole network curve of that past specific
   period. By further investigating, this intelligent platform could
   easily provide the ability to find the failure reason or discover the
   pattern of some complicated faults, e.g., one specific router has
   overflowed queues, which causes network congests.

   In this case, MAs are network devices constituting the whole network.
   Only passive measurements are needed since MAs just monitor the
   device states, network status and traffic information. No extra
   payload will be added to the existing network. Network-specific
   parameters are enough for this usage. Service-specific parameters
   will only be required in the simulation network, which is not in the
   scope of LMAP. This use case must consider and alleviate the
   performance issues caused by sample frequency and heavy measurement
   results reporting. As we know that the higher the sample frequency
   is, the closer the sampled network curve is to real network curve.
   But too frequent sample times will increase the burden of MAs and
   exhaust the resources of network devices. To solve this problem, some
   mechanisms, for example, using lower sample frequency when data vary
   gently while increasing sample frequency when network data change
   dramatically, should be considered to adjust data collection
   frequency. Another concern is the MA implementation in the network.
   The "ideal" situation is MA in each device (e.g. routers, switches)
   of the network ISP wishes to manage. However it is not feasible
   because we could envision heavy measurement report traffic disrupting
   the normal network traffic in large scale case. So only those network
   nodes arranged in a crisscross pattern and those important network
   devices to ISPs should be considered.

   Due to the high requirements of precise data collection and large
   scale environment, traditional protocols like SNMP are insufficient
   to do this kind of work in such huge and continuously expanding
   networks because of their constraints, e.g., producing plenty of
   management data which may causes serious traffic congestions, and
   incoordination among different network devices from different
 


<Author>               Expires December 30, 2013                [Page 4]

INTERNET DRAFT              <Document Title>               June 28, 2013


   vendors.

   Normally, usages in other use cases described in [LMAP-USECASE] are
   designed with some corresponding specific measurements. For example,
   measurements for identifying network problems, or measurements for
   evaluation the quality experienced by end users, etc. While different
   from other use cases, lmap used in this case is not dedicated for
   certain services, usages or end users. Instead, it is used to create
   a common and universal network management platform for all kinds of
   usages required by ISPs, including troubleshooting, performance
   evaluation, and other functions.

   The characteristics of large scale measurements emerging from this
   use case:

      1. Passive measurements are needed while active ones aren't.

      2. Network device states are also required as well as specific
      network performance parameters. Metrics of upper layer 3 are not.

      3. The data collection frequency of passive measurements could be
      adjusted adaptively.

      4. Results from the tests should not be averaged.

      5. Regular scheduled tests are necessary.






















 


<Author>               Expires December 30, 2013                [Page 5]

INTERNET DRAFT              <Document Title>               June 28, 2013


3  Security Considerations

      TBD

4  IANA Considerations

      TBD


5  References

5.1  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [LMAP-USECASE] Linsner, M., "Large-Scale Broadband Measurement Use
              Cases", draft-linsner-lmap-user-cases-02, February, 2013

5.2 Informative References

   [LMAP-REQ] Schulzrinne, H., "Large-Scale Broadband Performance:  Use
              Cases, Architecture and Protocol Requirements", draft-
              schulzrinne-lmap-requirements, September, 2012



Authors' Addresses


   Rachel Huang
   Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd.
   101 Software, Yuhua District
   Nanjing, Jiangsu, 210012 P.R.China

   EMail: rachel.huang@huawei.com















<Author>               Expires December 30, 2013                [Page 6]
