


rpsec Working Group                                             J. Huang
Internet-Draft                                      Southeast University
Intended status: Informational                           August 25, 2011
Expires: February 26, 2012


  Security Routing Service based on Public Key for Low-Power Wireless
                                Networks
                    draft-huang-routing-security-00

Abstract

   This memo specifies a security protocol based on public key matrix
   for Internet of Things.  All public keys MUST be generated by only
   one public key seed and the corresponding private key MUST be secret
   information for adversary.  Each node can indirectly authenticate the
   identity of other nodes without digital signature.  This protocol is
   REQUESTED Public/Private Key Pre-distribution service, Initial
   Session Key Establishment service, Session Key Update service and
   Data Encryption Service.

Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on February 26, 2012.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.



Huang                   Expires February 26, 2012               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                    SRSPk                      August 2011


   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Design Goals  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   3.  The Complete Service  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
     3.1.  Public/Private Key Pre-distribution . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
     3.2.  Initial Session Key Establishment . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
     3.3.  Session Key Update  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
     3.4.  Data Encryption Service . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   4.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   5.  Communication Overhead Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   6.  Storage Overhead Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   7.  Connectivity Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   8.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
     8.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
     8.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8























Huang                   Expires February 26, 2012               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                    SRSPk                      August 2011


1.  Introduction

   Low-power wireless networks are composed of a large number of tiny,
   low cost devices that conform to the IEEE 802.15.4 standard by the
   IEEE [IEEE802.15.4] .  These devices are characterized by short
   range, low bit rate, low power.  Their computational capabilities,
   memory and energy will be limited.  In RFC 3775, RFC 4919 and RFC
   5673, IPv6 routing protocol is perceived as a key technology to
   provide the scalability and interoperability[RFC3775]
   [RFC4919][RFC5673], but the protocol need to consume much more energy
   during exchanging data between devices.  Therefore it shortens the
   lifetime of the low-power networks.  The AODV routing protocol is
   intended to use for mobile devices in an ad hoc network [RFC3561],
   but it does not consider the low-power of mobile device and security.


2.  Design Goals

   This profile is intended to provide a range of functional
   capabilities for security routing of low-power wireless networks.
   The most complete services should use the public/private key and
   symmetric key to distribute session keys among all devices, and then
   use session keys encrypt exchanged messages among devices.  The basic
   mechanism may be used when all public/private keys are offline
   generated and assigned to each device at an administrative entity.
   The main goals of this profile are outlined below:

   (1) Network resilience.  It refers to the capability against physical
   capture, that is, low-power wireless networks cannot be compromised
   by physical attack, or the compromised devices cannot compromise
   other non-captured devices.  This memo provides a method for the
   latter.

   (2) Scalability.  Low-power wireless networks are dynamic networks.
   This profile can support adding fresh devices to extend the network
   size and evicting compromised devices without significant overheads.

   (3) Low resource consumption.  This protocol will cost extra memory
   and computational capability.  When a security scheme is designed,
   low memory overhead, and computational complexity are required.

   (4) Low energy consumption.  The energy computation for the security
   mechanism of low-power networks MUST be kept to a minimum.  In this
   network, the largest energy consumer is radio transmission.
   Therefore, this protocol requires the communication overhead between
   devices MUST be minimum as possible as it can.





Huang                   Expires February 26, 2012               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                    SRSPk                      August 2011


3.  The Complete Service

3.1.  Public/Private Key Pre-distribution

   All public/private keys are offline generated and offline assigned to
   each devices at an enclosed entity.  The entity can randomly generate
   a public key seed and a pair-wise public/private key for itself at
   first.  And then the public seed is used to construct an initial
   public key set by one-way hash function.  The first public key is
   generated by the public seed, and next public key is generated by the
   last public key.  Next, the entity computes all public key used in
   the low-power wireless networks by one-way hash function and the
   initial public key set to construct a public key matrix, that is,
   every element of the initial public key set can generate a row of
   elements of the public key matrix.  Then the entity computes the
   corresponding private keys of the public key matrix.

   Last, the entity offline randomly distributes different elements from
   the public/private matrix to differently devices.  In this phase, it
   is unnecessary for entity to use its private key to sign public keys
   of the devices in this protocol, which has two following reasons: (a)
   the procedure above is offline executed at an enclosed entity and the
   entity is security.  An intruder cannot compromise this secret
   information; (b) all public keys are generated by a public key seed
   and all private keys are unable to be derived from these public keys
   and cryptographic algorithm.

3.2.  Initial Session Key Establishment

   The pairwise public/private key is used to verify the identity of the
   devices in the low-power wireless networks.  In order to protect the
   confidentiality of transmitted data between devices, session keys are
   established and different communication links uses different session
   keys.  Each device only establishes a session key with its one-hop-
   neighbor.  The session key establishment procedure is describes
   below:

   (1) A sender device first chooses symmetric key.  And then it
   broadcasts its identity number to its one-hop-neighbors.

   (2) Its one-hop-neighbor receives the device's identity.  It first
   estimates the position of the sender device's public key in the
   public key matrix and then computers the public key of the device.
   After that, it sends a decrypted message by the public key of the
   sender device, not only including its identity number and one
   symmetric key to the device.

   (3) The sender device decrypts and receives the symmetric key.  After



Huang                   Expires February 26, 2012               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                    SRSPk                      August 2011


   that, it computes the session key between the two devices by XOR two
   symmetric keys.  Then, sends a encrypted message by receiver device's
   public key, not only including a symmetric key.

   (4) The receiver device decrypts and receives the symmetric key.
   Then it computes the session key between two devices by XOR two
   symmetric keys.

   Each device establishes a unique secure communication link with its
   one-hop-neighbors and any of two devices are able to authenticate
   their identities each other without digital signature.  The protocol
   is secure against a man-in-the-middle attack.  Suppose that two
   devices wish to establish a secure communication link.  Although an
   intruder can intercept and tamper the exchanged message between two
   devices, it cannot generate a correctly private key belonging to the
   public key matrix.  Therefore, the intruder is not able to compute
   the correctly session key between the two devices.

   If a new device is added in the low-power wireless networks, the
   procedures of the session key establishment between the new device
   and its one-hop-neighbor is similar to that of the session key
   establishment.

3.3.  Session Key Update

   The session key is a provisional key in this protocol, and therefore,
   the key must be periodically updated.  A new session key is
   established by the previous session key.  In other words, each device
   sends a message authentication code (MAC) using the previous session
   key to the other device.  The session key update produce is described
   as follow:

   (1) When a sender device wants to establish a new session key with a
   receiver device, the former computes MAC by their session key, not
   only including its identity number.  And then it sends the MAC to the
   receiver device.

   (2) The receiver device verifies the integrality of the message.  If
   the verification is right, the two devices update session key.
   Otherwise, the receivers reject the message and send the request
   message again.

3.4.  Data Encryption Service

   After the session key is established between any of two devices, they
   can exchange secret messages each other.  The delivery information is
   as follow:




Huang                   Expires February 26, 2012               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                    SRSPk                      August 2011


   (1) If sender device wants to transmit an encrypted message to a
   receiver device.  The sender computes the encrypted message of
   plaintext by their session key and generates a message authentication
   code.

   (2) The receiver device verifies the integrity and freshness of the
   encrypted message.  If the verification is right, the receiver will
   receive the message.  Otherwise, the receivers reject the message.
   At last, receiver decrypts the message to receive the plaintext.


4.  Security Considerations

   In this protocol, the security performance MUST be analysized, but
   the likelihood of non-captured devices compromised by captured ones
   is only considered.  In the public/private key pre-distribution
   service, the enclosed entity generates the public/private matrix and
   offline assigns them to all devices in the low-power wireless
   networks.  And in session key establishment service, the sender
   device verifies the identity of the receiver device without digital
   signature, since private keys are unable to be derived from these
   public keys and cryptographic algorithm.  An intruder node can be
   verified through disguising as valid device.  The communication link
   between the intruder and its valid neighbors can be established.  But
   the captured node cannot compromise other non-captured sensors and
   their communication links because different communication links has
   different pairwise public/private keys.  In data encryption service,
   transmitted data confidentiality and devices' identity are ensured by
   a shared session key between two devices.  In order to prevent the
   shared session key from attack, it MUST be periodically updated in
   session key update service.  This profile provides the message
   integrity by encrypted message and MAC.


5.  Communication Overhead Considerations

   In the low-power wireless networks, the largest energy consumer is
   the radio transmission that consumes much more energies than other
   process in devices.  But in order to improve network security, the
   communication overhead between devices must increase.  Therefore, the
   strength of security mechanism is REQUIRED a tradeoff with its
   communication overhead.  RFC 4944 describes the frame format for
   transmission of IPv6 packets and the method of forming IPv6 link-
   local addresses [RFC4944].  However, the packet head length is too
   long to transmit in the low-power wireless networks.

   In this profile, each device establishes a shared session keys with
   its one-hop neighbors and all devices can verify their identities



Huang                   Expires February 26, 2012               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                    SRSPk                      August 2011


   each other without digital signature.


6.  Storage Overhead Considerations

   In this profile, each device is required very low cost, so the
   storage capability of each device MUST be severely limited.


7.   Connectivity Considerations

   In this profile, network connectivity is one of significant problems.
   If any of two devices can share a session key, the low-power wireless
   networks can implement perfect connectivity.  If the low-power
   wireless networks cannot realize perfectly network connectivity, this
   profile MUST assure that the network connected probability exceeds
   0.99999.


8.  References

8.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC3561]  Perkins, C., Belding-Royer, E., and S. Das, "Ad hoc On-
              Demand Distance Vector (AODV) Routing", RFC 3561,
              July 2003.

   [RFC3775]  Johnson, D., Perkins, C., and J. Arkko, "Mobility Support
              in IPv6", RFC 3775, June 2004.

   [RFC4919]  Kushalnagar, N., Montenegro, G., and C. Schumacher, "IPv6
              over Low-Power Wireless Personal Area Networks (6LoWPANs):
              Overview, Assumptions, Problem Statement, and Goals",
              RFC 4919, August 2007.

   [RFC4944]  Montenegro, G., Kushalnagar, N., Hui, J., and D. Culler,
              "Transmission of IPv6 Packets over IEEE 802.15.4
              Networks", RFC 4944, September 2007.

   [RFC5673]  Pister, K., Thubert, P., Dwars, S., and T. Phinney,
              "Industrial Routing Requirements in Low-Power and Lossy
              Networks", RFC 5673, October 2009.






Huang                   Expires February 26, 2012               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                    SRSPk                      August 2011


8.2.  Informative References

   [IEEE802.15.4]
              "Telecommunications and Information Exchange between
              Systems -- Local and Metropolitan Area Networks - Specific
              requirements Part 15.4: Wireless Medium Access Control
              (MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) Specifications for Low-Rate
              Wireless Personal Area Networks (WPANS)", 2006.


Author's Address

   Jie Huang
   Southeast University
   No.2, Si Pailou, School of Information Science and Engineering
   Nan Jing, Jiang Su Province  210096
   RPC China

   Phone: +86 25 83795822-803
   Email: jhuang@seu.edu.cn































Huang                   Expires February 26, 2012               [Page 8]

