




Network Working Group                                    Manqing Huang
Internet Draft                                        Exar Corporation
Intended status: Informational                       February 26, 2010
Expires: September 2010
                                                              
                                                                  

                  TCP Extended Acknowledgment Options
                   draft-huang-tsvwg-tcp-eack-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with 
   the provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79. 

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents 
   at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as 
   reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 28, 2010.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the 
   document authors. All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the BSD License. 




Huang                  Expires September 28, 2010               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft    TCP Extended Acknowledgment Options      February 2010


Abstract

   TCP may experience asymmetric bi-directional performance and poor 
   over all performance when acknowledgments (ACKs) are sent by 
   separate packets instead of being piggybacked by data packets.  
   Between two TCP end points, when two-way traffic flows do not share 
   the same TCP connection, the increase of traffic volume in one 
   direction consumes more bandwidth in the reverse direction by 
   generating more separate ACK packets, potentially causing more 
   congestions in the reverse direction.

   An Extended Acknowledgment (EACK) mechanism can help overcome these
   limitations.  The receiving TCP sends back EACK packets to the sender
   informing the sender of data, including data of the current TCP 
   connection and data of other eligible connections, that have been
   received.  EACK thus reduces the need for separate ACK packets and
   improves the bi-directional symmetry and over all throughput.

   This memo proposes an implementation of EACK and discusses its 
   related issues.

Acknowledgements

   Some of the text in this document is taken directly from RFC 2018 
   "TCP Selective Acknowledgement Options" by Mathis, et. al [Mat96].  
   The authors would like to thank Jiebing Wang for his review and
   constructive comments.


1.  Introduction

   TCP uses the piggyback ACK machanism to reduce the overhead of the
   TCP ACK transmissions.  This machanism is effective if the TCP 
   connection carries bi-directional traffic.  When multiple onnections 
   are established and each carries one-way traffic, even if the over 
   all traffic is bi-directional, a TCP receiver can not piggyback ACKs 
   on any data packets but have to generate separate ACK packets.  With 
   the delayed ACK algorithm [Bra89], a TCP receiver still SHOULD 
   generate an ACK packet for at least every second full-sized segment
   [All99].  Generating separate ACK packets potentially has two 
   performance issues.

   The first issue is the unstablility of the TCP performance.  For the 
   ease of discussion, a specific case is considered with the following 
   assumptions:
     - A and B are two TCP hosts;
     - A sends data to B on a connection while B sends data to A on 
       another connection;



Huang                  Expires September 28, 2010               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft    TCP Extended Acknowledgment Options      February 2010


     - both A and B always have full-sized segments ready for send; and 
     - the available bandwidth is symmetric for the two directions.  

   The unstability cycle starts at the point A and B are sending data 
   traffic at the same rate, and the ACK packets to data packets ratio
   is already the lowest at 1:2.  Some time later, however, there is an 
   increase of data traffic volume in A->B direction.  The increase of 
   A->B data traffic requires more separate ACK packets in B->A     
   direction, thus consumes more bandwidth and creates more congestions 
   in B->A direction.  If congestions result in packet drop in the B->A 
   direction, more data packets than ACK pacekts are dropped. The loss 
   of an ACK packet generally has less impact on the TCP throughput   
   because the next ACK is likely to cover the previous ACK, however, 
   each loss of data packet will result in a reduction of slow start 
   threshold and congestion window [All99].  The combined result is a 
   positive feedback that keeps exaggerating the asymmetric behavior 
   until other limiting factors kick in.
   
   The second issue is the reduced total TCP throughput.  The separate 
   ACK packets certainly create an overhead for the TCP transmission. 
   This overhead is magnifized when IP payload compression (IPcomp) is 
   applied.  Using IPcomp, because data packets in many cases are more 
   compressible than the small separate ACK packets, the portion of 
   bandwidth consumed by separate ACK packets is increased.  The 
   symmetric behavior further reduces the total throughput as the gain 
   of performance on the faster direction can not make up the loss on 
   the slower direction.

   FTP always sends one-way traffic at a time on the data connection.  
   Using FTP, bi-directional performace testing can be done by running
   FTP client simutanuously on both hosts.  TCP performance test tool  
   Iperf [Iperf] also sends one-way traffic on each connection, and 
   create two connections for bi-directional traffic.  These two issues 
   have been demonstrated by running FTP or Iperf on two hosts with 
   different CPU power.  In contrast, another TCP performance testing 
   tool NetStrain [Netst] sends two-way traffic over the same 
   connection, thus these two issues are not seen by running NetStrain.

   Extended Acknowledgment (EACK) is a strategy which mitigates these
   issues in the face of multiple connections each of which carries one
   way traffic.  With extended acknowledgments, the data receiver can
   use one packet to acknowledge the arrival of segments of multiple 
   connections sharing the same source and destination internet 
   addresses, thus the chance to piggyback an ACK instead of sending a 
   separate ACK packet is greatly improved.

   The extended acknowledgment extension uses two TCP options.  The
   first is an enabling option, "EACK-Permitted", which may be sent in 



Huang                  Expires September 28, 2010               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft    TCP Extended Acknowledgment Options      February 2010


   a SYN segment to indicate that the EACK option can be used on the 
   connection once it is established.  The other is the EACK option 
   itself, which may be sent over an established connection once 
   permission has been given by EACK-Permitted.  Using the EACK option
   on a connection means packets carrying EACK option can be sent on
   that connection, and the acknowledgement of that connection can also
   be sent by EACK option in packets of other proper connections that
   are EACK-permitted.

   The EACK option is to be included in a segment sent from a TCP that
   is receiving data to the TCP that is sending that data; these TCP's 
   are referred to as the data receiver and the data sender,  
   respectively.  A particular simplex data flow is considered in the 
   discussion; any data flowing in the reverse direction can be treated 
   independently.  


2. Internet Connection Group

   All TCP connections sharing the same source and destination internet 
   addresses form a group.  This group represent all TCP connections 
   between two end points of an internet connection, and is referred to 
   as an internet connection group.  EACK option extends the
   acknowgement coverage from a single conenection to multiple
   connections belong to an internet connection group.


3. EACK-Permitted Option

   This two-byte option may be sent in a SYN by a TCP that has been
   extended to receive (and presumably process) the EACK option.  By 
   sending the EACK-Permitted option, the data sender advertizes to the 
   data receiver that,
     1. the data receiver can use the intended connnection to carry an 
        EACK option, and
     2. the data receiver can send the acknowledgement for the intended 
        connection in an EACK option carried by another connection.

   This option MUST NOT be sent on non-SYN segments.

       TCP Sack-Permitted Option:

       Kind: 29

       +---------+---------+
       | Kind=29 | Length=2|
       +---------+---------+




Huang                  Expires September 28, 2010               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft    TCP Extended Acknowledgment Options      February 2010


4.  Eack Option Format

   The EACK option is to be used to convey extended acknowledgment
   information from the receiver to the sender over an established TCP
   connection.

       TCP EACK Option:

       Kind: 30

       Length: Variable

                         +--------+--------+
                         | Kind=30| Length |
       +--------+--------+--------+--------+
       |Conn n Src Port  | Conn n Dst Port |
       +--------+--------+--------+--------+
       |   Conn n Acknowledgement Number   |
       +--------+--------+--------+--------+
       |                                   |
       /            . . .                  /
       |                                   |
       +--------+--------+--------+--------+
       |Conn n+i Src Port|Conn n+i Dst Port|
       +--------+--------+--------+--------+
       |  Conn n+i Acknowledgement Number  |
       +--------+--------+--------+--------+


   Conn n Src Port: 16 bits
 
     The source port number of connection n.
     
   Conn n Dst port: 16 bits

     The destination port number of connection n.

   Conn n Acknowledgement Number: 32 bits

     The acknowledgement number of connection n.

   Note that the notation of connection n and connection n+i is purely 
   to differentiate different connections.  It does not require any 
   numbering scheme for connections

   Each 3-tuple (connection n source port, connection n destination 
   port, connection n acknowledgement number) in EACK option forms a 
   record, referred to as EACK record.  Each EACK record describes the 



Huang                  Expires September 28, 2010               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft    TCP Extended Acknowledgment Options      February 2010


   accknowlegement for a connection.

   The EACK option is to be sent in a connection by the data receiver   
   to inform the data sender of data of other connection(s) that have 
   been received and queued.  The connection that carries the segment 
   with EACK option is referred to as the carrying connection, while 
   connection(s) that is ACKed by the EACK option is(are) referred to 
   as EACKed connections.  The carrying connection and ACKed
   connection(s) MUST belong to the same internet connection group. 
   The EACK option does not change the meaning of the Acknowledgement 
   Number field, and the acknowledgement of the carrying connection(the 
   standard ACK), SHOULD NOT be part of the EACK option. 

   An EACK option that contains n EACK records will have a length of
   8*n+2 bytes, so the 40 bytes available for TCP options can specify a 
   maximum of 4 EACK records. 


5.  Generating EACK Options: Data Receiver Behavior

   If the data receiver has received an EACK-Permitted option in the 
   SYN for a connection, the data receiver MAY elect to generate EACK 
   options on that connection as described below.  If the data receiver 
   has not received a EACK-Permitted option for a given connection, it 
   MUST NOT use EACK options on that connection.

   If the data receiver elect to generate EACK options, it SHOULD 
   generate an EACK option only when it needs to generate a standard 
   ACK for a connection whether by piggybacking the ACK or generating a 
   separate ACK packet.  When the standard ACK is to be generated, the 
   data receiver determines if there are un-ACKed data on other EACK-
   permmitted connections in the internet connection group for that 
   connection.  If so, the data receiver may create the option 
   containing up to the maximum number of EACK records allowed by the 
   available opton space, each EACK record describing the
   acknowledgement of such a connection.  Each connection whose
   acknowlegement is sent as an EACK record in EACK option MUST be
   treated as if it sends the acknowlegement using the standard
   Acknowledgement Number field without this option.


6.  Processing the EACK Option: Data Sender Behavior

   When receiving a segment containing an EACK option, the data sender
   MUST treat each EACK record as if it is a standard ACK received from 
   the connection described in that EACK record.  The data sender MUST 
   NOT applies any control bits in this segment to any connections
   described in the EACK option.

 

Huang                  Expires September 28, 2010               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft    TCP Extended Acknowledgment Options      February 2010


7.  EACK Option Examples

   The following example attempts to demonstrate the proper behavior of
   EACK generation by the data receiver.

   The case assumes there are 10 connections C1, C2, ..., C10 in an 
   internet connection group.  TCP recived EACK-Permitted option on all 
   connections except C10.  All connections except C9 have un-
   acknowledged received data.  

   When TCP decides to generate an ACK on C1 connection, it polls the 
   states of other connections in the internet connection group C1
   belongs to.  TCP finds C2 is an candidate and creates an EACK record
   for C2.  TCP continues the same process and finally creates 4 EACK
   records for C2, C3, C4 and C5, the maximum allowed by the EACK
   option.  TCP sends the segment with this EACK option and updates the
   associated states.  Then TCP decides to geneate an ACK on C6. TCP
   finds out at this moment only C7, C8 in that internet connection
   group are EACK-permitted and have un-acknowledged data.  TCP creates
   two EACK records for C7 and C8 in the EACK option, sends segment with
   this EACK option and updates the associated states.


8.  IPsec Consideration

   IPsec allows the user to control the granularity at which a security 
   service is offered [Ken98].  If the granularity is at a per TCP 
   connection level, EACK may compromise the security of the 
   acknowledgement number of an EACKed connection.  Therefore, EACK
   SHOULD NOT be used on connections on which different security
   associations apply.


9.  IP Network Address Port Translation (NAT) Consideration

   A NAT [Sri99] device may translate different IP addresses into a 
   unique IP address.  With this translation, an internet connection 
   group, in the perception of the data sender or the data receiver, no 
   longer represents all TCP connections between the data sender and 
   the data receiver.  This mismatch causes EACK to fail at least for
   one direction.

   There are two solutions to resolve this issue in the NAT device. One 
   is to block the delivery of EACK-Permitted option; the other is to 
   implement an EACK proxy.

   Blocking the delivery of EACK-Permitted option requires the NAT 
   device to remove the EACK-Permitted option from a TCP SYN packet.



Huang                  Expires September 28, 2010               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft    TCP Extended Acknowledgment Options      February 2010


   Implementing an EACK proxy in a NET device has a much higher 
   complexity. Upon receiving and finishing the address translation for 
   an EACK option, the proxy removes each EACK record for a connection 
   that has a different destination IP address than the carrying 
   connection does and geneates a separate ACK packet for the removed 
   connection.  The removal of EACK records result in either a shorter 
   EACK option or the removal of the entire EACK option.

   In either solution, the implementation MAY change the TCP segment 
   with a shortened TCP header or applies the No-Operation options to 
   keep the length of the TCP header without the need to shift the TCP 
   payload.
 

10. Authors' Addresses

    Manqing Huang
    Exar Coperation
    48720 Kato Road
    Fremont, CA 94538
    manqing.huang@exar.com

REFERENCES

   [Bra89] Braden, R., "Requiremens for Internet Hosts -- Communication 
           Layers", RFC 1122, October 1989

   [Mat96] Mathis, M., Mahdavi, J., Floyd, S., and Romanow, A., "TCP
           Selective Acknowledgement Options", RFC 2018, October 1996

   [Ken98] Kent, S. and Atkinson, R., "Security Architecture for the 
           Internet Protocol", RFC 2401, November 1998

   [All99] Allman, M., Paxson, V. and Stevens, W., "TCP Congestion 
           Control", RFC 2581, April 1999

   [Sri99] Srisuresh, P. and Holdrege, M., "IP Network Address
           Translator (NAT) Terminology and Considerations",  RFC 2663, 
           Auguest 1999

   [Iperf] http://iperf.sourceforge.net/

   [Netst] http://netstrain.sourceforge.net/
