

     IPSECME working group                                 KaizhiHuang 
     Internet-Draft                                               NDSC 
     Intended status: Informational 
     Expires: December 1,2010                             July 9, 2010 
      
            Heterogeneous Wireless Network Security Architecture 
                                       
                 draft-huang-wireless-security-architecture-00 
                                         
  ABSTRACT 
      
     After analysis and comparison of domestic and international  
     wireless network secure schemes and standards, security threats  
     for heterogeneous wireless network are investigated in theory and 
     practice. According to the comprehensive summing-up of current  
     secure standards' application, existing secure vulnerabilities and 
     secure hidden troubles which may happen in future, "network 
     layered,security classified and trusted domain departed" secure 
     standard model is proposed, and corresponding standards for 
     heterogeneous wireless network security architecture are also put 
     forward. 
   
  Status of this Memo 
      
     This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the 
     provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79. 
      
     Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
     Task Force (IETF). Note that other groups may also distribute 
     working documents as Internet-Drafts. The list of current Internet-
     Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/. 
      
     Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
     months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other 
     documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts 
     as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in 
     progress."
      
     This Internet-Draft will expire on December 1, 2010. 
      
  Copyright Notice 
      
     Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the 
     document authors. All rights reserved. 
      
     This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal 
     Provisions Relating to IETF Documents 
     (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of 
     publication of this document. Please review these documents 
   
  Huang                    Expires Dec,2010              [Page 1] 
   
   
  Internet-Draft     Wireless Security Architecture    Jul. 2010 
   
     carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with 
     respect to this document. Code Components extracted from this 
     document must include Simplified BSD License text as 
     described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and 
     are provided without warranty as described in the Simplified 
     BSD License.






      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
   
   
  Huang                  Expires Dec. 2010              [Page 2] 
                                      
   
  Internet-Draft     Wireless Security Architecture    Jul. 2010 
   
  Table of Contents 
      
     1. Introduction..................................................4 
         1.1. Requirements............................................4 
         1.2. Terminology.............................................4 
         1.3. Purpose.................................................5 
     2. Security standards for wireless broadband networks Analysis...5 
         2.1. Security Standards for Wireless LAN (WLAN)..............6 
         2.2. Security Standards for Wireless MAN (WMAN)..............6 
         2.3. Security Standards for Wireless WAN (WWAN)..............7 
         2.4. Heterogeneous Network Access Authentication Mechanisms..8 
          2.4.1. UMTS-WLAN Authentication Mechanism...................8 
          2.4.2. Integration Architecture for WiMAX-3G................9 
         2.5. Future Development of Access Security Standard.........10 
     3. Security Analysis of Wireless Broadband Network Standards....11 
         3.1. Security Analysis of Existing Standards................11 
          3.1.1. Security Analysis of WEP............................11 
          3.1.2. Security Analysis of WPA1...........................13 
          3.1.3. Security Analysis of WAP2...........................14 
          3.1.4. Security Analysis of WAPI...........................15 
         3.2. Security Analysis of Some Key Technologies.............16 
          3.2.1. Security Analysis of TKIP...........................16 
          3.2.2. Security Analysis of EAP............................16 
          3.2.3. Security Analysis of LEAP...........................17 
          3.2.4 Security Analysis of PAP.............................18 
          3.2.5. Security Analysis of PEAP...........................20 
     4. Wireless Broadband Network Security Architecture.............21 
         4.1. Framework model........................................21 
          4.1.1. Security Classification.............................22 
          4.1.2. Security Domain.....................................23 
         4.2. System Framework Content...............................23 
          4.2.1. Heterogeneous Network Access Security Technology....24 
          4.2.2. Password Security Technology........................25 
          4.2.3. Mobile Terminal Secure Technology...................26 
          4.2.4. Access Control Technology...........................27 
          4.2.5. Wireless Intrusion Detection Technology.............30 
          4.2.6. Mobile E-commerce secure technology.................32
     5.  IANA Considerations.........................................33
     6. Security Considerations......................................34
     7. References...................................................34
         7.1. Normative References...................................34
     Author's Address................................................34

    
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
   
  Huang                  Expires Dec. 2010              [Page 3] 
                                      
   
  Internet-Draft     Wireless Security Architecture    Jul. 2010 
   
  1. Introduction 
      
     Heterogeneous wireless network is expected to provide mobile  
     users with freedom of roaming between diverse set of wireless 
     networks, since different wireless networks have different  
     security standards and requirements, mobile terminal should hold 
     various secure schemes. This document considers the security 
     mechanisms in heterogeneous wireless networks, such as secure  
     system architecture. 
      
     This document defines "network layered, security classified and 
     trusted domain departed" secure system model, which proposes  
     several secure technologies (such as access secure technology, 
     password secure technology, mobile terminal secure technologies  
     and so on)to meet different service requirements.  
      
  1.1. Requirements 
      
     The key words "MUST","MUST NOT","REQUIRED","SHALL","SHALL  
     NOT","SHOULD","SHOULD NOT","RECOMMENDED","MAY" and "OPTIONAL" 
     in this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119]. 
      
  1.2. Terminology 
      
     This document frequently uses the following terms: 
      
     Heterogeneous wireless network 
      
     Heterogeneous wireless network is the trend of next-generation 
     network; it refers to different network based on different low  
     layer technologies integrate as a whole, so user can really  
     achieve the goal that anyone can communicate with anybody in 
     anywhere when anytime. 
      
     Wireless broadband networks 
      
     Wireless broadband networks refers to networks which can provide 
     more efficient services for different people and different needs,  
     and also provided ways to achieve mobility, personalization of 
     communication and multimedia applications. WLAN, WiMAX and 3G are  
     the typical Wireless broadband networks. 
      
     Security Standards 
      
     Authentication, access control scheme and encryption technologies 
     are part of secure technologies, if they are employed by some 
     networks, they become security standards of these work, such as  
     PKM for WiMAX. 
   
  Huang                  Expires Dec. 2010              [Page 4] 
                                      
   
  Internet-Draft     Wireless Security Architecture    Jul. 2010 
   
      
     Security Analysis 
      
     Security schemes are analyzed via contrasting others and linking 
     them to the reality application. Through security analysis, 
     advantages and disadvantages of protocol or scheme can be found 
     thoroughly. 
      
     Security Architecture 
      
     Security architecture in this document is "network layered,  
     security classified and trusted domain departed" secure system  
     frame. 
      
  1.3. Purpose 
      
     One purpose of this document is to provide a fundamental security 
     investigation of security in heterogeneous wireless networks. The 
     other one is to offer a reference for researchers who would study 
     this field. 
   
  2. Security standards for wireless broadband networks Analysis 
      
     Multiple heterogeneous wireless networks will be coexistence for a 
     long time in next-generation broadband wireless communication  
     network of (WLAN, WiMAX, etc.). A variety of network access 
     technologies, such as: TD-SCDMA, WCDMA, cdma2000 for wireless wide 
     area network,WiMAX for wireless metropolitan area network and Wi-Fi 
     for WLAN technology, provided more efficient services for different 
     people and different needs, and also provided ways to achieve 
     mobility, personalization of communication and multimedia 
     applications. At the same time, on a variety of wireless network 
     performance, especially security requirements put forward higher 
     requirements, so specialized security protection mechanisms are in 
     need. The access users should perform authentication and access 
     control to protect the confidentiality and integrity of  
     transmission data. However, wireless broadband network security 
     cannot be satisfied in the whole because of independent and 
     incompatible of different wireless network security standards. 
     Therefore, heterogeneous wireless network security architecture 
     standards need to be developed. 
      
     By tracking security standards of domestic and international 
     wireless network, Analysis and comparison of various security 
     mechanisms of wireless networks are presented. Security threats  
     that wireless network may suffered are concluded and summarized in 
     theory and practice. This architecture exploited the usability of 
     security protocols and encryption algorithms in wireless network  
   
  Huang                  Expires Dec. 2010              [Page 5] 
                                      
   
  Internet-Draft     Wireless Security Architecture    Jul. 2010 
   
     from throughput, security, fault tolerance, balance between 
     efficiency and other aspects, and estimated the anti-attack 
     capability of information security systems (including encryption 
     algorithms, security protocols and key management, etc.). A brief 
     description of existing wireless broadband network standards in  
     the literature will be presented. 
      
  2.1. Security Standards for Wireless LAN (WLAN) 
      
     Design of WLAN standard starts early and goes on a long term. It  
     has become a mature international standard, and has a wide range  
     of applications, including IEEE802.11 (WEP), IEEE802.11i and WPA  
     and WAPI. IEEE 802.11 standard achieved authentication and data 
     encryption through WEP (Wired Equivalent Privacy). IEEE 802.11i  
     which is published by IEEE802.11 Working Group in June 2004 is to 
     enhance the security of WLAN further and ensure compatibility of 
     wireless security technology between different manufacturers. IEEE 
     802.11i defines a robust security network (RSN) of Key Management 
     Protocol based on 802.1x Wi-Fi alliance formulates WPA standard as  
     a transition. WPA uses 802.1x and TKIP to implement WLAN access  
     control, key management and data encryption. WAPI which has 
     independent intellectual property is standards for wireless network 
     technology in China. WAPI uses Elliptic Curve Cryptography  
     algorithm within public key cryptosystem and block cipher system of 
     secret key approved by State Encryption Administration Commission,  
     to achieve device authentication, link authentication, access 
     control and encryption to protect user information under wireless 
     transmission. It will completely change the current situation with  
     a variety of security mechanisms co-exist and incompatible for  
     WLAN.  
      
     From the above description, it seems that areas covered by 
     international standards are mainly on user and network  
     authentication, key exchanging, access control and data encryption. 
     However, user security in the heterogeneous wireless network has 
      not involved, which is also suitable for end-to-end security 
     framework in cross-domain environment. 
      
  2.2. Security Standards for Wireless MAN (WMAN) 
      
     WMAN (WiMAX) security standards mainly include 802.16 D3, 802.16E 
     and South Korea's WiBro. 802.16 D3 defines a secure sub-layer on  
     MAC layer to guarantee security. Secure sub-layer consists of two 
     protocols: Data Encryption Encapsulation Protocol and Key  
     Management Protocol (PKM). Data Encryption Encapsulation Protocol 
     defines encryption suite supported by IEEE 802.16 protocol, which 
     includes data encryption and integrity verification algorithm,  

   
  Huang                  Expires Dec. 2010              [Page 6] 
                                      
   
  Internet-Draft     Wireless Security Architecture    Jul. 2010 
   
     and rules of applying these algorithms to MAC PDU load. Key 
     management protocol defines secure distribution way of key data  
     from base station to user workstation and key data synchronization 
     and restrictions to access network services.802.16e is enhanced  
     based on the 802.16d to support vehicular and mobile services 
     between 2~11GHz band , and support handoff between station and  
     sector. It is mainly to solve some existing deficiencies of  
     original 802.16 security mechanism. IEEE 802.16e secure sub-layer 
     supports PKMv1 and PKMv2 two versions. PKMv2 can support broadcast 
     and multicast service, MSS and BS mutual authentication, etc. 
      
     Standards of WiBro (Wireless Broadband) is beginning in January 
     2004,which is developed from the Electronics and Telecommunications 
     Association (ETRI), Samsung Electronics and HPI (High Speed  
     Portable Internet) project launched by South Korea's major  
     operator. South Korea's Ministry of Information and Communication 
     declared definitely that WiBro should fully comply with 802.16e and 
     began to coordinate with 802.16e to integrate WiBro and 802.16e. 
      
  2.3. Security Standards for Wireless WAN (WWAN) 
      
     TD-SCDMA, WCDMA and cdma2000 are the major communication 
     specification of 3G system, and they have comprehensive security 
     mechanisms. With inherit of the advantages of 2G system, 
     comprehensive security features and security services are defined 
     based on the new features of 3G.Security mechanisms of 3G system 
     mainly include 3GPP and 3GPP2. 3GPP and 3GPP2 have corresponding 
     security standards respectively for service, including WAP  
     security, presence service security, location service security, 
     mobile payment services security, filtering mechanisms for spam  
     short messages and DRM standard to prevent reproduction without 
     authorized and so on. 
      
     Mobile Internet terminals have identity authentication function  
     and have access control function for various system resource and 
     services application. Security of identity authentication can be 
     realized through password or smart card and entity identify 
     mechanisms. Security protection and access control for data  
     service can be realized through policy of access control. For  
     data stored in the terminal, hierarchical storage and data  
     integrity check and other means can be used to ensure security. 
      
     In addition, with greatly increasing applications of mobile IP,  
     how can authentication systems support user roaming and across 
     administrative domains authentication become the current research 
     focus. Diameter which developed from RADIUS has better scalability. 
     AAA Working Group of Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF)  

   
  Huang                  Expires Dec. 2010              [Page 7] 
                                      
   
  Internet-Draft     Wireless Security Architecture    Jul. 2010 
   
     developed a mobile IP (MIP) AAA standard based on the Diameter 
     protocol. Solutions extend the AAA function through the access  
     router of mobile IP network, realize mobile node access control,  
     and support mobile IP fast handoff. 
      
  2.4. Heterogeneous Network Access Authentication Mechanisms 
      
     The integration of heterogeneous wireless networks may be  
     inevitable in the future development of B3G/4G. Recently, 
     Integration architecture and related technologies for  
     implementation of heterogeneous wireless networks become the focus 
     among information technology companies and academe researchers.  
     Many countries and specification organizations have already set up 
     working groups for the study of integration of heterogeneous  
     networks and related technologies. However, implementation of 
     integrated network is a complex and large project. Integration 
     architecture with design comprehensive and good scalability is few. 
     The major integrated architectures proposed realized it through 
     simple interworking between two or more heterogeneous networks,  
     such as 3G-WLAN interworking, 3G-WiMAX interworking, and CDMA2000-
     WLAN interworking, etc. Implementation of integrated network  
     requires the support of various key technologies, and the security 
     mechanism is the key for successful application of integrated  
     network. Access authentication mechanisms regard as the first step 
     of security. Different access technologies have different ways to 
     guarantee different access authentication. How to design a  
     universal access authentication mechanism which can provide  
     seamless secure roam and enjoy services for mobile user in the 
     wireless networks is a major technical challenge for integration 
     network. 
      
  2.4.1. UMTS-WLAN Authentication Mechanism 
      
     According to the difference of interconnected location, the 
     implementation approaches can be classified several kinds as 
     following: 
      
     Interworking architecture based on MIP (Mobile IP): The  
     architecture takes 3G and WLAN as two kinds of peer networks which 
     are connected through internet and the MIP can be achieved through 
     the home-agent (HA) and foreign-agent (FA) set in the network. The 
     GGSN (GPRS Gateway Support Node) in the home network of 3G is set  
     as HA, and SGSN (Serving GPRS Support Node) in the foreign network 
     of 3G is set as FA. HA in WLAN is located in DNS (Domain Name  
     Server), while FA is located in the DHCP (Dynamic Host  
     Configuration Protocol) server. 
      

   
  Huang                  Expires Dec. 2010              [Page 8] 
                                      
   
  Internet-Draft     Wireless Security Architecture    Jul. 2010 
   
     Interworking architecture based on inter-connection gateway: The 
     architecture also takes 3G and WLAN as two kinds of peer networks 
     while a inter-connection gateway is added. The mobile nodes  
     perform mobility management in the 3G network according to the 3G 
     network's session management and the GPRS mobility management,  
     while in WLAN covering areas with hot spots executes the WLAN 
     mobility management mechanism. Such kind of integration plan can 
     simultaneously provide services to both single-mode user and dual-
     mode user. Mobility management of dual-mode user can exchange  
     signal through gateway. 
      
     Tight Coupling Architecture: this architecture takes the WLAN 
     network as one of the access network of 3G Core Network (CN),  
     which satisfies the interworking requirements for WLAN access to  
     the packet domain traffic of 3G network, such as allowing WLAN to 
     access, for access control and accounting based on 3GPP system,  
     and for unified accounting and customer services , service 
     continuity. 
      
     Loose Coupling Architecture: This architecture separates logically 
     3G service domain and WLAN service domain. Location management and 
     authentication, authorization, accounting in the handoff process 
     between WLAN and 3G network can be realized through MIP, so the  
     WLAN standard has the fewest changes. 
      
     Semi-tight Coupling Architecture: WLAN and UMTS can be working 
     concurrently in this architecture, but the major signaling for 
     interconnection (i.e. authentication messages with user identifier) 
     is carried over UMTS access network and core network to the WLAN. 
     Signaling which cannot be carried through UMTS is still carried  
     over WLAN. If the Hybrid-authentication is successful, traffic can 
     also be carried over WLAN.  
      
  2.4.2. Integration Architecture for WiMAX-3G  
      
     According to the tightness, the architecture for integrating 3G 
     system and WiMAX can be categorized into loose coupling and tight 
     coupling architecture. The interworking has six common scenarios:  
     (1) Common Billing and Customer Care; (2) 3G system based Network 
     Authentication and Accounting; (3) WiMAX Access to 3G system  
     (3) Packet-Switched based services; (4) WiMAX Access to 3G system 
     Packet-Switched based Services with Service Consistency and 
     Continuity; (5) WiMAX Access to 3G system Packet-Switched  
     (6) based Services with Seamless Service Continuity; (7) WiMAX 
     Access to 3G system Circuit-Switched based Services.  
      
     The first two scenarios belong to the loose coupling mode, and the 
     latter four scenarios belong to tight coupling mode. In  
   
  Huang                  Expires Dec. 2010              [Page 9] 
                                      
   
  Internet-Draft     Wireless Security Architecture    Jul. 2010 
   
     scenario(1), there is a network appended between two systems in 
     which AAA is located to accomplish authentication and accounting;  
     In scenario (2), as the complementary network of 3G system, 
     authentication and accounting of WiMAX should use Home Location 
     Register (HLR), AAA etc. of 3G system, while traffic export of  
     WiMAX directly connects to MAN; In scenario (3), Authentication  
     and accounting in WiMAX is just like scenario (2), and packet  
     domain gateway of 3G system takes responsibility of its traffic 
     export; In scenario (4), WiMAX can directly access all services of  
     3G system; In scenario (5), WiMAX network handoff should be 
     controlled by 3G system and its VoIP service can handover to 3G 
     system; In scenario (6), radio resources of WiMAX and 3G system  
     will be schedule centralized.  
      
     Authentication and accounting of WiMAX terminals are implemented in 
     the corresponding entities of 3G system. Under the loose coupling 
     scenario, WiMAX proprietary equipments achieve mobility management  
     of WiMAX, while equipment in 3G system should participate in 
     mobility management of WiMAX terminal under the tight coupling 
     scenario. WiMAX may firstly consider adopting scenario (1), then 
     through the updates of 3G system it can evolute gradually to  
     scenario (4) and (5) and achieve ultimate target of evolution 
     scenario (6). 
      
  2.5. Future Development of Access Security Standard 
      
     From the above descriptions of the wireless broadband security 
     standards, the access security issue using the same communication 
     technology has been basically solved, with the relatively mature 
     security mechanism and safety standards accepted by the industry  
     on the whole. However, new security issues appeared with the  
     changes of emerging markets demand and network technology 
     evolution. . Driven by the objective demands of resource sharing, 
     information integration, supply chain construction etc., large- 
     scale resource sharing mode makes the work flow and sensitive data 
     processing facing unprecedented security threats, while the  
     existing international security standards cannot meet the security 
     needs of heterogeneous networks. Some areas of security have  
     appeared yet these international standards have not mentioned, and 
     the problem of heterogeneous network access security has placed in 
     front of network integration and market expansion. Heterogeneous 
     network security standard is still in its infancy internationally, 
     the domestic work in this area still stays only in academic  
     research. 
      
     According to wireless communication industrial distribution of our 
     country, mobile communication technology (3G) will hold a dominant 
     position, and other technologies (WLAN, WiMAX) will be considered  
   
  Huang                  Expires Dec. 2010              [Page 10] 
                                      
   
  Internet-Draft     Wireless Security Architecture    Jul. 2010 
   
     as auxiliary technologies. This multi-mode communication 
     distribution will provide many kinds of services. Because of 
     coexistence of heterogeneous networks, roaming and domain crossing 
     will become more common and complex in the next-generation  
     broadband wireless mobile communication network, and high level 
     privacy protection is taken more attention when user accessing 
     network. It is a common viewpoint for international standard 
     organization that the problem of roaming secure access can be  
     solved via using public key cryptography. There are many 
     authentication and key exchange protocols and patent technologies, 
     but they can meet the certifiable secure requirements under the 
     domain crossing condition. Furthermore, there are few of  
     certifiable secure protocol which can provide high level privacy 
     protection when crossing different domains. Therefore, it is 
     practical and valuable to investigate and propose corresponding 
     specifications which meet the secure requirements when roaming  
     within mobile networks. 
      
  3. Security Analysis of Wireless Broadband Network Standards  
      
     The rapid development of network technology has impacted and 
     influenced network security, and with the diversity of network  
     attack techniques safety standards (protocols) analysis and  
     attack tools are becoming increasingly various. The original  
     safety standards become unsafe or there are obvious security risks. 
      
  3.1. Security Analysis of Existing Standards 
      
  3.1.1. Security Analysis of WEP 
      
     The purpose of WEP is to ensure confidentiality, integrity and 
     authentication in the wireless communication environment and to 
     provide equivalent privacy as wired environment. WEP uses RC4  
     stream cipher algorithm to encrypt data, and the CRC (Cyclic 
     Redundancy Check) as the data integrity check algorithm.  
     Encryption key used is 40 bits with a 24 bits initial vector IV as 
     auxiliary encryption input. Initially 802.11 WEP Protocol Working 
     Group just designed a protocol under wireless environment with  
     little considerations of security. WEP security problems exist 
     mainly in the following areas: 
      
     (1) WEP cannot resist exhaustive key search: 40 bits key is too 
     short to meet the security needs. Although you can use longer keys, 
     it easily leads to re-use keys for the small scope of the initial 
     vector and the adversary can still decrypt the message. 
      
     (2) All users of the network use the same authentication key, so  

   
  Huang                  Expires Dec. 2010              [Page 11] 
                                      
   
  Internet-Draft     Wireless Security Architecture    Jul. 2010 
   
     it doesn't actually achieve authentication. The valid users of the 
     network can pretend other users to send messages. 
      
     (3) CRC integrity verification algorithm can detect changes on the 
     messages, but without hash function an attacker can forge messages  
     at will. Obviously, CRC is not cryptographic secure. 
      
     (4) Keys of different users are not independent of the MAC  
     addresses. 
      
     (5) Without description of production for the initial vector IV, 
     different IVs are prone to collide which leads to key exposure. 
     802.11 Working Group recommends that different data packets uses 
     different initial vectors, but the range is small so that it is  
     easy to collide. 
      
     (6) It is difficult for key re-distribution when deleting a user  
     of the authorized list. 
      
     (7) Using the RC4 stream cipher algorithm itself is not secure  
     and there have been attacks of RC4.  
      
     (8) There are no measures against replay attacks. 
      
     For RC4 encryption system, the specific attacks of the WEP  
     protocol are: 
      
     (1)FMS attack (2001): FMS attack is the first key recovery attack, 
     and the principle is based on the predictable head. The attacker 
     first obtains some front bits of the key stream, resulting in 
     correlation with the other bits. Under the FMS attack, the 
     probability of a successful attack more than 50% may need 4 to 6 
     million packets.  
      
     (2) Korek attack (2004): Based on the FMS attack, but the  
     relevance of RC4 key stream increases. The probability of a 
     successful attack more than 50% may take only about 70 000  
     packets. 
      
     (3) PTW attack (2007): Expanding the FMS attack and Korek  
     attack, each packet is processed to detect the correctness of  
     the key. The probability of a successful attack more than 50%  
     may take only 35 000 to 40 000 packets. 
      
     (4) Chopchop attacks: Allow an attacker to send 128*m packets  
     in order to decrypt the last m bits, but the attack will not lead  
     to disclosure of the root key.  
      
   
  Huang                  Expires Dec. 2010              [Page 12] 
                                      
   
  Internet-Draft     Wireless Security Architecture    Jul. 2010 
   
  3.1.2. Security Analysis of WPA1 
      
     Although WEP basically doesn't achieve any security goals, but 
     practically many devices support WEP protocol. Given urgent market 
     demand to improve the security of WLAN, Wi-Fi alliance formulates  
     WPA standard as a transition. WPA uses 802.1x and TKIP to implement 
     WLAN access control, key management and data encryption. 802.1x is  
     a port-based access control standard, users must pass  
     authentication and authorization and then access network resources 
     through the port. Although TKIP is based on RC4 encryption  
     algorithm as WEP, it introduces four new algorithms: 
      
     *Extended 48-bit initial vector (IV) and IV Sequencing Rules 
      
     *Per-packet key construction 
      
     *Message Integrity Code (MIC) 
      
     *Key to re-access and distribution mechanism 
      
     WPA adds a Key Mixing Function, ensuring the independence between 
     the key of different data packets by the expansion of Initial  
     Vector Space, and also using Michael algorithms to improve data 
     integrity. Although TKIP adds Key Mixing Function, and has been 
     greatly improved in security, however, it is not as safe as  
     expected. We can find the MIC key through a data packet key, if we 
     continue the use of short-term key TK, and the same initial vector, 
     then the security of the entire system will be destroyed. This  
     defect is not to say TKIP unsafe, but some parts of the TKIP  
     unsafe. There are some attacks to WPA: 
      
     (1) In 2004, some scholars have found that by using a given number 
     of RC4 data packets encryption key, an attacker may get short-term 
     key TK and message integrity check key MIC. This attack is not an 
     actual attack, but can reduce the restore complexity of the key TK 
     from 2128 of the Infinite Search to 2105. This attack shows that  
     the security of WPA depends on the key of all the data packets. 
      
     (2) Off-line dictionary attack: As the master key of WPA is 
     generated by the Passphrase and SSID, and the session key is 
     generated by the master key, the user's MAC address, the user's 
     random number and random number of access point AP, then the  
     attacker only needs to get SSID, MAC address, and random numbers  
     to obtain Passphrase by off-line dictionary attacks. 
      
     (3)In November 2008, researchers found a way to crack WAP, and even 
     to complete it within 15 minutes. However, this method only applies 
     to Wi-Fi adapter's data, and it does not work for the encrypted  
   
  Huang                  Expires Dec. 2010              [Page 13] 
                                      
   
  Internet-Draft     Wireless Security Architecture    Jul. 2010 
   
     data from the PC to the router. When TKIP encryption system is  
     being cracked by the Bulk Data Algorithm, the security is greatly 
     reduced, however, this attack is different from original methods. 
     When the implementation of this attack, a lot of data from WPA  
     router has been used, and can finally break encryption system by 
     combining with an algorithm. Some elements of this method have been 
     incorporated into Aircrack-ng Wi-Fi encryption hacking tool system, 
     which is primarily used by system intrusion tester and other  
     officers. Viewing that the WEP and WPA encryption are not so  
     secure, experts recommend WPA2 for wireless network system. 
      
  3.1.3. Security Analysis of WAP2 
      
     To make up the security of WEP protocol, Wi-Fi Alliance used WPA1  
     as a transitional security standard, and designed WPA2 as the 
     ultimate standard of wireless network security. WPA2 uses the same 
     authentication process, 4 rounds handshaking, and layered keys with 
     the WPA1. However, it uses AES to replace TKIP, uses AES counter 
     encryption mode and uses CBC mode of AES as the data integrity 
     verification. WPA2 has two versions, one is WPA2 Enterprise  
     version, mainly using 802.1x and EAP method for certification; and 
     the other is WPA2 Home version, using(pre-shared-key)PSK-based 
     authentication, and do not need RADIUS. The improvements of WPA2 in 
     security are: 
      
     (1) WPA2 authentication: WPA2 requires authentication with two 
     stages, first open system authentication, and then 802.1x and EAP 
     methods authentication. For the network without RADIUS (Remote 
     Authentication Dial-In User Service) infrastructure, such as small 
     office and home networks, WPA2 also supports the use of PSK (pre-
     shared key). 
      
     (2) WPA2 key management: the same with WPA, WPA2 requires a PMK 
     (primary master key) generated through the EAP or PSK  
     authentication processes and calculate TK (temporary key) by 4  
     rounds hand-shaking. 
      
     (3) Using AES: WPA2 required equipment to support AES encryption 
     using Counter-mode, and support AES data integrity verification  
     of CBC mode (CCMP). AES encryption system can attain the U.S. 
     national standard safety requirements. 
      
     (4) WPA2 supports for fast roaming. 
      
     (5) WPA2 is compatible with WPA and WEP, besides WPA2 devices can 
     also support WPA and WEP. Compared with WPA, the security of WPA2  
     has been greatly improved. Nowadays, the major attack is Off-line 
     Dictionary Attack, which is the same with the attack in WPA.  
   
  Huang                  Expires Dec. 2010              [Page 14] 
                                      
   
  Internet-Draft     Wireless Security Architecture    Jul. 2010 
   
     However, the effect of this attack is not so good. WPA2 encryption 
     use AES instead of RC4, so it has been the most secure wireless 
     security standard. 
      
  3.1.4. Security Analysis of WAPI 
      
     In addition to the international standard IEEE 802.11i and WPA 
     security, the national standard for wireless local area network 
     GB15629.11 is also proposed in China, which is the only approved 
     protocol in China in this field. The standard includes a new WAPI 
     security mechanism, which is made up of WAI (WLAN Authentication 
     Infrastructure) and WPI (WLAN Privacy Infrastructure) two parts,  
     used to identify the user and encrypt the transmission data. WAPI 
     can provide comprehensive security protection for users' WLAN  
     system. WAPI security mechanism includes two components. 
      
     By means of public key cryptography, WAI also uses certificates on 
     authentication of STA and AP in WLAN system. WAI defines an entity 
     named ASU (Authentication Service Unit), in order to manage the 
     certificates required by all parties of information exchange 
     (including certificate generation, issuance, revocation and  
     renewal). Certificates which contain the public key and signatures 
     of the certificate issuer (ASU) and the certificate holder (the 
     signatures here use unique WAPI elliptic curve digital signature 
     algorithm), is the digital credentials of network equipment. In the 
     specific implementation, the authentications for each other are 
     needed after STA associated to the AP. Firstly, STA will submit its 
     own certificate and current time to AP, then AP uses STA's 
     certificate, current time and its own certificate to format  
     signature by means of its own private key, the three parts will be 
     sent to ASU together with signature. All the identification of 
     certificates will be done by the ASU, when it receives the 
     identification request of AP, it will first verify the signatures  
     and certificates. When the identification succeeds, the certificate 
     of STA will be validated. Finally, ASU will sign the identify  
     results of STA and AP with its private key, then send the results 
     and signature back to AP. AP uses the signature verification on 
     received results, obtain identification results of STA, and decide 
     whether to allow the access to STA according to the results. 
     Meanwhile AP needs to transmit the ASU test results to STA, STA  
     also verify the signature of ASU and get AP identification results, 
     which helps to determine whether access to AP. 
      
     From the above description, we can see, WAI carried out a two-way 
     authentication on STA and AP, so that it has a strong resilience 
     against the "false" AP attack. The two sides will conduct a key 
     agreement after certificates of STA and AP are the successfully 
     identified. First of all, key algorithm negotiation will be  
   
  Huang                  Expires Dec. 2010              [Page 15] 
                                      
   
  Internet-Draft     Wireless Security Architecture    Jul. 2010 
   
     carried out between the two sides. Subsequently, STA and AP will 
     each generate a random number, and transfer to each other after 
     encrypted with their private key. Finally the two ends of 
     communication will use each other's public key to restore the  
     random numbers generated by the other party, then make the results 
     of the two random number mod 2 as the session key. With this key,  
     we can encrypt communication data with prior exchanging algorithm. 
     As the session key is not in the channel for transmission, and 
     therefore enhance its security. To further improve the 
     confidentiality of communication, WAPI also stipulates, after some 
     time of communication or a certain amount of data exchange, STA  
     and AP can re-negotiations the session key. Symmetric encryption 
     algorithm is used by WPI on the encryption and decryption  
     operations of MAC layer MSDU. 
      
     WAPI is designed in completely closed environment, so its main 
     problem is not transparent enough. After the formal announcement  
     of WAPI, domestic scholars have done some research on it; in  
     general, there are still some deficiencies in WAPI design and 
     implementation. 
      
  3.2. Security Analysis of Some Key Technologies 
      
  3.2.1. Security Analysis of TKIP 
      
     In the IEEE 802.11i specification, TKIP (Temporal Key Integrity 
     Protocol) handles the encryption part of wireless security issues. 
      
     The length of TKIP key is 128 bits and packets using different 
     encryption keys. Some different factors will be mixed together to 
     product the Key, including basic keys (i.e. the so-called  
     transient key pairs of TKIP), MAC address of transmitting station 
     and serial number of the packet. Hybrid operation will minimize  
     the requirements in the design of wireless stations and access 
     points, but still has sufficient password strength, so that it  
     can not be easily deciphered. 
      
     As same as WEP, TKIP's encryption is based on RC4, just different  
     in the implementations. Although the WEP vulnerabilities has been 
     settled, but TKIP can still be attacked through the shortcomings  
     of RC4. 
      
  3.2.2. Security Analysis of EAP 
      
     Extensible Authentication Protocol (EAP) is a general protocol for 
     PPP authentication which can support multiple authentication  
     methods. EAP didn't specify authentication method during the link 
     establishment period, but defer the process to certification stage. 
   
  Huang                  Expires Dec. 2010              [Page 16] 
                                      
   
  Internet-Draft     Wireless Security Architecture    Jul. 2010 
   
     So certification side can get more information in order to decide 
     which authentication method to use. This mechanism also allows the 
     parties of PPP authentication passing through the received 
     certification packet to the authentication server at the rear, so 
     that authentication server from the rear can realize a variety of 
     authentication methods. WPA and WPA2 both can support to provide 
     stronger authentication with EAP. The advantages of EAP can  
     support multiple authentication mechanisms without having to  
     specify in the pre-consultation process of LCP stage. Currently,  
     EAP security issues are: 
      
     (1) Identity Protection: Identity exchange is optional in the EAP, 
     so it may be completely ignored. 
      
     (2) Man in Middle Attack: When EAP run in other protocol, if the 
     other side authentication is neglected, it will lead to a  
     middleman attack. 
      
     (3) Modify the packet: As EAP is to ensure the data packet's  
     source authentication, integrity and anti-replay, but this 
     protection is not in the EAP layer, so an adversary can  
     successfully insert or replay EAP packets by guessing identifier. 
      
     (4) Dictionary attacks: Password-based authentication method (such 
     as EAP-MD5, MS-CHAPv1) cannot resist a dictionary attack, so it  
     needs to adopt some against-dictionary attacks. 
      
     (5) Links to the untrusty network: EAP support one-way 
     authentication (such as EAP-MD5), as the user don't authenticate  
     the authentication device, resulting in the user easy to be  
     deceived by fake authentication device. 
      
  3.2.3. Security Analysis of LEAP 
      
     LEAP (Lightweight Extensible Authentication Protocol) is a 
     proprietary, previous variant before IEEE 802.1x port access  
     protocol standards approved. 802.1x is a framework for a wireless 
     authentication server approves the user to enter access point 
     approved in the distributed network (i.e. access point to connect  
     the wired network) before the wireless user authentication prior  
     to the certificate. 802.1x works with many different certificates 
     used together, such as passwords, tokens and certificates. This is 
     done by the request and response to 802.1x carrying any type of  
     EAP (Extensible Authentication Protocol) to complete. LEAP is one  
     of these types of EAP, is designed to provide password 
     identification. 
      

   
  Huang                  Expires Dec. 2010              [Page 17] 
                                      
   
  Internet-Draft     Wireless Security Architecture    Jul. 2010 
   
     LEAP is vulnerable for Dictionary Attack. First, the user name is 
     not sent under encryption, everyone can get it. Second, the hash 
     value generated by using words in the dictionary compared with  
     the hash value generated by clients will be able to crack (or  
     guess) the password. Some sharing software tools can automatically 
     crack the hash value. These software tools include Anwrap, Asleap  
     and THC-LEAP cracker. Using very long, random password will help 
     prevent Dictionary Attack. However, this way round the leak is not 
     practical, since many WLAN and existing user names (such as the 
     Windows domain name) and password use LEAP together. 
      
     There are many other EAP types which can be used with 802.1x 
     together. For example, EAP-TLS supports mutual authentication  
     based on digital certificates. PEAP (protected EAP) support TLS 
     encrypted channels in the MS-CHAPv2 password authentication, to 
     prevent peeping and dictionary attacks. In fact, there are more  
     than 40 kinds of definitions of EAP type. Some LEAP is weak (such  
     as EAP-MD5), some is more powerful (such as EAP-TLS and PEAP). Of 
     course, there are some types of EAP is more difficult to use than 
     LEAP. For example, to use EAP-TLS, your client must have a 
     certificate. 
      
  3.2.4 Security Analysis of PAP 
      
     PAP (Password Authentication Protocol) is a simple plain-text 
     authentication. NAS (Network Access Server) requires the user to 
     provide user name and password, and PAP returns information to  
     user with plain-text. This kind of authentication's security is  
     poor, the third parties can easily get user name and password 
     transmitted through eavesdropping, and use these information to 
     connect with NAS and get all the resources available from NAS. 
     Therefore, once the user password is stolen by a third party, PAP 
     can't provide guarantee measures to avoid attacks by third-party. 
     Using PAP protocol, the whole authentication process is a two  
     shook hands process, sending the password in clear text. PAP's 
     certification process is as follows:  
      
     (1) The verifier sends the user name and password to verify the 
     validity, which is that the client requests to authenticate by  
     the server-side;  
      
     (2) The server network checks whether the user exists and the 
     password is correct according to its configuration information,  
     and then returns a different response (Acknowledge or Not 
     Acknowledge); 
      
     (3) If correct, the client will send the ACK (response  

   
  Huang                  Expires Dec. 2010              [Page 18] 
                                      
   
  Internet-Draft     Wireless Security Architecture    Jul. 2010 
   
     confirmation) messages, informing the other side that it has been 
     allowed to progress the next stage of consultation; otherwise, it 
     will send NCK (non-confirmation) packet to inform the other side  
     that confirmation has failed. But at this time it does not close  
     the link directly, the client is allowed to continue to try new 
     password. Only when the authentication fails for a certain number 
     (the default is 4), the link will be closed, to prevent  
     unnecessary LCP re-negotiation process caused by wrong  
     transmission and network interference. 
      
     PAP authentication protocol is not in good condition and basically 
     do not provide any security. Its feather is transmitting user name 
     and password in a civilized manner by the network. If intercepted 
     during transmission, it may cause a great threat to network  
     security. So it is not a strong and effective authentication  
     method. And the password sent in text format can't provide any 
     protection to against for eavesdropping, replay or repeat attempt  
     and fault attacks, so it is only fit for this network environment 
     which requires a relatively lower security. Compared with PAP, CHAP 
     can provide a degree of security protection to password. Its 
     authentication process is as follows:  
      
     (1) When the client requests a connection with the authentication 
     server, it don't input password directly by the client as PAP, 
     instead, the server sends a randomly generated message with its  
     host name to the client as an authenticate request; 
      
     (2) After the client receives the server's authenticate request 
     (Challenge), it checks the corresponding user account and password 
     based on the server's host name in that message and its own user 
     table. If there is some account in the user table which is same to 
     the host name, it use the random message and the user's password 
     received to generate response (Response) in Md5 algorithm, then  
     its response and host name will be sent to the authentication; 
      
     (3) After receiving this response, the server checks its own 
     reservation system password words in its user table by using the 
     other's user name, then generates results by using its own  
     password words and random message in MD5 algorithm and compares  
     with the proven party answers. If Successful, the authentication 
     server will send an ACK packet (Success) and otherwise, it will  
     send a NAK message (Failure).  
      
     The characteristic of CHAP authentication is only transmitting  
     user name, not including user password on the network, so its 
     security is higher than PAP. CHAP authentication method prevents 
     replay attacks by using a different inquiring message and each 

   
  Huang                  Expires Dec. 2010              [Page 19] 
                                      
   
  Internet-Draft     Wireless Security Architecture    Jul. 2010 
   
     message is impossible to predict the unique values. Uninterrupted 
     inquiry can be limited in a period of time among an attack, and  
     the router local can control the frequency and time. However, the 
     security of CHAP is still weak, with the attack technology's 
     constantly updating and improving, CHAP is attacked more and more, 
     such as off-line dictionary attack, online dictionary attack, 
     password leakage attack etc, so it is necessary to design more 
     security password-based authentication protocol.  
      
  3.2.5. Security Analysis of PEAP 
      
     Protected Extensible Authentication Protocol PEAP (Protected EAP) 
     uses Transport Layer Security (TLS) to create encrypted channel 
     between client (such as wireless terminals) and the  
     authentication device (such as Internet Authentication Service  
     (IAS) or Remote Authentication Dial in User Service (RADIUS)  
     server). PEAP is not specified authentication method, but provide 
     additional security to other EAP authentication protocols, such  
     as EAP-MSCHAPv2 protocol, which can be achieved by TLS encryption 
     channel provided by PEAP. PEAP can be used for wireless client 
     computer authentication in 802.11, but is not fit for virtual  
     private network (VPN) remote access client or other clients. To 
     enhance the security of EAP protocol and network, PEAP provides 
     security protection as follows:  
      
     (1) The protection between the client and server in EAP method 
     negotiation through the TLS channel. This helps to prevent an 
     attacker inserting data packets between the client and the network 
     access server (NAS), in case of the attacking to the less secure  
     EAP method. Encrypted TLS channel also helps to prevent attacking 
     against the refusal of IAS server; 
      
     (2) Supporting message and message fragmentation, allowing the use 
     of EAP which does not provide this feature type; 
      
     (3) IAS or RADIUS server authentication. The server has to 
     authenticate the client, so mutual situation exists; 
      
     (4) When the EAP client authenticate the certificate provided by  
     the IAS server, the protection of deployment of unauthorized 
     wireless access points (WAP). In addition, the TLS keys created by 
     PEAP authentication server and the client are not shared with the 
     access point. Therefore, the access point can't decrypt messages 
     protected by PEAP; 
      
     (5) PEAP's fast reconnect, reduces time delay between the client 
     authentication's requests and IAS or RADIUS server's response,  

   
  Huang                  Expires Dec. 2010              [Page 20] 
                                      
   
  Internet-Draft     Wireless Security Architecture    Jul. 2010 
   
     and allows wireless clients to move between access points without 
     repeating authentication requests, which reduces resource 
     requirements of the client and the server. 
      
     PEAP's fast reconnect allows wireless clients to move between 
     wireless access points in the same network without having to re-
     authenticate when associate with the new point each time. We 
     configure the wireless access point as RADIUS client of RADIUS  
     sever. If the wireless client roams between the access points which 
     were configured for the same RADIUS server, the client don't have  
     the need to each authenticate for new client association. When the 
     client moved to a different RADIUS client configured by different 
     RADIUS server, though having to re-verify the identity of the  
     client, but the efficiency of the treatment of this process is much 
     higher. Because of the new server authentication requests forwarded 
     to the original server, PEAP's fast reconnect reduces the response 
     time between the client and authentication server. As the PEAP  
     client and authentication server both use the previously cached TLS 
     connection properties, the authentication server can quickly 
     determine whether the client connection is re-connected. If the 
     original PEAP authentication device is not available, it must  
     advance complete authentication between the client and the new 
     authentication server. 
      
  4. Wireless Broadband Network Security Architecture 
      
     According to Wireless broadband networks' characteristics,  
     technical characteristics and developing trends, and based on the 
     study of multiple access subnets' security standards and analysis.  
     A security architecture is designed which has each layer's  
     security mechanism. This secure architecture can achieve safe  
     goals such as reliability, controllability and availability. 
      
  4.1. Framework model 
      
     Wireless communication networks bring a great convenience to us; 
     meanwhile, they face a series of new security issues, such as 
     security between network entities, seamless connection among  
     security protocols, and new security requirements of new various 
     services. It is necessary to consider several important security 
     issues in the process of developing wireless networks, including 
     constructing a flexible wireless broadband network security model 
     avoiding attacks, key security technologies and methods.  
      
     As network applications become more complex than before, the 
     security requirements, especially the ability against attacks,  
     are much more enhanced; it is true that people gradually take much 
     more attention on network deep defense strategies. The ideal state  
   
  Huang                  Expires Dec. 2010              [Page 21] 
                                      
   
  Internet-Draft     Wireless Security Architecture    Jul. 2010 
   
     is that if a security system or a defense mechanism fails, the 
     remaining security system and defense mechanisms will be able to 
     provide the same level of security protection. It is necessary to 
     embed the security features into each node. That is the security 
     services and abilities extended to the node applications. And also  
     it needs to design network's program and network layer security 
     mechanisms on the whole. 
      
     Based on the study of security standards of many access subnets, 
     such as wireless LAN, wireless metropolitan area network, wireless 
     wide area network, we find that when building a perfect security 
     standards framework for wireless broadband system, it needs to  
     refer to Open Systems Interconnection (OSI) protocol system model. 
     Firstly, this chapter summarized security mechanism of access, 
     network and application layer; secondly, security mechanisms are 
     classified according to the strength of attacker's ability.  
     Finally, based on the work mentioned above, a model of "network 
     layered, security classified and trusted domain departed" is  
     proposed, this chapter also presented wireless broadband network 
     security architecture on the basic of the access layer security. 
      
  4.1.1. Security Classification 
      
     Security protocol standards can be classified into general level, 
     the weak and strong cipher level according to the security of  
     cipher cell. General level protocol standard is a standard that 
     focus on function realizing, security is considered low level 
     security or even not ,such as WEP, PEAP. Weak cipher level  
     standard is a standard that fully considers security when 
     established standard, butt made a compromise between interests  
     and security for commercial reasons, such as WPA1, still use the  
     RC4 stream cipher system. Weak cipher level standard is also a 
     standard that there are some weakness in its cipher security, or a 
     standard that become insecurity because of enhanced attack methods. 
     Although weak cipher security level standards are no longer safe,  
     it is still consume enormous human and material resources to attack 
     them; these standards are also useful in civilian application and 
     some situation which doesn't require high level security. Strong 
     cipher level standard is a standard proved its safety by 
     appropriate model, and also meet the new safety requirements, such 
     as IKEv2; Strong cipher level standard is also a standard without 
     proved its security under appropriate model, but until now there 
     is not very effective attack to such standard, such as WPA2. If 
     strong cipher level standard supports roaming and domain-crossing 
     applications,it is necessary to consider the security when roaming 
     and domain-crossing. 
      
   
  Huang                  Expires Dec. 2010              [Page 22] 
                                      
   
  Internet-Draft     Wireless Security Architecture    Jul. 2010 
   
  4.1.2. Security Domain 
      
     According to whether the authentication, key exchange protocol in 
     security protocol standard supporting secure domain's crossing or  
     not, the security protocol standard can be divided into single  
     trust domain, cross trust domain and heterogeneous network. Single 
     trust domain is composed of wireless local area network (generally 
     refers to the home network in mobile networks). There is a obvious 
     boundary between single trust domain and Internet, user s can  
     access the local information resources under the control of  
     boundary secure measures. Cross trust domain refers to that  
     networks belong to different manage organizations have different 
     secure strategy and protective mechanism. It is likely to happen  
     that a user under a secure domain communicates others in another 
     domain in order to. This type connection can achieve resources 
     sharing and information integrating. Heterogeneous network is a 
     variety of coexisting heterogeneous network (communication network, 
     WLAN, WiMAX, etc.). With roaming and domain-crossing within new 
     generation broadband wireless mobile communication network become 
     more common and complex and users' high-level privacy protection 
     mechanism given more attention, where the core is to solve the  
     user's security access and key exchange problem by using public 
     cipher technology. 
      
  4.2. System Framework Content 
      
     According to present security protectionism, access security, key 
     authentication technology state and developing trend, and based on 
     the "sub-network layer, sub-safe level, sub-trust domain" 
     standard classification model, a wireless broadband network  
     security architecture is proposed as shown in Figure 1. 
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
   
  Huang                  Expires Dec. 2010              [Page 23] 
                                      
   
  Internet-Draft     Wireless Security Architecture    Jul. 2010 
   
            ......................... ............... ............. 
            . Heterogeneous Network . .   Access    . .           . 
            .   Access Technology   . .    Layer    . .           . 
            ......................... . ............. .   Strong  . 
            ......................... ............... .           . 
            .  End to End Password  . .             . .  Semantic . 
            .  Security Technology  . .             . .           . 
            ......................... . Application . .  Security . 
            ......................... .    Layer    . .           . 
            .   Mobile E-commerce   . .             . .           . 
            .  Security Technology  . .             . .           . 
            ......................... ............... ............. 
            ......................... ............... ............. 
            .     Access Control    . .   Access    . .           . 
            .   Security Management . .    Layer    . .           . 
            ......................... ............... .           . 
            ......................... ............... .           . 
            .   Wireless Intrusion  . .             . . Undefined . 
            .        Detection      . .             . .           . 
            ......................... . Application . .           . 
            ......................... .   Layer     . .           . 
            .    Mobile Endpoint    . .             . .           . 
            .  Security Technology  . .             . .           . 
            ......................... ............... ............. 
            Fig. 1 Wireless Broadband Network Security Architecture 
      
     Based on the existing wireless local area network (mainly  
     including WEP, IEEE802.11i, WPA security standards and WAPI), MAN 
     (802.16 D3, 802.16E and Korea WiBro) and wide area networks (3GPP  
     and 3GPP2 security technology system) standards, considering the 
     national and international wireless broadband network security 
     standards' application status and coverage, aiming at our country 
     wireless broadband network technology trend and network layout. 
     Security architecture includes six safety technologies:  
     heterogeneous network access security technology, password  
     security technology, access control security technology, wireless 
     intrusion and detection technology, mobile terminal security 
     technology and mobile commerce security technology. 
      
  4.2.1. Heterogeneous Network Access Security Technology 
      
     Heterogeneous network has multi-trust domains, users, resources'
     sharing severs and authentication service providers are belonging  
     to different secure institutions. By studying identity-based USIM 
     access authentication, smart card-based EAP authentication, fast  
     re-authentication mechanisms, UE initial tunnel establishment and 
     direct IP session access detecting mechanisms, we established a 
     unified authentication model and security system structure for 
   
  Huang                  Expires Dec. 2010              [Page 24] 
                                      
   
  Internet-Draft     Wireless Security Architecture    Jul. 2010 
   
     heterogeneous network, which can shield otherness of different 
     domains users, resources representation, security mechanisms, and  
     can effectively harmonize domain-crossing information resource or 
     access service in security. This system framework mainly include 
     mobile network (TD-CDMA, WCDMA, CDMA2000) and local area network 
     (WLAN) access security standards, and mobile network (TD-CDMA,  
     WCDMA, CDMA2000) and wide area network (WIMAX) access security 
     standards. 
      
     This standard not only will enable trusted domain-crossing 
     (including roaming case) authentication and key agreement, and 
     resolve the mutual operation of heterogeneous network (secure  
     domain-crossing) and security establishment. This standard can 
     achieve two main objectives, the first one is that when users  
     roaming other service provider area, they can validate whether  
     the provider is a legitimate one or not and, meanwhile the service 
     provider also can validate whether the user is a legitimate one or 
     not, but also this standard can produce session key in the process  
     of domain-crossing authentication which can guarantee the data  
     under a safe model. A more promoted domain-crossing authentication  
     security model is proposed under standard model or random  
     predictive model by excavating the content of computational  
     problems and using international advanced security-provable method. 
     We analysis the secure qualities of this model via using Oracle  
     model and formalized tools, and we also analysis and test the 
     performance of this new protocol. Key agreement protocol must meet 
     several important security goals, such as fake attack due to key 
     leaking, unknown session key sharing attack, and forward security  
     and so on. 
      
  4.2.2. Password Security Technology 
      
     Current domain-crossing password authentication and key exchange 
     protocol are designed largely based on symmetric key mechanism;  
     they cannot prevent new type attacks (PCI, KCI). Now public key 
     cipher mechanism is always be used to enhance protocol security,  
     but it undoubtedly increases the quantity of online computation,  
     the burden of network and the times protocol information 
     transmission. So it is very valuable to design a certifiable  
     secure domain-crossing password protocol for which has several  
     good characteristic such as low-transition times, tradeoff security 
     and efficiency, and broad application market. Protocol of provably 
     secure cross-domain password with safety and efficiency, especially 
     in the mobile environment, and this has a wide range of application 
     environments. Meanwhile, the user to user password security 
     technology research and design for different security domain are  
     also valuable. 
      
   
  Huang                  Expires Dec. 2010              [Page 25] 
                                      
   
  Internet-Draft     Wireless Security Architecture    Jul. 2010 
   
     The way to descript the ability of attacker, simulate attacker and 
     participator's action and extend the current secure model to meet 
     advanced secure attributes must be reasonable. So a more complete 
     cross-domain password authentication and key exchange security  
     model can be established. 
      
     Generally speaking, network server have public key in practice,  
     nor do mobile terminals, so in the protocol designing ,it is 
     sensible to take full account of asymmetry between terminal and 
     server, make optimization analysis of the protocol participants'
     number of computation and interaction and minimize the amount of 
     mobile terminal computing when designing effective, lightweight, 
     domain-cross protocol. 
      
     The secure evidence of draft candidate provided by international 
     organizations have a principal limit of the random oracle model  
     or ideal code model, and to some extent rely on public key 
     encryption system. So, in addition to basic nature of security 
     mentioned above, the feasibility of efficiency, the security  
     within standard model, getting rid of relying on public encryption 
     and other factors affecting security and efficiency, are also 
     considered when design password protocol. From the existing  
     candidate password standard draft's analysis, password secure 
     technology should satisfy some basic secure features: 
      
     *Resist off-line dictionary attack 
      
     *Resist on-line dictionary attack 
      
     *Satisfy forward security 
      
     *Resist server destroy attack 
      
     *Resist Denning Sacco attack (gotten the assigned session key have 
     little help to adversary 
      
  4.2.3. Mobile Terminal Secure Technology 
      
     As fast development 3G networks, the number of people who use 3G 
     terminal device will become larger and larger. More and more  
     personal information will be stored in terminal equipment. The 
     privacy and the importance of personal information are often higher 
     than other information stored in individual hosts. Therefore,  
     Mobile terminal particular secure requirements are higher. 
      
     Product and service providers embed security technology in the 
     mobile device to ensure platform crossing computing and  

   
  Huang                  Expires Dec. 2010              [Page 26] 
                                      
   
  Internet-Draft     Wireless Security Architecture    Jul. 2010 
   
     communication security and interoperability. These security 
     solutions are mostly operated in the operating system. However,  
     these operating systems are very complex, which makes a big  
     problem to get a stable security just relying on an operating  
     system alone. Furthermore, implementing security in the operating 
     system also significantly prolongs the process of developing and 
     debugging. Therefore, it is necessary to standard intelligent 
     terminal's security function. 
      
     On the other hand, the current intelligent mobile communication 
     equipments of 2G and 2.5G networks have following secure problems: 
     lack abundant security defending software, low firewall usage rate, 
     users's security awareness of mobile communication device is less  
     than personal host. 
      
     (1) Access security and Data security 
      
     Mobile internet terminal should have the authentication function; 
     have the ability to access control various system resources and 
     service applications. The terminal secure technology needs to 
     consider identity authentication using password, smart card and 
     entity authentication mechanism. For data security protection and 
     access control, setting access control policy can ensure their  
     safety; Hierarchical storage and isolation, data integrity  
     detecting and other measures can ensure the security of data  
     stored within the terminal. 
      
     (2) Terminal security protection mechanism 
      
     Terminal security measures are proposed to protect the safety of 
     various types of hardware and software systems (operating system 
     security), data security and content security, and avoid  
     illegally juggling information, unauthorized access and the 
     malicious access caused by viruses and malicious code. Technical 
     specifications and relevant parameters are suggested by using  
     tools such as firewall technology, intrusion detection techniques, 
     and Trojan detection technology. 
      
  4.2.4. Access Control Technology 
      
     Access control is to permit or limit access ability and extension  
     by some approaches, and thus Access control can limits visiting to 
     secure protective resources, and prevent destructions caused by  
     the illegal user's malicious invasion or legal user's careless 
     operation. Because the changes and development of computation 
     environment and the resource sharing patterns, access control face 
     the brand-new challenges. Especially due to the existing 
     authentication and authorization technology's poor support to 
   
  Huang                  Expires Dec. 2010              [Page 27] 
                                      
   
  Internet-Draft     Wireless Security Architecture    Jul. 2010 
   
     heterogeneous environments, poor system scalability, thick 
     granularity and bad dynamic access control, high cost, so it is 
     impossible to meet requirements of large-scale resource sharing 
     applications. Therefore, we should use some key technologies, such  
     as domain crossing authentication, authorization management, and 
     dynamic thin granularity access control, to implement the access 
     control in the new type networks and applications. 
      
     (1) Access control model 
      
     Access control model which is suitable for domain-cross environment 
     can support multi authorized attributes (including secure  
     attributes of subject, object body, and operation the relationship 
     of network elements). This model can support many kinds of access 
     control strategy (RBAC-based access control, identity-based access 
     control and so on), and can thick granularity and too complex  
     problem of single model is solved. How to integrate the area  
     concept into the access control model is explored (via attribute  
     or other ways). Then, the subject and object security attributes 
     modeling methods are researched, thin granularity can be achieved  
     by defining attributes of thin granularity. This segment also 
     investigate attribute-based access control model which can support 
     multi type secure strategy, attribute layer model and giving a  
     common and flexible attribute layer framework. Collision avoiding 
     scheme which can support multi strategy is studied. The constraint 
     mechanism of attribute-based access control model is researched 
     (including duties separation and constraint tense, etc.). 
      
     (2) Multi-domain strategy integrated technology 
      
     In order to realize the resource sharing and protection between 
     different trusted domains, we need to integrate each domain  
     original access control strategy to obtain a unified overall  
     access strategy. Strategy integration follows autonomy principle  
     and security principle. Attribute-based access control can express 
     the traditional access control strategy by using uniform attributes 
     and authorization framework, therefore its integrated method is  
     also applicable to integrate traditional strategy. We research on 
     the attribute-based access control integrated framework, the  
     accuracy of its integrated result can be ensured via semantic form. 
     Strategy collision detection algorithm is also investigated, this 
     algorithm can detect automatically circular inheritance and 
     constraint destroy of integrated strategy attributes layers, and  
     can automatically clear up collision in the process of strategy 
     integrating. This segment also researches on efficient modular 
     algorithm of integrated strategy; this algorithm tries its effort  
     to avoid the global integration when there is a small change in 
     strategy. 
   
  Huang                  Expires Dec. 2010              [Page 28] 
                                      
   
  Internet-Draft     Wireless Security Architecture    Jul. 2010 
   
      
     (3) User authorization attributes' privacy protecting technology 
      
     When the user access to resources across trusted domain, the 
     resources provider may cross other domain to index the user's 
     security attributes Users usually do not hope their privacy 
     information to be known by others in another trusted domain when 
     accessing. So, the inter-agency access to resources often need to 
     ensure the anonymity of their users, and must provide privacy 
     protection of users attributes during cross-domain indexing. this 
     project researches on protection strategy and realization  
     mechanism to protect privacy of users' authorization attributes,  
     and, investigate the thin granularity users' self control privacy 
     protection mechanism which allow users to choose the disclosed 
     attributes by themselves, and study how to negotiate the access 
     attributes step by step in the process of access control to  
     minimize the leakage of users privacy attitudes. 
      
     (4) Frame design with dynamic context support 
      
     The key to realize dynamic access control is that the context 
     (environment) information in the process of strategy estimation  
     when access request happens. Now, many access control strategies 
     support context-based access condition information. When  
     estimating strategies, appropriate context provider must provide 
     context information to strategy engine. In this project we will 
     research how to provide a dynamic context supporting frame, which  
     can integrate the various service providers transfer interfaces,  
     the corresponding service provider module, and one or more  
     software or hardware-based context inductor. Common framework of 
     context providers is investigated and the standard access  
     interface and communication interface are defined, how to get 
     reliable context information to ensure making accuracy strategy  
     is also considered. 
      
     (6) Access control strategy algorithm and access strategy engine 
     design 
      
     The performance of access control strategy algorithm can decide  
     the performance and throughput of the strategy engine. We research 
     on the search algorithm (that is, making a determining of the 
     applicable strategy or rule algorithm according to strategy  
     request) of strategy request. We also research on search algorithm 
     of subject, object body and the environment attributes' acquisition 
     mode and the applicable attributes when decision-making. Efficient 
     evaluation algorithm of advanced access control strategy, and  
     updated algorithm of the evaluation intermediate results which 
     stored in cache for improving algorithm performance is also  
   
  Huang                  Expires Dec. 2010              [Page 29] 
                                      
   
  Internet-Draft     Wireless Security Architecture    Jul. 2010 
   
     studied, performance evaluation mode of the access control  
     decision engine is investigated at last. 
      
  4.2.5. Wireless Intrusion Detection Technology 
      
     There is a great deal of differences between wired and wireless 
     network, it is impossible for wireless network to directly employ  
     the intrusion detection system (IDS) which was designed for wired 
     network. The reasons can be list in the following, firstly, 
     traditional IDS largely depends on monitoring and analysis of the 
     entire network real-time services, but wireless networks can only 
     provide partial data information for intrusion detection, because  
     we can but get the data which is restricted within the wireless 
     communication range. IDS must employ these half-baked data 
     information to achieve intrusion and detection. Secondly, the link  
     of mobile network is slow, the bandwidth is limited, and the nodes 
     rely on battery to supply power, these features make that it has  
     very strict demands on communication and does not adopt the 
     communication protocol designed for wired IDS. Thirdly, there is  
     not an obvious boundary between normal and in normal operation due 
     to high-speed mobile network topology changing. The nodes sending 
     wrong messages may be the captured nodes or nodes temporarily  
     losing synchronization due to fast moving. Generally, it is 
     difficult for IDS to identify the real intrusion and the temporary 
     system malfunction. Thereby, we think that the main point of  
     wireless intrusion and detection standard research is technology 
     investigation. A pertinent standard will be instituted based on the 
     application level of network until the technology become very 
     advanced.  
      
     At present, there are mainly two intrusion and detection systems 
     reputed: distributed intrusion-detection system based on mobile  
     agent, ad hoc network distributed intrusion-detection system. The 
     former's core is mobile agent module. Based on the different  
     function of number limited mobile agents in ad hoc network, mobile 
     agents can be distributed to different nodes, and execute  
     different intrusion detection mission. An action implementing  
     model can take appropriate measures according to the final test 
     results. As the number of mobile agents are significantly reduced, 
     this intrusion-detection system model has lower network overhead  
     than other IDS. Ad hoc network intrusion detection system requires 
     all the nodes in the network to participate to detect intrusion and 
     make response. Each node is equipped with an IDS agent, the IDS 
     agents using a statistical abnormity-based detection technology.  
     When a node makes an exceptional report, the IDS agents in  
     different regions co-operate to launch global intrusion detection 
     and make response. In the security research of ad hoc and cellular  
     integrated network, CAMA structure discussed intrusion detection.  
   
  Huang                  Expires Dec. 2010              [Page 30] 
                                      
   
  Internet-Draft     Wireless Security Architecture    Jul. 2010 
   
     If an intrusion node is detected, CAMA agent will broadcast  
     security information to the entire network through base station.  
     The mail function of intrusion detection is to solve routing 
     security issues caused by CAMA nodes deliberately provide  
     incorrect location information to the base station. When a node 
     receive a routing table from base station, and finds that the next 
     hop node does not exist, then it sends a wrong routing report to  
     the base station. CAMA agent finds out the malicious node then  
     kick it out from network. 
      
     With the rising risk coefficient of network security, in addition  
     to improving the conventional and traditional techniques (pattern 
     recognition and integrity detection), network intrusion detection 
     system should take much attention to investigate statistical and 
     analyzing technologies, we suggest the specific requirements and 
     specifications of the detection range, the percentage of system 
     resource accounting and warning accuracy probability by combining 
     with new methods such as distributed intrusion detection,  
     application layer intrusion detection and intelligent intrusion 
     detection. Future technology trends can be embodied in the  
     following aspects: 
      
     (1) Coexistence of detection and firewall technology 
      
     Basically speaking, detection techniques represented by IDS are  
     very different from access control technology represented by 
     firewall. Firewall is a gateway format; it requires high  
     performance and high reliability. So the firewall pays attention  
     to requirements of throughput, delay, and HA. The main features of 
     the firewall are passing (transmission) and off (blocking)  
     functions, so requirements of transmission rata are very high. The 
     features of IDS are detecting and discovering, its goal is to 
     decrease the probability of lost and miss record. In this sense, 
     detection and firewall technology will concern each own 
     characteristics in a long period of time. Their performance and 
     reliability are enhanced dependently; they cannot replace each  
     other or simply integrate together. 
      
     (2) Cooperation of detection and access control is an inevitable 
     trend 
      
     Although there are some differences between detection and access 
     control technology, it is an urgent requirement and inevitable  
     trend that the two technologies work together and integrate their 
     application. The integration of security products, collaboration,  
     and centralized management is a trend of network security. Large 
     enterprises need integrative security solution schemes and thin 
     granularity security control methods. In one hand, the less large 
   
  Huang                  Expires Dec. 2010              [Page 31] 
                                      
   
  Internet-Draft     Wireless Security Architecture    Jul. 2010 
   
     enterprises want to get practical security guarantee, on the other 
     hand, they do not want to invest much money to ensure information 
     security. From the early active response intrusion detection  
     system to the linkage of intrusion detection systems and  
     firewalls, and to the IPS and IMS, they form a continuous  
     improving process of solving security needs.  
      
     (3) Integration of multiple technologies is the future trend 
      
     The point of view, "centralized detection, distributed control"  
     is very important to how to consider the trend of detection and 
     access control technology. IDS which is not entirely satisfied  
     can become accuracy by manual analysis. Similarly, a more accuracy  
     result will be achieved though centralized detecting and  
     associated analysis with other detecting technologies after large-
     scale IDS deployment. Thus, overall events detection will replace 
     partial events detection. Overall response and control can be 
     implemented according to the overall detecting results.  
     In conclusion, as a proactive security guard technology, the 
     intrusion detection system provides real-time protection of  
     internal attacks, external attacks and miss operations, and make a 
     interception and response to the intrusion before endanger the 
     network system. With the increasing secure demands of network 
     communication technology, in order to provide reliable services  
     for e-commerce and other network applications, intrusion detection 
     systems can provide secure services from the point view of 
     tridimensional depth and multi-level defense of network security. 
     People will pay much more attention to intrusion detection systems  
     in future. 
      
  4.2.6. Mobile E-commerce Secure Technology  
      
     The defending ability of mobile e-commerce can be enhanced by 
     investigating technology and increasing the standardization of  
     secure technology in the mobile e-commerce application process. 
     Mobile secure technology protects important information of  
     merchants and customers in the mobile commerce, and maintains the 
     credibility and property of the business system. It is obvious that 
     mobile e-commerce can be used and extended no other than taking 
     appropriate secure technology. Though many secure technologies  
     should be investigated, the crucial technologies of mobile e-
     commerce must stress much more efforts to get evolution and form a 
     standard. The crucial technologies are expressed as follows: 
      
     (1) End to end secure strategies. As for mobile e-commerce service, 
     end to end security means that each feeble part should be  
     protected; data transmission from source node to destination is 
     absolutely safe, including each stage of the transmission process. 
   
  Huang                  Expires Dec. 2010              [Page 32] 
                                      
   
  Internet-Draft     Wireless Security Architecture    Jul. 2010 
   
     That is looking to find every weak point and to take appropriate 
     secure and privacy measures to ensure that the transmission process  
      each channel is safe. Mobile e-commences have brought a lot of 
     equipment, they run different operating systems and employ  
     different standards, so safety has become more complex; 
      
     (2) Employ WPKI technology. End to end security of data  
     transmission, users' secure authentication and reliable  
     transaction, can be achieved via deploying wireless public key 
     infrastructure (WPKI) technology. WPKI uses public key  
     cryptography and opening standard technology to build credible 
     security architecture which can facilitate transactions and  
     secure communications authentication in public wireless network. 
     Reliable PKI can not only authenticate users, protect the  
     integrity of data transmission and confidentiality, but also can 
     help enterprises to implement non-replication ability, so as to 
     prevent parties deny their transaction; 
      
     (3) Identity authentication. Strengthen the bargainer identity 
     recognition management. In the mobile commerce transaction  
     process, the accuracy of users' access and authorization is 
     guaranteed by strengthening the management of users' identity 
     authentication. The behalf of two parties in transaction is not 
     damaged via the real identity authentication; 
      
     (4) Mobile payment. As the mobile payments are often happen in an 
     open environment of mobile Internet, the parties of the  
     transactions may not trust each other. In many cases, there are  
     many dissensions in transactions, so fairness of transaction plays 
     an important role in mobile payment. The so-called fairness of 
     transaction refer to two parties achieve each dealing goals or not 
     when the transaction is over. Each party is equal to others when 
     implement mobile payment protocol.  
      
     In addition, mobile payment must consider protecting the anonymity 
     of user's privacy. Businessman, listener-in and banks like  
     anonymity, the current system achieved that businessman and 
     listener-in do not know the identity of users, but banks know the 
     users' real identity. Mobile payment does not completely realize 
     incapable tracking of users and mobile payment, and also the  
     unable payment linking. In addition, because of anonymous mobile 
     payment characteristic, honest users are easily deceived by  
     dishonest users, so it is necessary to repeal the anonymity of 
     dishonest users. 
   

  5.  IANA Considerations


  Huang                  Expires Dec. 2010              [Page 33] 
                                      
   
  Internet-Draft     Wireless Security Architecture    Jul. 2010 
   
    This document makes not requests for IANA action.

  6.  Security Considerations 
      
    The content of the Category header-field is not secure, private or
    integrity-guaranteed, and due caution should be exercised when 
    using it.

  7.  References

  7.1. Normative References

     [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
                Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

  Author's Address 
     
     China National Digital Switching System Engineering&Technological 
     R&D Center 
     No. 780, BOX 1001 
     Zhengzhou,Henan,450002 P.R.China 
     Phone: +86-0371-81632917 
      
     EMail: rxmhkz@126.com 




























   
  Huang                  Expires Dec. 2010              [Page 34] 
                                      
