


ConEx                                                    B. Briscoe, Ed.
Internet-Draft                                                        BT
Intended status: Informational                            R. Woundy, Ed.
Expires: January 12, 2012                                        Comcast
                                                           July 11, 2011


                      ConEx Concepts and Use Cases
                   draft-ietf-conex-concepts-uses-02

Abstract

   This document provides the entry point to the set of documentation on
   a new Congestion Exposure (ConEx) protocol.  It motivates a new ConEx
   field at the IP layer, focusing on the 'why' rather than the 'how'.
   In the absence of such a protocol, traffic is subjected to numerous
   traffic management checks and limits as it crosses the Internet.  The
   purpose of this protocol is to expose congestion to network
   operators, so that they have no need to intervene at all when there
   is no congestion, and so they have exactly the right information when
   there is congestion.  Then it will at least be possible for traffic
   management to be application-neutral, openly transparent and free of
   unnecessary restraints.  Although traffic management is the focus of
   this document, it also briefly introduces a number of other important
   potential uses for ConEx, demonstrating its role as a generative
   technology and justifying its placement in the IP layer.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 12, 2012.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.



Briscoe & Woundy        Expires January 12, 2012                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft         ConEx Concepts & Use Cases              July 2011


   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Concepts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     2.1.  Definitions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     2.2.  Non-Goals of ConEx and Common Misconceptions . . . . . . .  8
   3.  Traffic Management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     3.1.  Existing Approaches to Traffic Management  . . . . . . . .  9
   4.  Exposing Congestion  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     4.1.  ECN - a Step in the Right Direction  . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   5.  ConEx Use Cases  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     5.1.  Inform the Operator's Traffic Management . . . . . . . . . 13
     5.2.  Consequence: Incentivise Scavenger Transports  . . . . . . 13
     5.3.  Consequence: User-Controlled Intra-Class Quality of
           Service (QoS)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
     5.4.  Other Use-Cases  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   6.  Deployment Arrangements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
     6.1.  Incremental Deployment Features of the Protocol
           Mechanism  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
     6.2.  Per-Network Deployment Concepts  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
     6.3.  Single Receiving Network Scenario  . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
     6.4.  Other Initial Deployment Scenarios . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
   7.  Potential Issues or Non-Issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
     7.1.  Congestion as a Commercial Secret  . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
     7.2.  Self Congestion  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
   8.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
     8.1.  Information Security . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
   9.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
   10. Conclusions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
   11. Acknowledgments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
     11.1. Contributors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
   12. Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
   Appendix A.  Changes from previous drafts (to be removed by
                the RFC Editor) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23







Briscoe & Woundy        Expires January 12, 2012                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft         ConEx Concepts & Use Cases              July 2011


1.  Introduction

   The power of Internet technology comes from multiplexing shared
   capacity with packets rather than circuits.  Network operators
   usually provide sufficient shared capacity, but whenever too much
   packet load meets too little shared capacity, congestion results.
   Congestion appears as either increased delay, missing packets or
   packets explicitly marked with ECN [RFC3168].  Referring to Figure 1,
   congestion control currently relies on the transport receiver
   detecting these 'Congestion Signals' and informing the transport
   sender in 'Congestion Feedback Signals'.  The sender is then meant to
   reduce its rate in response.

   This document provides the entry point to the set of documentation on
   Congestion Exposure (ConEx).  It motivates a new ConEx field at the
   IP layer, focusing on the 'why' rather than the 'how'.  A companion
   document about the ConEx protocol mechanism gives the 'how'
   [ConEx-Abstract-Mech].  Briefly, the idea is for the sender to
   continually signal expected congestion in the headers of any data it
   sends.  To a first approximation the sender does this by relaying the
   'Congestion Feedback Signals' back into the IP layer.  They then
   travel unchanged across the network to the receiver (shown as 'IP-
   Layer-ConEx-Signals' in Figure 1).  Certain IP layer devices can then
   use this new information, for example as input to traffic management.

   ,---------.                                               ,---------.
   |Transport|                                               |Transport|
   | Sender  |   .                                           |Receiver |
   |         |  /|___________________________________________|         |
   |     ,-<---------------Congestion-Feedback-Signals--<--------.     |
   |     |   |/                                              |   |     |
   |     |   |\           Transport Layer Feedback Flow      |   |     |
   |     |   | \  ___________________________________________|   |     |
   |     |   |  \|                                           |   |     |
   |     |   |   '         ,-----------.               .     |   |     |
   |     |   |_____________|           |_______________|\    |   |     |
   |     |   |    IP Layer |           |  Data Flow      \   |   |     |
   |     |   |             |(Congested)|                  \  |   |     |
   |     |   |             |  Network  |--Congestion-Signals--->-'     |
   |     |   |             |  Device   |                    \|         |
   |     |   |             |           |                    /|         |
   |     `----------->--(new)-IP-Layer-ConEx-Signals-------->|         |
   |         |             |           |                  /  |         |
   |         |_____________|           |_______________  /   |         |
   |         |             |           |               |/    |         |
   `---------'             `-----------'               '     `---------'

   Figure 1: Where the ConEx Protocol Fits in the Internet Architecture



Briscoe & Woundy        Expires January 12, 2012                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft         ConEx Concepts & Use Cases              July 2011


   Current traffic management solutions limit traffic based on either
   bit-rate or volume.  For instance, weighted fair queuing (based on
   [RFC0970]) shares out bit-rate when a link is congested.  However it
   fails to consider how much of the time a consumer keeps the link
   busy, which is the main factor that determines everyone else's bit-
   rate.  To try to address this issue, many network operators have
   introduced volume limits.  However, these tend to be either not
   strict enough during congested periods, or unnecessarily strict when
   traffic is light.

   Because each solution only partially addresses the problem, operators
   keep adding more solutions.  So a data path across the Internet often
   encounters numerous blockages and throttles in each network it
   crosses.  This clutter is actually a symptom of a deeper underlying
   problem: neither bit-rate nor volume is the right metric.

   Traffic management would be so much better (and simpler) if
   congestion were visible in packets.  Then, whenever congestion was
   not present, all restraints could be removed, leaving the full
   capacity available to everyone.  But if some excessive users were
   causing a lot of congestion, the traffic management function would
   know and be able to directly limit their traffic, in order to protect
   the service of other users sharing the same capacity.

   ConEx exposes exactly the right information for this, in the IP
   layer.  It reveals a consumer's overall contribution to congestion,
   which is a direct measure of how much one user affects others.  ConEx
   makes this easy to measure--as easy as counting straight volume,
   except you only count the volume of packets with ConEx markings.
   With the right metric visible, traffic management would only have to
   be done once on a path because it would be done well.

   In the absence of the right metric, some operators have deployed deep
   packet inspection (DPI) equipment; not just in the public Internet
   but also in enterprise and campus networks.  Their main aim has been
   to identify and limit specific types of application that they
   associate with heavy usage.

   With ConEx, a network operator can manage traffic without dipping
   into the higher layers, because ConEx makes the relevant bulk
   congestion information accessible at the IP layer.  This solves two
   problems that have made DPI controversial: traffic management can be
   application-neutral and compatible with IPsec encryption.

   Also, because ConEx information is added explicitly at the IP layer,
   it is visible to provider and consumer alike.  Therefore traffic
   contracts or acceptable use policies can be based on a quantifiable
   metric that is open and transparent to both parties, so that it will



Briscoe & Woundy        Expires January 12, 2012                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft         ConEx Concepts & Use Cases              July 2011


   be sufficient to manage traffic without extra non-transparent
   wriggle-room and caveats.

   To summarise so far, ConEx is designed to make it simple to do
   traffic management that is transparent, neutral and free of
   unnecessary restraints.  Although it is not our place to make a
   network provider meet these requirements, ConEx is designed to make
   this the simplest service to provide.

   {ToDo: review this para when done and shorten} This introduction has
   focused on traffic management as the main use for ConEx.  However,
   ConEx is intended as a generative technology, with a wider range of
   potential uses.  The document structure reflects this.  Section 3
   overviews existing approaches to traffic management and Section 4
   explains why exposing congestion would address their limitations.
   Section 5 introduces the main use-cases for ConEx: traffic
   management, incentivising scavenger transports and intra-class
   quality of service as well as briefly mentioning others.  Then
   Section 6 presents how how the above use-cases might drive deployment
   of ConEx.  Finally, Section 7 discusses a number of potential issues
   (and non-issues) that are often raised about ConEx, before the usual
   tailpiece sections in conclusion.

   But before all this, Section 2 introduces the basic concepts
   necessary to understand ConEx, as well as dispelling a number of
   common misconceptions.

2.  Concepts

   Despite its central role in network control and management,
   congestion is a remarkably hard concept to define.  [Bauer09]
   provides a good academic background.  For the purposes of ConEx, the
   definition below focuses on how congestion would be measured, rather
   than precisely what it is.  Our definition of congestion is then
   equivalent to the loss probability (or the marking probability if ECN
   is used).

   ConEx is essentially about accountability for congestion (or blame in
   crude language).  The blame for congestion lies equally between too
   little capacity and too much traffic.  On the capacity side,
   congestion itself measures how badly the network provider is to
   blame.  On the traffic side, in a shared network, the blame is split
   among all the users.  Congestion-volume measures how much of each
   user's traffic is to blame for the congestion.  Note that congestion-
   volume is a property of traffic, whereas congestion is a property of
   a link or a path.

   Congestion-volume is a relatively newly defined metric that is



Briscoe & Woundy        Expires January 12, 2012                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft         ConEx Concepts & Use Cases              July 2011


   central to ConEx.  To grasp an intuitive feel for what congestion-
   volume measures, some network operators give you an allowance and
   only count data volume during the peak period against it.  This is
   equivalent to counting your congestion-volume by assuming that
   congestion is 100% during the peak period and 0% otherwise.

   The congestion-volume metric is more refined but broadly equivalent
   to the above time-of-day volume example and still as simple to
   measure.  Imagine Alice sends 1GB while the loss-probability is a
   constant 0.2%.  Then her contribution to congestion (or congestion-
   volume) is 1GB x 0.2% = 2MB.  If she then sends 3GB while congestion
   is 0.1%, this adds 3MB to her congestion-volume.  Her total
   contribution to congestion is then 2MB+3MB = 5MB.

   To measure Alice's congestion-volume no-one has to do all these
   multiplications and additions.  It is simply a matter of counting the
   total volume of Alice's traffic that was discarded (a queue with a
   percentage loss involves multiplication inherently).

   Finally, there is yet another way to cut the blame for congestion.
   Recall that the level of congestion itself measures the provider's
   blame.  However, in an internetwork there are multiple providers.  If
   a data centre network with zero congestion is connected to an access
   network and sends traffic over a link with 0.4% loss probability,
   then clearly all the blame for congestion lies with the access
   network.  However, at another time, there might be 0.1% congestion
   across the data centre and 0.7% across the access, making 0.8% end-
   to-end congestion across the path.

   In order to apportion blame accordingly, ConEx information is placed
   in the IP layer so that a simple border meter can see how much of the
   congestion is on one side or other, termed upstream and downstream
   congestion.

   If A and B are connected within a chain of more than two networks, A
   attributes all congestion beyond B to B, and vice versa.  As far as A
   is concerned, B chooses who to route to, so B takes responsibility
   for its choices.

2.1.  Definitions

   Congestion:  Congestion occurs when any user's traffic suffers
      increased delay, loss or ECN marking as a result of one or more
      network resources becoming overloaded.  For the purposes of ConEx,
      the focus is on concrete signals of congestion (ECN and loss),
      therefore delay is set to one side.  Congestion is measured as the
      probability of loss or the probability of ECN marking, usually
      expressed as dimensionless percentages.



Briscoe & Woundy        Expires January 12, 2012                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft         ConEx Concepts & Use Cases              July 2011


   Congestion-volume:  For any granularity of traffic (packet, flow,
      aggregate, link, etc.), the volume of bytes dropped or marked in a
      given period of time.  Conceptually, data volume multiplied by the
      instantaneous congestion each packet of the volume experienced.
      Usually expressed in bytes (or MB, GB, of course).

   Congestion-rate:  For any granularity of traffic (packet, flow,
      aggregate, link, etc.), the instantaneous rate of traffic
      discarded or marked due to congestion.  Conceptually, the
      instantaneous bit-rate of the traffic weighted by the
      instantaneous congestion it experiences.  Usually expressed in
      b/s.

   Upstream Congestion:  The accumulated level of congestion experienced
      by a traffic flow thus far, relative to a point along its path.
      In other words, at any point the Upstream Congestion is the
      accmulated level of congestion the traffic flow has experienced as
      it travels from the sender to that point.  At the receiver this is
      equivalent to the end-to-end congestion level that (usually) is
      reported back to the sender.

   Downstream Congestion:  The level of congestion a flow of traffic is
      expected to experience on the remainder of its path.  In other
      words, at any point the Downstream Congestion is the level of
      congestion the traffic flow is yet to experience as it travels
      from that point to the receiver.  Aka. Rest-of-Path Congestion.

   Network provider:  (also 'operator'): the term is not confined to
      Internet service providers (ISPs) who run commercial public
      networks but is also intended to generalise to operators of
      enterprise, campus and other networks.

   Consumer:  A general term representing the contractual entity such as
      a user or business or institution that uses the service of a
      network provider.  There is no implication that the contract has
      to be commercial; for instance the consumers of a University or
      enterprise network service would be students or employees and they
      might well be required to comply with some form of contract or
      acceptable use policy.  There is also no implication that the
      consumer is necessarily an end-consumer.  Where two networks form
      a customer-provider relationship, the term consumer is also
      intended to cover the customer network.

   [ConEx-Abstract-Mech] gives further definitions for aspects of ConEx
   to do with protocol mechanisms.






Briscoe & Woundy        Expires January 12, 2012                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft         ConEx Concepts & Use Cases              July 2011


2.2.  Non-Goals of ConEx and Common Misconceptions

   Congestion exposure is about the transport sender exposing congestion
   to the network, not the other way round.  That would not make sense
   given by design the transport endpoints handle congestion in the
   TCP/IP protocol suite.

   Nonetheless, it is a non-goal for IP layer devices to use this ConEx
   information to do fine-grained congestion control.  That is still
   best done at the transport sender.  There is also no expectation that
   the information will be used by every IP router and forwarding
   device.  More likely, specific ConEx-based functions like traffic
   management will be added to edge routers.  This in turn should
   incentivize end-system transports to be more careful about congesting
   others.

   Note that good behaviour at individual flow granularity is the
   intended outcome, not the forcing function--it is the end, not the
   means.  Enforcing per-flow compliance to the TCP congestion response
   (or any per-flow rate enforcement) is a non-goal:

   o  It used to be commonly believed that TCP-friendliness was critical
      to fairness on the Internet.  However, no congestion control
      algorithm can determine how much data an application transfers, or
      how many flows it opens, or which congestion control algorithm an
      application uses, or how many applications the user runs, or how
      many users are active at once.  These factors all have a stronger
      impact on how great a share of a link is available for any
      particular data transfer.  To achieve fairness at this broader
      granularity (between users, homes, sites or whole networks)
      requires that individual flows in the same bottleneck will
      sometimes be very unequal.

   o  If the network forced everything to be TCP-friendly, some
      important applications would not work.  Worse still, this would
      prevent deployment of higher performance replacements to TCP.  It
      is important to allow give and take between one user's flows: some
      can be more aggressive than TCP and others less, e.g. long
      transfers, following the example of LEDBAT [LEDBAT] (see
      Section 5.2).

   Therefore, network enforcement of per-flow fairness is not only a
   non-goal, it would be a harmful goal in many respects.

   Capacity provisioning is another area of confusion in relation to
   ConEx.  Congestion-based traffic management is not an alternative to
   good capacity provisioning.  Either or both can be good practice
   depending on the situation, and ConEx can provide a useful metric for



Briscoe & Woundy        Expires January 12, 2012                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft         ConEx Concepts & Use Cases              July 2011


   both (see Section 5.4).

   Any network that is persistently highly congested is inefficient.
   However, the total absence of congestion from _all_ parts of a
   network is equally inefficient.  If an end-to-end transport protocol
   cannot go fast enough to find a bottleneck somewhere along the path--
   typically in an access network--it is probably broken.  The long-
   standing aim of congestion control has been to find the healthy point
   of balance with a low level of congestion _somewhere _on the path.
   Just to be clear though, zero congestion somewhere else (e.g. the
   core) is also perfectly healthy.

3.  Traffic Management

   Since 1988 congestion management has been the responsibility of the
   end-systems in the Internet architecture.  The network signals
   congestion to the receiver, the receiver feeds this back to the
   sender and the sender is expected to reduce the traffic it sends.

   Nonetheless, since at least when Nagle proposed fair queuing in 1985
   [RFC0970], it has been recognised that end-systems alone cannot be
   entrusted with sharing out capacity between themselves.

   Since then capacity has been shared by a mix of traffic management
   approaches, partly network-based (weighted round-robin scheduling,
   weighted fair queuing, etc) and partly host-based (TCP).  However, in
   recent years, network operators became concerned that a relatively
   small number of end-machines were consuming a disproportionately high
   share of network resources.  This is actually because both TCP and
   all the traditional network-based approaches only share out a
   bottleneck at each instant.  They fail to take account of how much of
   the time a consumer is keeping the link busy, which is the main
   factor that determines everyone else's bit-rate.

   As a result, some network operators introduced additional limits
   based on data volume transferred over time.  These also were
   generally too blunt an instrument, because they counted volume
   whether or not it was sent at a congested time that would limit other
   users.  Some operators have therefore tried to address this perceived
   problem by introducing further traffic management boxes that
   artificially starve certain types of traffic that they associate with
   heavy usage.

3.1.  Existing Approaches to Traffic Management

   Beyond this brief history, the authors have chosen not to
   exhaustively list current approaches to traffic management.  Broadly
   they can be divided into those that happen at Layer 3 of the OSI



Briscoe & Woundy        Expires January 12, 2012                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft         ConEx Concepts & Use Cases              July 2011


   model and those that use information gathered from higher layers.  In
   general these approaches attempt to find a "proxy" measure for
   congestion.  Layer 3 approaches include:

   o  Rate-based -- the traffic rate per user or per network is
      constrained.  The absolute rate a given consumer sends at may be
      limited, perhaps more at peak hours, or relative rates per
      consumer are equalised at a known bottleneck.  The average rate or
      more typically the 95th percentile taken over periods of a few
      minutes is also commonly used as the basis for inter-network
      billing.

   o  Volume accounting -- the overall volume of traffic a given
      consumer sends (and/or receives) is measured.  Consumers may be
      subject to an absolute volume cap (e.g. 10Gbytes per month) or the
      "heaviest" users may be sanctioned in some other manner.

   Higher layer approaches include:

   o  Bottleneck per-flow rate policing -- bottleneck flow rate policers
      (e.g. approximate fair dropping or AFD) aim to share the available
      capacity at a given bottleneck between all concurrent flows.

   o  DPI and application rate policing -- in some regions of the world
      and particularly in mobile networks, deep packet inspection and
      other techniques are used to determine what application a given
      traffic flow is associated with [Fair-use].  Operators may then
      use this information to rate-limit or otherwise sanction certain
      applications, typically at peak hours.

   All of these current approaches suffer from some general limitations.
   First, they introduce performance uncertainty.  Flat-rate pricing
   plans are popular because users appreciate the certainty of having
   their monthly bill amount remain the same for each billing period,
   allowing them to plan their costs accordingly.  But while flat-rate
   pricing avoids billing uncertainty, it creates performance
   uncertainty: users cannot know whether the performance of their
   connection is being altered or degraded based on how the network
   operator is attempting to manage congestion.

   Second, none of the approaches is able to make use of what may be the
   most important factor in managing congestion: the amount that a given
   endpoint contributes to congestion on the network.  This information
   simply is not available to network nodes, and neither volume nor rate
   nor application usage is an adequate proxy for congestion-volume,
   because none of these metrics measures a consumer's or network's
   actual contribution to congestion on the network.




Briscoe & Woundy        Expires January 12, 2012               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft         ConEx Concepts & Use Cases              July 2011


   Finally, none of these solutions accounts for inter-network
   congestion.  Mechanisms may exist that allow an operator to identify
   and mitigate congestion in their own network, but the design of the
   Internet means that only the end-hosts have full visibility of
   congestion information along the whole path.  ConEx allows this
   information to be visible to everyone on the path and thus allows
   operators to make better-informed decisions about controlling
   traffic.

4.  Exposing Congestion

   We argue that current traffic-control mechanisms seek to control the
   wrong quantity.  What matters in the network is neither the volume of
   traffic nor the rate of traffic: it is the contribution to congestion
   over time -- congestion means that your traffic impacts other users,
   and conversely that their traffic impacts you.  So if there is no
   congestion there need not be any restriction on the amount a user can
   send; restrictions only need to apply when others are sending traffic
   such that there is congestion.

   For example, an application intending to transfer large amounts of
   data could use a congestion control mechanism like [LEDBAT] (Low
   Extra Delay BAckground Transport) to reduce its transmission rate
   before any competing TCP flows do, by detecting an increase in end-
   to-end delay (as a measure of impending congestion).  Currently, such
   techniques rely on voluntary, altruistic action by end users and
   their application providers.  Operators cannot encourage their use,
   and worse, they penalize such applications for the large amount of
   volume they send rather than rewarding them for carefully avoiding
   congestion while sending it.

   The Internet was designed so that end-hosts detect and control
   congestion.  We argue that congestion needs to be visible to network
   nodes as well, not just to the end hosts.  More specifically, a
   network needs to be able to measure how much congestion any
   particular traffic expects to cause between the monitoring point in
   the network and the destination ("rest-of-path congestion").  This
   would be a new capability.  Today a network can use Explicit
   Congestion Notification (ECN) [RFC3168] to detect how much congestion
   the traffic has suffered between the source and a monitoring point
   ("upstream congestion"), but not beyond.  This new capability would
   enable an ISP to give incentives for the use of LEDBAT-like
   applications that seek to minimise congestion in the network whilst
   also being able to determine if excessive use of traditional UDP or
   even TCP applications was contributing excessively to congestion.

   So we propose a new approach which we call Congestion Exposure.  We
   propose that congestion information should be made visible at the IP



Briscoe & Woundy        Expires January 12, 2012               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft         ConEx Concepts & Use Cases              July 2011


   layer, so that any network node can measure the contribution to
   congestion of an aggregate of traffic as easily as straight volume
   can be measured today.  Once the information is exposed in this way,
   it is then possible to use it to measure the true impact of any
   traffic on the network.

   In general, congestion exposure gives operators a principled way to
   hold their customers accountable for the impact on others of their
   network usage and reward them for choosing congestion-sensitive
   applications.

4.1.  ECN - a Step in the Right Direction

   Explicit Congestion Notification [RFC3168] allows routers to
   explicitly tell end-hosts that they are approaching the point of
   congestion.  ECN builds on Active Queue Mechanisms such as random
   early detection (RED) [RFC2309] by allowing the router to mark a
   packet with a Congestion Experienced (CE) codepoint, rather than
   dropping it.  The probability of a packet being marked increases with
   the length of the queue and thus the rate of CE marks is a guide to
   the level of congestion at that queue.  This CE codepoint travels
   forward through the network to the receiver which then informs the
   sender that it has seen congestion.  The sender is then required to
   respond as if it had experienced a packet loss.  Because the CE
   codepoint is visible in the IP layer, this approach reveals the
   upstream congestion level for a packet.

   Alas, this is not enough - ECN gives a network node an idea of the
   congestion experienced on the path up to that node.  If this network
   node were near a receiver, it could help hold that receiver
   accountable for the congestion caused by incoming traffic.  But a
   receiver can only indirectly influence incoming congestion, by
   politely asking the sender to control it.  A receiver cannot make a
   sender install an adaptive codec, or install LEDBAT instead of TCP
   congestion-control.  And a receiver cannot cause an attacker to stop
   flooding it with traffic.

   What is needed is knowledge of the downstream congestion level
   relative to the node in the network that is measuring it.  That is,
   the congestion expected from that point along the rest of the path to
   the receiver.  This requires additional information that is still
   concealed from the network, but which ConEx is designed to reveal.

5.  ConEx Use Cases

   This section sets out some of the potentially most important use
   cases for ConEx.  These use cases rely on some of the components
   described in [ConEx-Abstract-Mech].  The authors don't claim this is



Briscoe & Woundy        Expires January 12, 2012               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft         ConEx Concepts & Use Cases              July 2011


   an exhaustive list of use cases, nor that they have equal merit.  But
   these use cases represent a consensus among people that have been
   working on this approach for some years.

5.1.  Inform the Operator's Traffic Management

   Currently many operators impose some form of traffic management.
   They consider this as an economic necessity particularly at peak
   hours-- the only reason their networks work as a commercial concern
   is that they can rely on statistical multiplexing to share their
   expensive network between large numbers of customers.  In order to
   ensure all customers get decent performance from the network, they
   subject the "heaviest" customers to some form of traffic management
   (see Existing Approaches to Traffic Management in Section 3.1).
   Often multiple approaches are added on top of each other, including
   resorting to expensive flow aware devices such as DPI boxes or flow-
   aware routers.  This is probably a sign that none of the approaches
   are really addressing the problem properly.

   ConEx offers a better approach that will actually target the traffic
   from consumers that contribute most to any congestion, and otherwise
   stand aside without intervening.  By using Ingress or Egress
   Policers, an operator can identify which consumers are causing the
   greatest congestion-volume throughout the network.  This can then be
   used as the basis for traffic management decisions.  The Ingress
   Policer described in [Policing-freedom] is one interesting approach
   that gives the consumer a congestion-volume allowance as the fill-
   rate of a token-bucket, but where the tokens give the right to cause
   bits of congestion-volume, rather than to send bits of data-volume.
   So long as consumers stay within their limit, then their traffic is
   unaffected.  Once they exceed that limit then their traffic will be
   slowed temporarily.

5.2.  Consequence: Incentivise Scavenger Transports

   Recent work proposes a new approach for QoS where traffic is provided
   with a less than best effort or "scavenger" quality of service.  The
   idea is that low priority but high volume traffic such as OS updates,
   P2P file transfers and view-later TV programs should be allowed to
   use any spare network capacity, but should rapidly get out of the way
   if a higher priority or interactive application starts up.  To a
   degree, this facility can be provided in the network.  Low Extra
   Delay BAckground Transport [LEDBAT] is an example of a new type of
   solution being actively explored which proposes that hosts can
   provide this scavenger service for themselves using a new congestion
   control algorithm.  LEDBAT yields when seeking out bandwidth if it
   detects that delay is rising, and other similar protocols share
   capacity less aggressively when competing with protocols like TCP.



Briscoe & Woundy        Expires January 12, 2012               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft         ConEx Concepts & Use Cases              July 2011


   At present most operators assume a strong correlation between the
   volume of a flow and the impact that flow causes in the network.
   This assumption can fail badly for protocols like LEDBAT that
   transfer large volumes of data but yield if congestion approaches.
   At the other extreme, this assumption is eroded by unresponsive
   interactive streaming which is unresponsive to congestion (inelastic)
   and hence can cause high congestion at relatively low data volumes.
   LEDBAT-like transports can transfer large volumes of data and may
   reach high transfer speeds if the network is uncongested.  Therefore
   network operators who use volume or bit-rate to judge the impact of
   traffic on their network give these protocols no encouragement, when
   they ought to welcome them.  Consequently the only current incentive
   for LEDBAT is that it can reduce self-congestion effects (see
   Section 7.2).

   If the network operator has deployed a ConEx-aware Ingress Policer
   then they are able to incentivise the use of LEDBAT because a user
   will be policed according to the overall congestion-volume their
   traffic generates, not the rate or data volume.  If all background
   file transfers are only generating a low level of congestion, then
   the sender has more "congestion budget" to "spend" on their
   interactive applications.  It can be shown [Kelly] that this approach
   improves social welfare--in other words if you limit the congestion
   that all users can generate then everyone benefits from a better
   service.

5.3.  Consequence: User-Controlled Intra-Class Quality of Service (QoS)

   Most QoS approaches require the active participation of routers to
   control the delay and loss characteristics for the traffic.  For
   real-time interactive traffic it is clear that low delay (and
   predictable jitter) are critical, and thus these probably always need
   different treatment at a router.  However if low loss is the issue
   then ConEx offers an alternative approach.

   Assuming the ingress ISP has deployed a ConEx Ingress Policer, then
   the only control on a user's traffic is dependent on the congestion
   that user has caused.  Likewise, if they are receiving traffic
   through a ConEx Egress Policer then their ISP will impose traffic
   controls (prioritisation, rate limiting, etc) based on the congestion
   they have caused.  If an end-user (be they the receiver or sender)
   wants to prioritise some traffic over other traffic then they can
   allow that traffic to generate or cause more congestion.  The price
   they will pay will be to reduce the congestion that their other
   traffic causes.

   Streaming video content-delivery is a good candidate for such ConEx-
   mediated QoS.  Such traffic can tolerate moderately high delays, but



Briscoe & Woundy        Expires January 12, 2012               [Page 14]

Internet-Draft         ConEx Concepts & Use Cases              July 2011


   there are strong economic pressures to maintain a high enough data
   rate (as that will directly influence the Quality of Experience the
   end-user receives.  This approach removes the need for bandwidth
   brokers to establish QoS sessions, by removing the need to coordinate
   requests from multiple sources to pre-allocate bandwidth, as well as
   to coordinate which allocations to revoke when bandwidth predictions
   turn out to be wrong.  There is also no need to "rate-police" at the
   boundaries on a per-flow basis, removing the need to keep per-flow
   state (which in turn makes this approach more scalable).

5.4.  Other Use-Cases

   Another Consequence: Preventing Congestion Collapse:  The Internet is
      no less vulnerable to congestion collapses now than it was in the
      1980s [RFC3714].  Under extreme congestion, ConEx-based traffic
      management would automatically override host congestion control
      and prevent congestion collapse.  Without visibility of
      congestion, other traffic management approaches do not have this
      property.

   Inform Inter-Operator Contracts:  Just as ConEx can inform a bulk
      traffic policer of the congestion-volume a particular end-consumer
      causes, it can also inform a border meter of the total congestion-
      volume one network sends into the next.  If ConEx made such
      information available, it is likely that operators would build it
      into the traffic contracts in their interconnection arrangements.

   Inform Capacity Provisioning:  {ToDo:}

6.  Deployment Arrangements

   This document is about concepts and use-cases, not mechanism.
   However, in order to describe how the above use-cases would be
   deployed, a high-level understanding of ConEx mechanism is first
   given below.

6.1.  Incremental Deployment Features of the Protocol Mechanism

   The ConEx mechanism document [ConEx-Abstract-Mech] goes to great
   lengths to design for incremental deployment in all the respects
   below.  It should be referred to for precise details on each of these
   points:

   o  The ConEx mechanism is essentially a change to the source, in
      order to re-insert congestion feedback into the network
      (Figure 1).





Briscoe & Woundy        Expires January 12, 2012               [Page 15]

Internet-Draft         ConEx Concepts & Use Cases              July 2011


   o  Source-host-only deployment is possible without any negotiation
      required, and individual transport protocol implementations within
      a source host can be updated separately.

   o  Receiver modification may optionally improve ConEx for some
      transport protocols with feedback limitations (TCP being the main
      example), but it is not a necessity

   o  Proxies for the source and/or receiver are feasible (though not
      necessarily straightforward)

   o  Queues and network forwarding do not require any modification for
      ConEx.

   o  ECN is not required in the network for ConEx.  If some network
      nodes support ECN, it can be used by ConEx.

   o  ECN is not required at the receiver for ConEx.  The sender should
      nonetheless attempt to negotiate ECN-usage with the receiver,
      given some aspects of ConEx work better the more ECN is deployed,
      particularly auditing and border measurement.

   o  Given ConEx exposes information for IP-layer policy devices to
      use, the design does not preclude possible innovative uses of
      ConEx information by other IP-layer devices, e.g. forwarding
      itself

   o  Packets indicate whether or not they support ConEx.

6.2.  Per-Network Deployment Concepts

   Network deployment-related definitions:

   Internet Ingress:  The first IP node a packet traverses that is
      outside the source's own network.  In a domestic network that will
      be the first node downstream from the home access equipment.  In
      an enterprise network this is the provider edge router.

   Internet Egress:  The last IP node a packet traverses before reaching
      the receiver's network.

   ConEx-Enabled Network:  A network whose edge nodes implement ConEx
      policy functions.

   Each network can unilaterally choose to use any ConEx information
   given by those sources using ConEx, independently of whether other
   networks use it.




Briscoe & Woundy        Expires January 12, 2012               [Page 16]

Internet-Draft         ConEx Concepts & Use Cases              July 2011


   Typically, a network will use ConEx information by deploying a policy
   function at the ingress edge of its network to monitor arriving
   traffic and to act in some way on the congestion information in those
   packets that are ConEx-enabled.  Actions might include policing,
   altering the class of service, or re-routing.  Alternatively, less
   direct actions via a management system might include triggering
   capacity upgrades, triggering penalty clauses in contracts or levying
   charges between networks based on ConEx measurements.

   {ToDO: I need to sleep, so I'll resort to bullets for the rest...}

   Audit: what it is (checks ConEx info is never less than actual
   congestion so far on the path).  If ConEx protocol is adhered to,
   there should be no place in a network where this is not true, so
   audit can be placed wherever most convenient.  But most useful
   placement is after the likely congestion locations, ideally as close
   to the egress as possible.

   Typically, a network using ConEx info will deploy a ConEx policy
   function near the ingress edge and a ConEx audit function near the
   egress edge.  The segment of the path between a ConEx policy function
   and a ConEx audit function can be considered to be a ConEx-protected
   segment of the path.  And assuming a network covers all its ingresses
   and egresses with policy functions and audit functions respectively,
   the network within this ring will be a ConEx-protected network.

   Of course, because each edge device usually serves as both an ingress
   and an egress, the two functions are both likely to be present in
   each edge device.

   [Plan view diagram of a ConEx-protected segment and ConEx-protected
   network here?]

   [We might have to explain the concept of non-negativity of congestion
   earlier in the doc, so we can use it here.  Could also require one of
   those staircase diags I used in re-ECN, but that assume ECN and ConEx
   - I'd rather focus on drop-only cases.]

   Sources can choose not to send ConEx-enabled packets.  Networks are
   expected to make it in senders' interests to expose congestion
   information in packets by treating ConEx-enabled packets better (in
   some sense) than non-ConEx packets.

   Prior to ConEx, networks have generally place constraints on incoming
   traffic to reduce the chances of it causing congestion.  For ConEx-
   enabled traffic, networks can remove these pessimistic constraints
   and solely apply constraints when the ConEx information indicates
   traffic is contributing to congestion.



Briscoe & Woundy        Expires January 12, 2012               [Page 17]

Internet-Draft         ConEx Concepts & Use Cases              July 2011


6.3.  Single Receiving Network Scenario

   Charter scenario [Description, picture and some deployment incentive
   text]

   Focusing on first step: why OS developers of senders would implement
   and why users would send ConEx.  Then, once info is there, why
   network would use it.

6.4.  Other Initial Deployment Scenarios

   o  Mobile: [conex-mobile] Couple of sentence description
      (characterised by terminals and network standards all co-
      ordinated.)

   o  Data Centre: Brief description.  (Happens because under one
      authority)

7.  Potential Issues or Non-Issues

7.1.  Congestion as a Commercial Secret

   Network operators have long viewed the congestion levels in their
   network as a business secret.  In some ways this harks back to the
   days of fixed-line telecommunications where congestion manifested as
   failed connections or dropped calls.  But even in modern data-centric
   packet networks congestion is viewed as a secret not to be shared
   with competitors.  It can be debated whether this view is sensible,
   but it may make operators uneasy about deploying ConEx.  The
   following two examples highlight some of the arguments used:

   o  An ISP buys backhaul capacity from an operator.  Most operators
      want their customers to get a decent service and so they want the
      backhaul to be relatively uncongested.  If there is competition,
      operators will seek to reassure their customers (the operators)
      that their network is not congested in order to attract their
      custom.  Some operators may see ConEx as a threat since it will
      enable those operators to see the actual congestion in their
      network.  On the other hand, operators with low congestion could
      use ConEx to show how well their network performs, and so might
      have an incentive to enable it.

   o  ISPs would like to be part of the lucrative content provision
      market.  Currently the ISP can gain a competitive edge as it can
      put its own content in a higher QoS class, whereas traffic from
      content providers has to use the Best Effort class.  The ISP may
      take the view that if they can conceal the congestion level in
      their Best Effort class this will make it harder for the content



Briscoe & Woundy        Expires January 12, 2012               [Page 18]

Internet-Draft         ConEx Concepts & Use Cases              July 2011


      provider to maintain a good level of QoS.  But in reality the
      Content Provider will just use the feedback mechanisms in
      streaming protocols such as Adobe Flash to monitor the congestion.

   Of course some might say that the idea of keeping congestion secret
   is silly.  After all, end-hosts already have knowledge of the
   congestion throughout the network, albeit only along specific paths,
   and operators can work out that there is persistent congestion as
   their customers will be suffering degraded network performance.

7.2.  Self Congestion

   {ToDo: The following para has been moved here from the Introduction.
   Re-phrase as an issue}

   Congestion takes two distinct forms.  The first results from the
   interaction of traffic from one set of users with traffic from other
   users, causing in a reduction in service (a cost) for all of them.
   the second, often referred to as "self-congestion", occurs when an
   increase in traffic from a single user causes that user to suffer a
   worse service (for instance because their traffic is being "shaped"
   by their ISP, or because they have an excessively large buffer in
   their home router).  ConEx is principally interested in the first
   form of congestion since it involves informing those other users of
   the impact you expect to have on them.

8.  Security Considerations

   This document proposes a mechanism tagging onto Explicit Congestion
   Notification [RFC3168], and inherits the security issues listed
   therein.  The additional issues from ConEx markings relate to the
   degree of trust each forwarding point places in the ConEx markings it
   receives, which is a business decision mostly orthogonal to the
   markings themselves.

   One expected use of exposed congestion information is to hold the
   end-to-end transport and the network accountable to each other.  The
   network cannot be relied on to report information to the receiver
   against its interest, and the same applies for the information the
   receiver feeds back to the sender, and that the sender reports back
   to the network.  Looking at each in turn:

   The Network  In general it is not in any network's interest to under-
      declare congestion since this will have potentially negative
      consequences for all users of that network.  It may be in its
      interest to over-declare congestion if, for instance, it wishes to
      force traffic to move away to a different network or simply to
      reduce the amount of traffic it is carrying.  Congestion Exposure



Briscoe & Woundy        Expires January 12, 2012               [Page 19]

Internet-Draft         ConEx Concepts & Use Cases              July 2011


      itself won't significantly alter the incentives for and against
      honest declaration of congestion by a network, but we can imagine
      applications of Congestion Exposure that will change these
      incentives.  There is a perception among network operators that
      their level of congestion is a business secret.  Today, congestion
      is one of the worst-kept secrets a network has, because end-hosts
      can see congestion better than network operators can.  Congestion
      Exposure will enable network operators to pinpoint whether
      congestion is on one side or the other of any border.  It is
      conceivable that forwarders with underprovisioned networks may try
      to obstruct deployment of Congestion Exposure.

   The Receiver  Receivers generally have an incentive to under-declare
      congestion since they generally wish to receive the data from the
      sender as rapidly as possible.  [Savage] explains how a receiver
      can significantly improve their throughput by failing to declare
      congestion.  This is a problem with or without Congestion
      Exposure.  [KGao] explains one possible technique to encourage
      receiver's to be honest in their declaration of congestion.

   The Sender  One proposed mechanism for Congestion Exposure deployment
      adds a requirement for a sender to advise the network how much
      congestion it has suffered or caused.  Although most senders
      currently respond to congestion they are informed of, one use of
      exposed congestion information might be to encourage sources of
      persistent congestion to back off more aggressively.  Then clearly
      there may be an incentive for the sender to under-declare
      congestion.  This will be a particular problem with sources of
      flooding attacks.  "Policing" mechanisms have been proposed to
      deal with this.

   In addition there are potential problems from source spoofing.  A
   malicious sender can pretend to be another user by spoofing the
   source address.  Congestion Exposure allows for "Policers" and
   "Traffic Shapers" so as to be robust against injection of false
   congestion information into the forward path.

8.1.  Information Security

   make a source believe it has seen more congestion than it has

   hijack a user's identity and make it appear they are dishonest at an
   egress policer

   clear or otherwise tamper with the ConEx markings

   ...




Briscoe & Woundy        Expires January 12, 2012               [Page 20]

Internet-Draft         ConEx Concepts & Use Cases              July 2011


   {ToDo} Write these up properly...

9.  IANA Considerations

   This document does not require actions by IANA.

10.  Conclusions

   {ToDo}

11.  Acknowledgments

   Bob Briscoe is partly funded by Trilogy, a research project (ICT-
   216372) supported by the European Community under its Seventh
   Framework Programme.  The views expressed here are those of the
   author only.

   The authors would like to thank the many people that have commented
   on this document.  Bernard Aboba, Mikael Abrahamsson, Joao Taveira
   Araujo, Marcelo Bagnulo Braun, Steve Bauer, Caitlin Bestler, Steven
   Blake, Louise Burness, Ken Carlberg, Alissa Cooper, Nandita
   Dukkipati, Philip Eardley, Wes Eddy, Matthew Ford, Ingemar Johansson,
   Georgios Karagiannis, Mirja Kuehlewind, Dirk Kutscher, Zhu Lei, Kevin
   Mason, Matt Mathis, David McDysan, Michael Menth, Chris Morrow, Tim
   Shepard, Hannes Tschofenig and Stuart Venters.  Please accept our
   apologies if your name has been missed off this list.

11.1.  Contributors

   The following co-edited this document through most of its life:

      Toby Moncaster
      Moncaster Internet Consulting
      Dukes
      Layer Marney
      Colchester  CO5 9UZ
      UK
      EMail: toby@moncaster.com

      John Leslie
      JLC.net
      10 Souhegan Street
      Milford, NH  03055
      US
      EMail: john@jlc.net






Briscoe & Woundy        Expires January 12, 2012               [Page 21]

Internet-Draft         ConEx Concepts & Use Cases              July 2011


12.  Informative References

   [Bauer09]              Bauer, S., Clark, D., and W. Lehr, "The
                          Evolution of Internet Congestion", 2009.

   [ConEx-Abstract-Mech]  Mathis, M. and B. Briscoe, "Congestion
                          Exposure (ConEx) Concepts and Abstract
                          Mechanism", draft-ietf-conex-abstract-mech-02
                          (work in progress), July 2011.

   [Fair-use]             Broadband Choices, "Truth about 'fair usage'
                          broadband", 2009.

   [KGao]                 Gao, K. and C. Wang, "Incrementally Deployable
                          Prevention to TCP Attack with Misbehaving
                          Receivers", December 2004.

   [Kelly]                Kelly, F., Maulloo, A., and D. Tan, "Rate
                          control for communication networks: shadow
                          prices, proportional fairness and stability",
                          Journal of the Operational Research
                          Society 49(3) 237--252, 1998, <http://
                          www.statslab.cam.ac.uk/~frank/rate.html>.

   [LEDBAT]               Shalunov, S., Hazel, G., Iyengar, J., and M.
                          Kuehlewind, "Low Extra Delay Background
                          Transport (LEDBAT)",
                          draft-ietf-ledbat-congestion-06 (work in
                          progress), May 2011.

   [Policing-freedom]     Briscoe, B., Jacquet, A., and T. Moncaster,
                          "Policing Freedom to Use the Internet Resource
                          Pool", RE-Arch 2008 hosted at the 2008 CoNEXT
                          conference , December 2008.

   [RFC0970]              Nagle, J., "On packet switches with infinite
                          storage", RFC 970, December 1985.

   [RFC2309]              Braden, B., Clark, D., Crowcroft, J., Davie,
                          B., Deering, S., Estrin, D., Floyd, S.,
                          Jacobson, V., Minshall, G., Partridge, C.,
                          Peterson, L., Ramakrishnan, K., Shenker, S.,
                          Wroclawski, J., and L. Zhang, "Recommendations
                          on Queue Management and Congestion Avoidance
                          in the Internet", RFC 2309, April 1998.

   [RFC3168]              Ramakrishnan, K., Floyd, S., and D. Black,
                          "The Addition of Explicit Congestion



Briscoe & Woundy        Expires January 12, 2012               [Page 22]

Internet-Draft         ConEx Concepts & Use Cases              July 2011


                          Notification (ECN) to IP", RFC 3168,
                          September 2001.

   [RFC3714]              Floyd, S. and J. Kempf, "IAB Concerns
                          Regarding Congestion Control for Voice Traffic
                          in the Internet", RFC 3714, March 2004.

   [RFC6077]              Papadimitriou, D., Welzl, M., Scharf, M., and
                          B. Briscoe, "Open Research Issues in Internet
                          Congestion Control", RFC 6077, February 2011.

   [Savage]               Savage, S., Wetherall, D., and T. Anderson,
                          "TCP Congestion Control with a Misbehaving
                          Receiver", ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication
                          Review , 1999.

   [conex-mobile]         Kutscher, D., Mir, F., Winter, R., Krishnan,
                          S., and Y. Zhang, "Mobile Communication
                          Congestion Exposure Scenario",
                          draft-kutscher-conex-mobile-00 (work in
                          progress), March 2011.

Appendix A.  Changes from previous drafts (to be removed by the RFC
             Editor)

   From draft-ietf-conex-concepts-uses-01 to -02:  New Abstract &
      Introduction.  Concepts and Misconceptions sections added around
      defintions.  Minor clarifications to Existing Traffic Management
      and Use-Cases sections, with Other use Cases Added.  Deployment
      Arrangements Section added.

   From draft-ietf-conex-concepts-uses-00 to -01:

      Added section on timescales: Section 6

      Revised introduction to clarify congestion definitions

      Changed source for congestion definition in Section 2

      Other minor changes

   From draft-moncaster-conex-concepts-uses-02 to
   draft-ietf-conex-concepts-uses-00 (per decisions of working group):

      Removed section on DDoS mitigation use case.






Briscoe & Woundy        Expires January 12, 2012               [Page 23]

Internet-Draft         ConEx Concepts & Use Cases              July 2011


      Removed appendix on ConEx Architectural Elements.  PLEASE NOTE:
      Alignment of terminology with the Abstract Mechanism draft has
      been deferred to the next version.

   From draft-moncaster-conex-concepts-uses-01 to
   draft-moncaster-conex-concepts-uses-02:

      Updated document to take account of the new Abstract Mechanism
      draft [ConEx-Abstract-Mech].

      Updated the definitions section.

      Removed sections on Requirements and Mechanism.

      Moved section on ConEx Architectural Elements to appendix.

      Minor changes throughout.

   From draft-moncaster-conex-concepts-uses-00 to
   draft-moncaster-conex-concepts-uses-01:

      Changed end of Abstract to better reflect new title

      Created new section describing the architectural elements of
      ConEx.  Added Edge Monitors and Border Monitors (other elements
      are Ingress, Egress and Border Policers).

      Extensive re-write of Section 5 partly in response to suggestions
      from Dirk Kutscher

      Improved layout of Section 2 and added definitions of Whole Path
      Congestion, ConEx-Enabled and ECN-Enabled.  Re-wrote definition of
      Congestion Volume.  Renamed Ingress and Egress Router to Ingress
      and Egress Node as these nodes may not actually be routers.

      Improved document structure.  Merged sections on Exposing
      Congestion and ECN.

      Added new section on ConEx requirements with a ConEx Issues
      subsection.  Text for these came from the start of the old ConEx
      Use Cases section

      Added a sub-section on Partial vs Full Deployment (Section 5.5)

      Added a discussion on ConEx as a Business Secret Section 7.1






Briscoe & Woundy        Expires January 12, 2012               [Page 24]

Internet-Draft         ConEx Concepts & Use Cases              July 2011


   From draft-conex-mechanism-00 to
   draft-moncaster-conex-concepts-uses-00:

      Changed filename to draft-moncaster-conex-concepts-uses.

      Changed title to ConEx Concepts and Use Cases.

      Chose uniform capitalisation of ConEx.

      Moved definition of Congestion Volume to list of definitions.

      Clarified mechanism section.  Changed section title.

      Modified text relating to conex-aware policing and policers (which
      are NOT defined terms).

      Re-worded bullet on distinguishing ConEx and non-ConEx traffic in
      Section 5.

Authors' Addresses

   Bob Briscoe (editor)
   BT
   B54/77, Adastral Park
   Martlesham Heath
   Ipswich  IP5 3RE
   UK

   Phone: +44 1473 645196
   EMail: bob.briscoe@bt.com
   URI:   http://bobbriscoe.net/


   Richard Woundy (editor)
   Comcast
   Comcast Cable Communications
   27 Industrial Avenue
   Chelmsford, MA  01824
   US

   EMail: richard_woundy@cable.comcast.com
   URI:   http://www.comcast.com









Briscoe & Woundy        Expires January 12, 2012               [Page 25]

