





      
      
     Energy Management Working Group                 Brad Schoening     
     Internet Draft                          Independent Consultant 
     Intended status: Informational              Mouli Chandramouli      
     Expires: October 19, 2013                    Cisco Systems Inc. 
                                                      Bruce Nordman 
                              Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory 
                                                     April 19, 2013          
      
                                         
                Energy Management (EMAN) Applicability Statement 
                   draft-ietf-eman-applicability-statement-03 


     Abstract 

        The objective of Energy Management (EMAN) is to provide an 
        energy management framework for networked devices.  This 
        document presents the applicability of the EMAN framework to a 
        variety of scenarios.  This document lists use cases and target 
        devices that can potentially implement the EMAN framework and 
        associated SNMP MIB modules.  These use cases are useful for 
        identifying requirements for the framework and MIBs.  Further, 
        we describe the relationship of the EMAN framework to relevant 
        other energy monitoring standards and architectures. 
         

     Status of this Memo 

        This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance 
        with the provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.  
         
        Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet 
        Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working 
        groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute working 
        documents as Internet-Drafts.  
         
        Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
        months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other 
        documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-
        Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than as "work 
        in progress." 
         
        The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt  
         
        The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html  
         
      
      
      
                              Expires October 19, 2013       [Page 1] 
      
     Internet-Draft    EMAN Applicability Statement     April 2013  
         

        This Internet-Draft will expire on October 19, 2013. 
         

     Copyright Notice 

        Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the 
        document authors. All rights reserved. 
         
        This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal 
        Provisions Relating to IETF Documents 
        (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of 
        publication of this document.  Please review these documents 
        carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with 
        respect to this document.  Code Components extracted from this 
        document must include Simplified BSD License text as described 
        in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided 
        without warranty as described in the Simplified BSD License. 
      

     Table of Contents 

      1. Introduction ............................................... 3 
        1.1. Energy Management Overview ..............................4 
        1.2. EMAN Document Overview  .................................4 
        1.3. Energy Measurement  .....................................5 
        1.4. Energy Management  ......................................5 
        1.5. EMAN Framework Application  .............................6 
      2. Scenarios and Target Devices     ........................... 7 
        2.1. Network Infrastructure Energy Objects  ..................7 
        2.2. Devices Powered by and Connected to a Network Device  ...8 
        2.3. Devices Connected to a Network  .........................9 
        2.4. Power Meters  ..........................................10 
        2.5. Mid-level Managers  ....................................11 
        2.6. Non-residential Building System Gateways  ..............11 
        2.7. Home Energy Gateways  ..................................12 
        2.8. Data Center Devices  ...................................13 
        2.9. Energy Storage Devices  ................................14 
        2.10. Industrial Automation Networks  .......................15 
        2.11. Printers  .............................................15 
        2.12. Off-Grid Devices  .....................................16 
        2.13. Demand Response  ......................................17 
        2.14. Power Capping  ........................................17 
      3. Use Case Patterns      .................................... 18 
        3.1. Metering  ..............................................18 
        3.2. Metering and Control  ..................................18 
        3.3. Power Supply, Metering and Control  ....................18 
        3.4. Multiple Power Sources  ................................18 
      
      
                           Expires October 19, 2013      [Page 2] 
         
     Internet-Draft    EMAN Applicability Statement     April 2013  
         

      4. Relationship of EMAN to other Standards   .................. 19 
        4.1. Data Model and Reporting  ...............................19 
              4.1.1. IEC - CIM .......................................19 
              4.1.2. DMTF.............................................19 
              4.1.3. ODVA.............................................21 
              4.1.4. Ecma SDC.........................................21 
              4.1.5. PWG..............................................22 
              4.1.6. ASHRAE...........................................22 
              4.1.7. ZigBee...........................................23 
        4.2. Measurement .............................................23 
              4.2.1. ANSI C12.........................................24 
              4.2.2. IEC 62301........................................24 
        4.3. Other ...................................................24 
              4.3.1. ISO..............................................24 
              4.3.2. Energy Star......................................25 
              4.3.3. Smart Grid.......................................25 
      5. Limitations     ............................................ 26 
      6. Security Considerations     ................................ 26 
      7. IANA Considerations     .................................... 27 
      8. Acknowledgements     ....................................... 27 
      9. References     ............................................. 27 
        9.1. Normative References ....................................27 
        9.2. Informative References ..................................27 
       
     1. Introduction 

        The focus of the Energy Management (EMAN) framework is energy 
        monitoring and management of energy objects [EMAN-DEF]. The 
        scope of devices considered are network equipment and its 
        components, and devices connected directly or indirectly to 
        the network. The EMAN framework enables monitoring 
        (heterogeneous devices to report their energy consumption) 
        and, if permissible, control.  There are multiple scenarios 
        where this is desirable, particularly considering the 
        increased importance of limiting consumption of finite energy 
        resources and reducing operational expenses. 
      
        The EMAN framework [EMAN-FRAMEWORK] describes how energy 
        information can be retrieved from IP-enabled devices using 
        Simple Network Management Protocol (SNMP), specifically, 
        Management Information Base (MIBs) for SNMP. 
         
        This document describes typical applications of the EMAN 
        framework, as well as its opportunities and limitations. It 
        also reviews other standards that are similar in part to EMAN 
        but address different domains.  This document describes how 
        those other standards relate to the EMAN framework. 
      
      
                           Expires October 19, 2013      [Page 3] 
         
     Internet-Draft    EMAN Applicability Statement     April 2013  
         

         
        The rest of the document is organized as follows.  Section 2 
        contains a list of use cases or network scenarios that EMAN 
        addresses.  Section 3 contains an abstraction of the use case 
        scenarios to distinct patterns.  Section 4 deals with other 
        standards related to EMAN and applicable to EMAN. 
         
     1.1. Energy Management Overview 

        EMAN addresses the electrical energy consumed by devices 
        connected to a network.  A first step to increase the energy 
        efficiency in network equipment and devices attached to the 
        network is to enable energy objects to report their energy usage 
        over time.  The EMAN framework addresses this problem with an 
        information model for electrical equipment: energy object 
        identification, energy object context, power measurement and 
        power characteristics.  
      
        The EMAN drafts define SNMP MIB modules based on the information 
        model.  By implementing the SNMP MIB modules, any energy object 
        can report its energy consumption according to the information 
        model.  While the MIB drafts contain MIB modules, the 
        information model can be adapted to other mechanisms such as 
        YANG modules, NETCONF etc.  
         
        It is important to distinguish energy objects that can only 
        report their own energy usage from devices that can also collect 
        and aggregate energy usage of other energy objects.  
         
        Target devices and scenarios considered for energy management 
        are presented in Section 2 with detailed examples. 
         
     1.2. EMAN Document Overview 

        The EMAN working group charter called for producing a series of 
        Internet standard drafts in the area of energy management. The 
        following drafts were created by the working group.  
         
          Applicability Statement [EMAN-AS] this document presents use 
          cases and scenarios for energy management.  In addition, other 
          relevant energy standards and architectures are discussed.  
           
          Requirements [EMAN-REQ] this document presents requirements of 
          energy management and the scope of the devices considered.  
           


      
      
                           Expires October 19, 2013      [Page 4] 
         
     Internet-Draft    EMAN Applicability Statement     April 2013  
         

          Framework [EMAN-FRAMEWORK] This document defines a framework 
          for providing energy management for devices within or 
          connected to communication networks. 
           
          Energy-Aware MIB [EMAN-AWARE-MIB] This document proposes a MIB 
          module that characterizes a device identity, context and 
          relationships to other entities. 
           
          Monitoring MIB [EMAN-MONITORING-MIB] This document defines a 
          MIB module for monitoring the power and energy consumption of 
          a device.  The MIB module contains an optional module for 
          metrics associated with power characteristics.  
           
          Battery MIB [EMAN-BATTERY-MIB] This document contains a MIB 
          module for monitoring characteristics of an internal battery.  
           
          Energy Management Terminology [EMAN-DEF] This document lists 
          the definitions for the common terms used in the Energy 
          Management Working Group. 
         
         
     1.3. Energy Measurement 

        More and more devices are able to measure and report their own 
        energy consumption.  Smart power strips and some Power over 
        Ethernet (PoE) switches can meter consumption of connected 
        devices.  However, when managed and reported through proprietary 
        means, this information is minimally useful at the enterprise 
        level. 
         
        The primary goal of the EMAN MIBs is to enable reporting and 
        management within a standard framework that is applicable to a 
        wide variety of end devices, meters, and proxies.  This enables 
        a management system to know who's consuming what, when, and how 
        at any time by leveraging existing networks, across various 
        equipment, in a unified and consistent manner.   
         
        Given that an energy object can consume energy and/or provide 
        energy to other devices, there are three types of energy 
        measurement: energy input to a device, energy supplied to other 
        devices, and net (resultant) energy consumed (the difference 
        between energy input and provided).  
         
     1.4. Energy Management 

        Beyond energy monitoring, the EMAN framework provides mechanisms 
        for energy control.  
      
      
                           Expires October 19, 2013      [Page 5] 
         
     Internet-Draft    EMAN Applicability Statement     April 2013  
         

         
        There are many cases where reducing energy consumption of 
        devices is desirable, such as when the device utilization is low 
        or when the electricity is expensive or in short supply. 
         
        In some cases, energy control requires considering the energy 
        object context.  For instance, in a building during non-business 
        hours: usually not all phones would be turned off to keep some  
        phones available in case of emergency; and office cooling is 
        usually not turned off totally, but the comfort level is 
        reduced. 
      
        Energy object control requires flexibility and support for 
        different polices and mechanisms: from centralized management 
        with a network management station, to autonomous management by 
        individual devices, and alignment with dynamic demand-response 
        mechanisms. 
         
        The EMAN framework can be used as a tool for the demand/response 
        scenario where in response to time-of-day fluctuation of energy 
        costs or possible energy shortages, it is possible to respond 
        and reduce the energy consumption for the network devices, 
        effectively changing its power state. 
      
     1.5. EMAN Framework Application 

        A Network Management System (NMS) is the entity that requests 
        information from compatible devices using SNMP protocol. An NMS 
        implements many network management functions, e.g. security 
        management, or identity management.  An NMS that deals 
        exclusively with energy is called an Energy Management System 
        (EnMS).  It may be limited to monitoring energy use, or it may 
        also implement control functions.  An EnMS collects energy 
        information for devices in the network.  
         
        Energy management can be implemented by extending existing SNMP 
        support to the EMAN specific MIBs.  SNMP provides an industry 
        proven and well-known mechanism to discover, secure, measure, 
        and control SNMP-enabled end devices.  The EMAN framework 
        provides an information and data model to unify access to a 
        large range of devices. 
         
        The scope of the target devices and the network scenarios 
        considered for energy management are listed in Section 2. 
         


      
      
                           Expires October 19, 2013      [Page 6] 
         
     Internet-Draft    EMAN Applicability Statement     April 2013  
         

     2. Scenarios and Target Devices 

        In this section a selection of scenarios for energy management 
        are presented.  The fundamental objective of the use cases is to 
        list important network scenarios that the EMAN framework should 
        solve.  These use cases then drive the requirements for the EMAN 
        framework.  
         
        Each scenario lists target devices for which the energy 
        management framework can be applied, how the reported-on devices 
        are powered, and how the reporting is accomplished.  While there 
        is some overlap between some of the use cases, the use cases 
        illustrate network scenarios that the EMAN framework supports. 
      
     2.1. Network Infrastructure Energy Objects 

        This scenario covers network devices and their components.  
        Power management of energy objects is a fundamental requirement 
        of energy management of networks.  
         
        It can be important to monitor the energy consumption and 
        possibly manage the power state of these devices at a 
        granularity level finer than just the entire device.  For these 
        devices, the chassis draws power from one or more sources and 
        feeds all its internal components.  It is highly desirable to 
        have monitoring available for individual components, such as 
        line cards, processors, and disk drives as well as peripherals 
        such as USB devices. 
      
        As an illustrative example, consider a switch with the following 
        grouping of sub-entities for which energy management could be 
        useful.  
         
          .  physical view: chassis (or stack), line cards, service 
             modules of the switch. 
          .  component view: CPU, ASICs, fans, power supply, ports 
             (single port and port groups), storage and memory. 
              
        The ENTITY-MIB provides the containment tree framework, for 
        uniquely identifying the physical sub-components of network 
        devices.  A component can be an Energy Object and the ENTITY-MIB 
        containment tree expresses if one Energy Object belongs to 
        another Energy Object (e.g. a line-card Energy Object contained 
        in a chassis Energy Object).  The table entPhysicalContainsTable 
        which has the index of entPhysicalChildIndex and the MIB object 
        entPhysicalContainedIn which points to the containing entity. 
      
      
      
                           Expires October 19, 2013      [Page 7] 
         
     Internet-Draft    EMAN Applicability Statement     April 2013  
         

        The essential properties of this use case are:  
              
          . Target devices: network devices such as routers and 
             switches as well as their components. 
          . How powered: typically by a Power Distribution Unit (PDU) 
             on a rack or from a wall outlet.  The components of a 
             device are powered by the device chassis.  
          . Reporting: direct power measurement can be performed at a 
             device level.  Components can report their power 
             consumption directly or the chassis/device that can report 
             on behalf of some components. 
      
     2.2. Devices Powered by and Connected to a Network Device 

        This scenario covers Power over Ethernet (PoE) devices.  A PoE 
        Power Sourcing Equipment (PSE) device [RFC3621] (e.g. a PoE 
        switch) provides power to a Powered Device (PD) (e.g. a desktop 
        phone).  For each port, the PSE can control the power supply 
        (switching it on and off) and meter actual power provided.  PDs 
        obtain network connectivity as well as power over a single 
        connection so the PSE can determine which device is associated 
        with each port. 
      
        PoE ports on a switch are commonly connected to devices such as 
        IP phones, wireless access points, and IP cameras.  The switch 
        needs power for its internal use and to supply power to PoE 
        ports.  Monitoring the power consumption of the switch 
        (supplying device) and the power consumption of the PoE end-
        points (consuming devices) is a simple use case of this 
        scenario. 
         
        This scenario illustrates the relationships between entities. 
        The PoE IP phone is powered by the switch.  If there are many IP 
        phones connected to the same switch and the power consumption of 
        all the IP phones can be aggregated by the switch.  In that 
        case, the switch performs the aggregation function for other 
        entities.  
         
        The essential properties of this use case are:  
              
          . Target devices: power over Ethernet devices such as IP 
             phones, wireless access points, and IP cameras. 
          . How powered: PoE devices are connected to the switch port 
             which supplies power to those devices.  
          . Reporting:  PoE device power consumption is measured and 
             reported by the switch (PSE) which supplies power.  In 
             addition, some edge devices can support the EMAN framework. 
      
      
                           Expires October 19, 2013      [Page 8] 
         
     Internet-Draft    EMAN Applicability Statement     April 2013  
         

         
        This use case can be divided into two sub cases: 
         
        a) The end device supports the EMAN framework, in which case 
           this device is an EMAN Energy Object by itself, with its own 
           UUID, like in scenario "Devices Connected to a Network" 
           below.  The device is responsible for its own power 
           reporting and control. 
         
        b) The end device does not have EMAN capabilities, and the 
           power measurement may not be able to be performed 
           independently, and so is only performed by the supplying 
           device.  This scenario is similar to the "Mid-level Manager" 
           below. 
         
        In the sub case (a) note that two power usage reporting 
        mechanisms for the same device are available: one performed by 
        the PD itself and one performed by the PSE.  Device specific 
        implementations will dictate which one to use.  
         
        It is also possible to illustrate the relationships between 
        entities.  The PoE IP phone is powered by the switch. If there 
        are many IP phones connected to the same switch and the power 
        consumption of all the IP phones can be aggregated by the 
        switch.  In that case, the switch performs the aggregation 
        function for other entities.  
      
     2.3. Devices Connected to a Network 

        The use case covers the metering relationship between an energy 
        object and the parent energy object it is connected to, while 
        receiving power from a different source. 
      
        An example is a PC which has a network connection to a switch, 
        but draws power from a wall outlet.  In this case, the PC can 
        report power usage by itself, ideally through the EMAN 
        framework. 
         
        The wall outlet the PC is plugged in can be metered for example 
        by a Smart PDU, or unmetered. 
         
        a) If metered, the PC has a powered-by relationship to the Smart   
        PDU, and the Smart PDU acts as a "Mid-Level Manager" 
         
        b) If unmetered - or running on batteries - the PC will report 
        its own energy usage as any other Energy Object to the switch, 
        and the switch can possibly provide aggregation.  
      
      
                           Expires October 19, 2013      [Page 9] 
         
     Internet-Draft    EMAN Applicability Statement     April 2013  
         

         
        These two cases are not mutually exclusive.  
         
        In terms of relationships between entities, the PC has a powered 
        by relationship to the PDU and if the power consumption of the 
        PC is metered by the PDU then there is a metered by relation 
        between the PC and the PDU.  
         
        The essential properties of this use case are:  
              
          . Target devices: energy objects that have a network 
             connection, but receive power supply from another source.  
          . How powered: end devices (e.g. PCs) receive power supply 
             from the wall outlet (unmetered), or a PDU (metered). That 
             can also be powered autonomously (batteries). 
          . Reporting: devices can measure and report the power 
             consumption directly via the EMAN framework, or, 
             communicate it to the network device (switch) and the 
             switch can report the device's power consumption via the 
             EMAN framework.  
      
     2.4. Power Meters 

        Some electrical devices are not equipped with instrumentation to 
        measure their own power and accumulated energy consumption.  
        External meters can be used to measure the power consumption of 
        such electrical devices as well as collections of devices.  This 
        use case covers energy objects able to measure or report the 
        power consumption of external electrical devices, not natively 
        connected to the network.  
         
        Three types of external metering are relevant to EMAN: PDUs, 
        standalone meters, and utility meters.  External meters can 
        measure consumption of a single device or a set of devices. 
         
        Power Distribution Unit (PDUs) usually have inbuilt meters for 
        each socket and so can measure the power supplied to each device 
        in an equipment rack.  The PDUs have remote management 
        functionality which can measure and possibly control the power 
        supply of each outlet.  
         
        Standalone meters can be placed anywhere in a power distribution 
        tree and so may measure the total of groups of devices.  Utility 
        meters monitor and report accumulated power consumption of the 
        entire building.  There can be sub-meters to measure the power 
        consumption of a portion of the building.  
         
      
      
                           Expires October 19, 2013      [Page 10] 
         
     Internet-Draft    EMAN Applicability Statement     April 2013  
         

        The essential properties of this use case are: 
         
          . Target devices: PDUs and meters. 
          . How powered: from traditional mains power but as passed 
             through a PDU or meter. 
          . Reporting: PDUs report power consumption of downstream 
             devices, usually a single device per outlet.   
         
        The meters can have a metering relationship and possibly 
        aggregation relationship between the meters and the devices for 
        which power consumption is accumulated and reported by the 
        meter.  
         
     2.5. Mid-level Managers 

        This use case covers aggregation of energy management data at 
        "mid-level managers" that can provide energy management 
        functions for themselves as well as associated devices. 
      
        A switch can provide energy management functions for all devices 
        connected to its ports, whether or not these devices are powered 
        by the switch or whether the switch provides immediate network 
        connectivity to the devices.  Such a switch is a mid-level 
        manager, offering aggregation of power consumption data for 
        other devices.  Devices report their EMAN data to the switch and 
        the switch aggregates the data for further reporting.  
         
        The essential properties of this use case:  
      
          . Target devices: devices which can perform aggregation; 
             commonly a switch or a proxy. 
          . How powered: mid-level managers are commonly powered by a 
             PDU or from a wall outlet but can be powered by any method. 
          . Reporting: the middle-manager aggregates the energy data 
             and reports that data to a NMS or higher mid-level manager.  
      
     2.6. Non-residential Building System Gateways 

        This use case describes energy management of non-residential 
        buildings.  Building Management Systems (BMS) have been in place 
        for many years using legacy protocols not based on IP.  In these 
        buildings, a gateway can provide a proxy function between IP and 
        legacy building automation protocols.  The gateway provides an 
        interface between the EMAN framework and relevant building 
        management protocols.  
         

      
      
                           Expires October 19, 2013      [Page 11] 
         
     Internet-Draft    EMAN Applicability Statement     April 2013  
         

        Due to the potential energy savings, energy management of 
        buildings has received significant attention.  There are gateway 
        network elements to manage the multiple components of a building 
        energy management system such as Heating, Ventilation, and Air 
        Conditioning (HVAC), lighting, electrical, fire and emergency 
        systems, elevators, etc.  The gateway device uses legacy 
        building protocols to communicate with those devices, collects 
        their energy usage, and reports the results.  
         
        The gateway performs protocol conversion and communicates via 
        RS-232/RS-485 interfaces, Ethernet interfaces, and protocols 
        specific to building management such as BACNET [ASHRAE], MODBUS 
        [MODBUS], or ZigBee [ZIGBEE].   
         
        The essential properties of this use case are: 
      
          . Target devices: building energy management devices - HVAC 
             systems, lighting, electrical, fire and emergency systems.  
          . How powered: any method.   
          . Reporting: the gateway collects energy consumption of non-
             IP systems and communicates the data via the EMAN 
             framework.  
      
     2.7. Home Energy Gateways 

        This use case describes the scenario of energy management of a 
        home.  The home energy gateway is another example of a proxy 
        that interfaces to electrical appliances and other devices in a 
        home.  This gateway can monitor and manage electrical equipment 
        (e.g. refrigerator, heating/cooling, or washing machine) using 
        one of the many protocols that are being developed for 
        residential devices. 
         
        In its simplest form, metering can be performed at home.  Beyond 
        the metering, it is also possible to implement energy saving 
        policies based on energy pricing from the utility grid.  The 
        EMAN information model can be applied to energy management of a 
        home.  
         
        The essential properties of this use case are:  
      
          . Target devices: home energy gateway and smart meters in a 
             home. 
          . How powered: any method. 
          . Reporting: home energy gateway can collect power 
             consumption of device in a home and possibly report the 
             metering reading to the utility.  
      
      
                           Expires October 19, 2013      [Page 12] 
         
     Internet-Draft    EMAN Applicability Statement     April 2013  
         

      
        Beyond the canonical setting of a home drawing power from the 
        utility, it is also possible to envision an energy neutral 
        situation wherein the buildings/homes that can produce and 
        consume energy with reduced or zero net importing energy from 
        the utility grid.  There are many energy production technologies 
        such as solar panels, wind turbines, or micro generators.  This 
        use case illustrates the concept of covers self-contained energy 
        generation and consumption and possibly the aggregation of the 
        energy use of homes. 
      
       2.8. Data Center Devices 

        This use case describes energy management of a data center.  
        Energy efficiency of data centers has become a fundamental 
        challenge of data center operation, as datacenters are big 
        energy consumers and have expensive infrastructure.  The 
        equipment generates heat, and heat needs to be evacuated though 
        a HVAC system. 
         
        A typical data center network consists of a hierarchy of 
        electrical energy objects.  At the bottom of the network 
        hierarchy are servers mounted on a rack; these are connected to 
        top-of-the-rack switches, which in turn are connected to 
        aggregation switches, and then to core switches.  Power 
        consumption of all network elements, servers, and storage 
        devices in the data center should be measured.  Energy 
        management can be implemented on different aggregation levels, 
        at the network level, Power Distribution Unit (PDU) level, and 
        server level. 
         
        Beyond the network devices, storage devices and servers, data 
        centers contain UPSs to provide back-up power for the facility 
        in the event in the event of a power outage.  A UPS can provide 
        backup power for many devices in a data center for a finite 
        period of time.  Energy monitoring of such energy storage 
        devices is vital from a data center network operations point of 
        view.  Presently, the UPS MIB can be useful in monitoring the 
        battery capacity, the input load to the UPS and the output load 
        from the UPS.  Currently, there is no link between the UPS MIB 
        and the ENTITY MIB.  
         
        Thus, for data center energy management, in addition to 
        monitoring the energy usage of IT equipment, it is also 
        important to monitor the remaining capacity of the UPS. 
      

      
      
                           Expires October 19, 2013      [Page 13] 
         
     Internet-Draft    EMAN Applicability Statement     April 2013  
         

        In addition to monitoring the power consumption of a data 
        center, additional power characteristic metrics should be 
        monitored.  Some of these are dynamic variations in the input 
        power supply from the grid referred to as power characteristics 
        is one metric.  Secondly, it can be useful to monitor how 
        efficiently the devices utilize power.  
         
        The nameplate power consumption (the worst case possible power 
        draw) of all devices will make it possible to know an aggregate 
        of the potential worst-case power usage and compare it to the 
        budgeted power in the data center. 
         
        The essential properties of this use case are:  
      
          . Target devices: all IT devices in a data center, such as 
             network equipment, servers, and storage devices, as well as 
             power and cooling infrastructure.  
          . How powered: any method but commonly by one or more PDUs. 
          . Reporting: devices may report on their own behalf, or for 
             other connected devices as described in other use cases.  
      
     2.9. Energy Storage Devices 

        There are two types of devices with energy storage: those whose 
        primary function is to provide power to another device (e.g. a 
        UPS), and those with a different primary function, but which 
        have energy storage as a component (e.g. a notebook).  This use 
        case covers both. 
         
        The energy storage can be a conventional battery, or any other 
        means to store electricity such as a hydrogen cell. 
         
        An internal battery can be a back-up or an alternative source of 
        power to mains power.  As batteries have a finite capacity and 
        lifetime, means for reporting the actual charge, age, and state 
        of a battery are required.  An internal battery can be viewed as 
        a component of a device and so be contained within the device 
        from an ENTITY-MIB perspective. 
         
        Battery systems are used in mobile telecom towers including for 
        use in remote locations.  It is important to monitor the 
        remaining battery life and raise an alarm when this falls below 
        a threshold.  
         
        The essential properties of this use case are:  
      
          . Target devices: devices that have an internal battery. 
      
      
                           Expires October 19, 2013      [Page 14] 
         
     Internet-Draft    EMAN Applicability Statement     April 2013  
         

          . How powered: from internal batteries or mains power. 
          . Reporting: the device reports on its internal battery. 
      
     2.10. Industrial Automation Networks 

        Energy consumption statistics in the industrial sector are 
        staggering.  The industrial sector alone consumes about half of 
        the world's total delivered energy, and is a significant user of 
        electricity.  Thus, the need for optimization of energy usage in 
        this sector is natural.  
         
        Industrial facilities consume energy in process loads, and in 
        non-process loads.   
         
        The essential properties of this use case are:  
         
          . Target devices: devices used in industrial automation.  
          . How powered: any method. 
          . Reporting: currently, CIP protocol is currently used for 
             reporting energy for these devices. 
      
     2.11. Printers 

        This use case describes the scenario of energy monitoring and 
        management of printers.  
         
        Printers in this use case stand in for all imaging equipment, 
        also including multi-function devices (MFDs), copiers, scanners, 
        fax machines, and mailing machines.   
         
        Energy use of printers has been an industry concern for several 
        decades, and they usually have sophisticated power management 
        with a variety of low-power modes, particularly for managing 
        energy-intensive thermo-mechanical components.  Printers also 
        have long made extensive use of SNMP for end-user system 
        interaction and for management generally, and cross-vendor 
        management systems manage fleets of printers in enterprises.  
        Power consumption during active modes can vary widely, with high 
        peak levels. 
         
        Printers can expose detailed power state information, distinct 
        from operational state information, with some printers reporting 
        transition states between stable long-term states.  Many also 
        support active setting of power states, and setting of policies 
        such as delay times when no activity will cause automatic 
        transition to a lower power mode.  Other features include 

      
      
                           Expires October 19, 2013      [Page 15] 
         
     Internet-Draft    EMAN Applicability Statement     April 2013  
         

        reporting on components, counters for state transitions, typical 
        power levels by state, scheduling, and events/alarms. 
         
        Some large printers also have a "Digital Front End" which is a 
        computer that performs functions on behalf of the physical 
        imaging system.  These typically have their own presence on the 
        network and are sometimes separately powered. 
         
        There are some unique characteristics of printers from the point 
        of view energy management.  While the printer is not in use, 
        there are timer based low power states, which consume little 
        power.  On the other hand, while the printer is printing or 
        copying the cylinder needs to be heated so that power 
        consumption is quite high but only for a short period of time.  
        Given this work load, periodic polling of power levels alone 
        would not suffice.  
         
        The essential properties of this use case are:  
         
          . Target devices: all imaging equipment. 
          . How powered: typically AC from a wall outlet. 
          . Reporting: devices report for themselves. 
         
     2.12. Off-Grid Devices 

        This use case concerns self-contained devices that use energy 
        but are not connected to an infrastructure power delivery grid.  
        These devices typically scavenge energy from environmental 
        sources such as solar energy or wind power.  The device 
        generally contains a closely coupled combination of  
         
          . power scavenging or generation component(s)  
          . power storage component(s) (e.g., battery)  
          . power consuming component(s)  
           
        With scavenged power, the energy input is often dependent on the 
        random variations of the weather.  These devices therefore 
        require energy management both for internal control and remote 
        reporting of their state.  In order to optimize the performance 
        of these devices and minimize the costs of the generation and 
        storage components, it is desirable to vary the activity level, 
        and, hopefully, the energy requirements of the consuming 
        components in order to make best use of the available stored and 
        instantaneously generated energy.  With appropriate energy 
        management, the overall device can be optimized to deliver an 
        appropriate level of service without over provisioning the 
        generation and storage components. 
      
      
                           Expires October 19, 2013      [Page 16] 
         
     Internet-Draft    EMAN Applicability Statement     April 2013  
         

         
        In many cases these devices are expected to operate 
        autonomously, as continuous communications for the purposes of 
        remote control is either impossible or would result in excessive 
        power consumption.  Non continuous polling requires the ability 
        to store and access later the information collected while the 
        communication was not possible. 
         
        The essential properties of this use case are:  
         
          Target Devices: remote network devices (mobile network) that 
          consume and produce energy. 
          How Powered: can be battery powered or using local energy 
          sources. 
          Reporting: devices report their power usage, but only 
          occasionally.  
      
     2.13. Demand Response 

        The theme of demand response from a utility grid spans across 
        several use cases.  In some situations, in response to time-of-
        day fluctuation of energy costs or sudden energy shortages due 
        power outages, it may be important to respond and reduce the 
        energy consumption of the network.  
        From EMAN use case perspective, the demand response scenario can 
        apply to a Data Center or a Building or a residential home.  As 
        a first step, it may be important to monitor the energy 
        consumption in real-time of a Data center, building or home 
        which is already discussed in the previous use cases.  Then 
        based on the potential energy shortfall, the EnMS could 
        formulate a suitable response.  The EnMS could shut down 
        selected devices that are considered lower priority or uniformly 
        reduce the power supplied to all devices.  For multi-site data 
        centers it may be possible to formulate policies such as follow-
        the-sun type of approach, by scheduling the mobility of VMs 
        across Data centers in different geographical locations. 
         
     2.14. Power Capping 

        Power capping is a technique to limit the total power 
        consumption of a server, and it can be useful for power limited 
        data centers.  Based on workload measurements, the server can 
        choose the optimal power state of the server in terms of 
        performance and power consumption.  When the server operates at 
        less than the power supply capacity, it runs at full speed.  
        When the server power would be greater than the power supply  

      
      
                           Expires October 19, 2013      [Page 17] 
         
     Internet-Draft    EMAN Applicability Statement     April 2013  
         

        capacity, it runs at a slower speed so that its power 
        consumption matches the available power supply capacity.  This 
        gives vendors the option to use smaller, cost-effective power 
        supplies that allow real world workloads to run at nominal 
        themselves.  
      
     3. Use Case Patterns 

        The use cases presented above can be abstracted to the following 
        broad patterns.  
      
     3.1. Metering 

        - energy objects which have capability for internal metering  
        - energy objects which are metered by an external device  
      
     3.2. Metering and Control 

        - energy objects that do not supply power, but can perform only 
        power metering for other devices 
      
        - energy objects that do not supply power, but can perform both 
        metering and control for other devices 
      
     3.3. Power Supply, Metering and Control 

        - energy objects that supply power for other devices but do not 
        perform power metering for those devices 
         
        - energy objects that supply power for other devices and also 
        perform power metering  
         
        - energy objects supply power for other devices and also perform 
        power metering and control for other devices 
         
     3.4. Multiple Power Sources 

        - energy objects that have multiple power sources and metering 
        and control are performed by the same power source  
         
        - energy objects that have multiple power sources supplying 
        power to the device and metering is performed by one source and 
        control is performed by another source 
         



      
      
                           Expires October 19, 2013      [Page 18] 
         
     Internet-Draft    EMAN Applicability Statement     April 2013  
         

     4. Relationship of EMAN to other Standards 

        The EMAN framework is tied to other standards and efforts that 
        deal with energy.  EMAN leverages existing standards when 
        possible, and it helps enable adjacent technologies such as 
        Smart Grid. 
         
        The standards most relevant and applicable to EMAN are listed 
        below with a brief description of their objectives, the current 
        state and how that standard relates to EMAN. 
         
     4.1. Data Model and Reporting 

     4.1.1. IEC - CIM 

        The International Electro-technical Commission (IEC) has 
        developed a broad set of standards for power management.  Among 
        these, the most applicable to EMAN is IEC 61850, a standard for 
        the design of electric utility automation.  The abstract data 
        model defined in 61850 is built upon and extends the Common 
        Information Model (CIM).  The complete 61850 CIM model includes 
        over a hundred object classes and is widely used by utilities 
        worldwide. 
         
        This set of standards was originally conceived to automate 
        control of a substation (facilities which transfer electricity 
        from the transmission to the distribution system).  However, the 
        extensive data model has been widely used in other domains, 
        including Energy Management Systems (EMS). 
         
        IEC TC57 WG19 is an ongoing working group to harmonize the CIM 
        data model and 61850 standards. 
         
        Several concepts from IEC Standards have been reused in the EMAN 
        drafts.  In particular, AC Power Quality measurements have been 
        reused from IEC 61850-7-4.  The concept of Accuracy Classes for 
        measure of power and energy has been adapted from ANSI C12.20 
        and IEC standards 62053-21 and 62053-22. 
         
     4.1.2. DMTF 

        The Distributed Management Task Force (DMTF) has defined a Power 
        State Management profile [DMTF.DSP1027] for managing computer 
        systems using the DMTF's Common Information Model (CIM).  These 
        specifications provide physical, logical, and virtual system 
        management requirements for power-state control services. The 
        DMTF standard does not include energy monitoring.  
      
      
                           Expires October 19, 2013      [Page 19] 
         
     Internet-Draft    EMAN Applicability Statement     April 2013  
         

         
        The Power State Management profile is used to describe and 
        manage the Power State of computer systems.  This includes 
        controlling the Power State of an entity for entering sleep 
        mode, re-awaking, and rebooting.  The EMAN framework references 
        the DMTF Power Profile and Power State Set. 
         
     4.1.2.1. Common Information Model Profiles 

        The DMTF uses CIM-based (Common Information Model) 'Profiles' to 
        represent and manage power utilization and configuration of 
        managed elements (note that this is not the 61850 CIM).  Key 
        profiles for energy management are 'Power Supply' (DSP 1015), 
        'Power State' (DSP 1027) and 'Power Utilization Management' (DSP 
        1085).  These profiles define many features for monitoring and 
        configuration of a Power Managed Element's static and dynamic 
        power saving modes, power allocation limits and power states.   
         
        Reduced power modes can be established as static or dynamic.  
        Static modes are fixed policies that limit power use or 
        utilization.  Dynamic power saving modes rely upon internal 
        feedback to control power consumption. 
         
        Power states are eight named operational and non operational 
        levels.  These are On, Sleep-Light, Sleep-Deep, Hibernate, Off-
        Soft, and Off-Hard.  Power change capabilities provide 
        immediate, timed interval, and graceful transitions between on, 
        off, and reset power states.  Table 3 of the Power State Profile 
        defines the correspondence between the ACPI and DMTF power state 
        models, although it is not necessary for a managed element to 
        support ACPI.  Optionally, a TransitingToPowerState property can 
        represent power state transitions in progress. 
         
     4.1.2.2. DASH 

        DMTF DASH (DSP0232) (Desktop And Mobile Architecture for System 
        Hardware) addresses managing heterogeneous desktop and mobile 
        systems (including power) via in-band and out-of-band 
        communications. DASH provides management and control of managed 
        elements like power, CPU, etc. using the DMTF's WS-Management 
        web services and CIM data model. 
         
        Both in-service and out-of-service systems can be managed with 
        the DASH specification in a fully secured remote environment.  
        Full power lifecycle management is possible using out-of-band 
        management. 
         
      
      
                           Expires October 19, 2013      [Page 20] 
         
     Internet-Draft    EMAN Applicability Statement     April 2013  
         

     4.1.3. ODVA 

        The Open DeviceNet Vendors Association (ODVA) is an association 
        for industrial automation companies and defines the Common 
        Industrial Protocol (CIP).  Within ODVA, there is a special 
        interest group focused on energy and standardization and inter-
        operability of energy-aware devices. 
         
        The Open DeviceNet Vendors Association (ODVA) is developing an 
        energy management framework for the industrial sector.  There 
        are synergies and similar concepts between the ODVA and EMAN 
        approaches to energy monitoring and management.  In particular, 
        one of the concepts being considered different energy meters 
        based on if the device consumes electricity or produces 
        electricity or a passive device.  
         
        ODVA defines a three-part approach towards energy management: 
        awareness of energy usage, consuming energy more efficiently, 
        and exchanging energy with the utility or others.  Energy 
        monitoring and management promote efficient consumption and 
        enable automating actions that reduce energy consumption. 
         
        The foundation of the approach is the information and 
        communication model for entities.  An entity is a network-
        connected, energy-aware device that has the ability to either 
        measure or derive its energy usage based on its native 
        consumption or generation of energy, or report a nominal or 
        static energy value. 
         
     4.1.4. Ecma SDC 

        The Ecma International committee on Smart Data Centre (TC38-TG2 
        SDC [Ecma-SDC]) is defining semantics for management of entities 
        in a data center such as servers, storage, and network 
        equipment.  It covers energy as one of many functional resources 
        or attributes of systems for monitoring and control.  It only 
        defines messages and properties, and does not reference any 
        specific protocol.  Its goal is to enable interoperability of 
        such protocols as SNMP, BACNET, and HTTP by ensuring a common 
        semantic model across them.  Four power states are defined, Off, 
        Sleep, Idle, and Active.  The standard does not include actual 
        energy or power measurements. 
         
        The 14th draft of SDC process was published in March 2011 and 
        the development of the standard is still underway.  When used 
        with EMAN, the SDC standard will provide a thin abstraction on 
        top of the more detailed data model available in EMAN.  
      
      
                           Expires October 19, 2013      [Page 21] 
         
     Internet-Draft    EMAN Applicability Statement     April 2013  
         

         
     4.1.5. PWG 

        The IEEE-ISTO Printer Working Group [PWG5106.4] defines open 
        standards for printer related protocols, for the benefit of 
        printer manufacturers and related software vendors. The Printer 
        WG covers power monitoring and management of network printers 
        and imaging systems in the PWG Power Management Model for 
        Imaging Systems [PWG5106.4]. Clearly, these devices are within 
        the scope of energy management since these devices receive power 
        and are attached to the network.  In addition, there is ample 
        scope of power management since printers and imaging systems are 
        not used that often.   
            
        The IEEE-ISTO Printer Working Group (PWG) defines SNMP MIB 
        modules for printer management and in particular a "PWG Power 
        Management Model for Imaging Systems v1.0" [PWG5106.4] and a 
        companion SNMP binding in the "PWG Imaging System Power MIB 
        v1.0" [PWG5106.5].  This PWG model and MIB are harmonized with 
        the DMTF CIM Infrastructure [DSP0004] and DMTF CIM Power State 
        Management Profile [DSP1027] for power states and alerts. 
         
        These MIB modules can be useful for monitoring the power and 
        Power State of printers.  The EMAN framework takes into account 
        the standards defined in the Printer working group.  The PWG may 
        harmonize its MIBs with those from EMAN.  The PWG covers many 
        topics in greater detail than EMAN, as well as some that are 
        specific to imaging equipment.  The PWG also provides for 
        vendor-specific extension states (beyond the standard DMTF CIM 
        states). 
         
        The IETF Printer MIB RFC3805 [RFC3805] has been standardized, 
        however, this MIB module does not address power management. 
      
     4.1.6. ASHRAE 

        In the U.S., there is an extensive effort to coordinate and 
        develop standards related to the "Smart Grid".  The Smart Grid 
        Interoperability Panel, coordinated by the government National
        Institute of Standards and Technology, identified the need for a 
        building side information model (as a counterpart to utility 
        models) and specified this in Priority Action Plan (PAP) 17.  
        This was designated to be a joint effort by the American Society 
        of Heating, Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning Engineers 
        (ASHRAE) and the National Electrical Manufacturers Association 
        (NEMA), both ANSI approved SDO's.  The result is to be an 
        information model, not a protocol.  
      
      
                           Expires October 19, 2013      [Page 22] 
         
     Internet-Draft    EMAN Applicability Statement     April 2013  
         

         
        The ASHRAE effort addresses data used only within a building as 
        well as data that may be shared with the grid, particularly as 
        it relates to coordinating future demand levels with the needs 
        of the grid.  The model is intended to be applied to any 
        building type, both residential and commercial.  It is expected 
        that existing protocols will be adapted to comply with the new 
        information model, as would new protocols. 
         
        There are four basic types of entities in the model: generators, 
        loads, meters, and energy managers. 
         
        The metering part of the model overlaps with the EMAN framework 
        to a large degree, though there are features unique to each.  
        The load part speaks to control capabilities well beyond what 
        EMAN covers.  Details of generation and of the energy management 
        function are outside of EMAN scope. 
         
        A public review draft of the ASHRAE standard was released in 
        July, 2012.  There are no apparent major conflicts between the 
        two approaches, but there are areas where some harmonization is 
        possible.   
      
     4.1.7. ZigBee 

        The ZigBee Smart Energy 2.0 effort [ZIGBEE] focuses on wireless 
        communication to appliances and lighting.  ZigBee 1.x is not 
        based on IP, whereas ZigBee 2.0 is supposed to interoperate with 
        IP. It is intended to enable building energy management and 
        enable direct load control by utilities.   
         
        ZigBee protocols are intended for use in embedded applications 
        with low data rates and low power consumption.  ZigBee defines a 
        general-purpose, inexpensive, self-organizing mesh network that 
        can be used for industrial control, embedded sensing, medical 
        data collection, smoke and intruder warning, building 
        automation, home automation, etc.  
      
        ZigBee is currently not an ANSI recognized SDO. 
         
        The EMAN framework addresses the needs of IP-enabled networks 
        through the usage of SNMP, while ZigBee looks for completely 
        integrated and inexpensive mesh solution. 
         
     4.2. Measurement 

         
      
      
                           Expires October 19, 2013      [Page 23] 
         
     Internet-Draft    EMAN Applicability Statement     April 2013  
         

     4.2.1. ANSI C12 

        The American National Standards Institute (ANSI) has defined a 
        collection of power meter standards under ANSI C12.  The primary 
        standards include communication protocols (C12.18, 21 and 22), 
        data and schema definitions (C12.19), and measurement accuracy 
        (C12.20). European equivalent standards are provided by IEC 
        62053-22.  ANSI C12.20 defines accuracy classes for power 
        meters.  
         
        These standards are oriented to the meter itself, are very 
        specific, and used by electricity distributors and producers. 
         
        The EMAN standard references ANSI C12 accuracy classes. 

     4.2.2. IEC 62301 

        IEC 62301, "Household electrical appliances Measurement of 
        standby power", specifies a power level measurement procedure.  
        While nominally for appliances and low-power modes, many aspects 
        of it apply to other device types and modes and it is commonly 
        referenced in test procedures for energy using products. 

        While the standard is intended for laboratory measurements of 
        devices in controlled conditions, many aspects of it are 
        informative to those implementing measurement in products that 
        ultimately report via EMAN. 

         
     4.3. Other 

     4.3.1. ISO 

        The International Organization for Standardization (ISO) [ISO] 
        is developing an energy management standard, ISO 50001, to 
        complement ISO 9001 for quality management, and ISO 14001 for 
        environmental management.  The intent is to facilitate the 
        creation of energy management programs for industrial, 
        commercial, and other entities.  The standard defines a process 
        for energy management at an organization level.  It does not 
        define the way in which devices report energy and consume 
        energy. 
      
        ISO 50001 is based on the common elements found in all of ISO's 
        management system standards, assuring a high level of 
        compatibility with ISO 9001 and ISO 14001.  ISO 50001 benefits 
        include: 
      
      
                           Expires October 19, 2013      [Page 24] 
         
     Internet-Draft    EMAN Applicability Statement     April 2013  
         

         
       o Integrating energy efficiency into management practices and 
          throughout the supply chain 
       o Energy management best practices and good energy management 
          behaviors 
       o benchmarking, measuring, documenting, and reporting energy 
          intensity improvements and their projected impact on 
          reductions in greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions 
       o Evaluating and prioritizing the implementation of new energy-
          efficient technologies 
      
        ISO 50001 has been developed by ISO project committee ISO PC 
        242, Energy management. EMAN is complementary to ISO 9001.  
         
     4.3.2. Energy Star 

        The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and U.S. 
        Department of Energy (DOE) jointly sponsor the Energy Star 
        program [ESTAR].  The program promotes the development of energy 
        efficient products and practices.   
         
        To qualify as Energy Star, products must meet specific energy 
        efficiency targets.  The Energy Star program also provides 
        planning tools and technical documentation to encourage more 
        energy efficient building design.  Energy Star is a program; it 
        is not a protocol or standard.  
         
        For businesses and data centers, Energy Star offers technical 
        support to help companies establish energy conservation 
        practices.  Energy Star provides best practices for measuring 
        current energy performance, goal setting, and tracking 
        improvement.  The Energy Star tools offered include a rating 
        system for building performance and comparative benchmarks. 
         
        There is no immediate link between EMAN and EnergyStar, one 
        being a protocol and the other a set of recommendations to 
        develop energy efficient products.  However, Energy Star could 
        include EMAN standards in specifications for future products, 
        either as required or rewarded with some benefit. 
      
     4.3.3. Smart Grid 

        The Smart Grid standards efforts underway in the United States 
        are overseen by the U.S. National Institute of Standards and 
        Technology [NIST].  NIST is responsible for coordinating a 
        public-private partnership with key energy and consumer 
        stakeholders in order to facilitate the development of smart 
      
      
                           Expires October 19, 2013      [Page 25] 
         
     Internet-Draft    EMAN Applicability Statement     April 2013  
         

        grid standards. These activities are monitored and facilitated 
        by the SGIP (Smart Grid Interoperability Panel).  This group has 
        working groups for specific topics including homes, commercial 
        buildings, and industrial facilities as they relate to the grid.  
        A stated goal of the group is to harmonize any new standard with 
        the IEC CIM and IEC 61850. 
         
        When a working group detects a standard or technology gap, the 
        team seeks approval from the SGIP for the creation of a Priority 
        Action Plan (PAP), a private-public partnership to close the 
        gap. PAP 17 is discussed in section 4.1.6. 
         
        PAP 10 addresses "Standard Energy Usage Information".  Smart 
        Grid standards will provide distributed intelligence in the 
        network and allow enhanced load shedding.  For example, pricing 
        signals will enable selective shutdown of non critical 
        activities during peak price periods.  Both centralized and 
        distributed management controls are in scope.   
         
        There is an obvious functional link between Smart Grid and EMAN 
        in the form of demand response, even though the EMAN framework 
        itself does not address any coordination with the grid.  As EMAN 
        enables control, it can be used by an EnMS to accomplish demand 
        response through translation of a signal from an outside entity. 
         
     5. Limitations 

        EMAN addresses the needs of energy monitoring in terms of 
        measurement and, considers limited control capabilities of 
        energy monitoring of networks. 
         
        EMAN does not create a new protocol stack, but rather defines a 
        data and information model useful for measuring and reporting 
        energy and other metrics over SNMP. 
      
        EMAN does not address questions regarding Smart Grid, 
        electricity producers, and distributors. 
         
     6. Security Considerations 

        EMAN uses the SNMP protocol and thus has the functionality of 
        SNMP's security capabilities.  SNMPv3 [RFC3411] provides 
        important security features such as confidentiality, integrity, 
        and authentication. 
         


      
      
                           Expires October 19, 2013      [Page 26] 
         
     Internet-Draft    EMAN Applicability Statement     April 2013  
         

     7. IANA Considerations 

        This memo includes no request to IANA. 

     8. Acknowledgements 

        Firstly, the authors thank Emmanuel Tychon for taking the lead 
        for this draft and his substantial contributions to it.   The 
        authors thank Jeff Wheeler, Benoit Claise, Juergen Quittek, 
        Chris Verges, John Parello, and Matt Laherty, for their valuable 
        contributions.  The authors thank Georgios Karagiannis for use 
        case involving energy neutral homes, Elwyn Davies for off-grid 
        electricity systems, and Kerry Lynn for demand response. 
         
         
     9. References 

     9.1. Normative References 

        [RFC3411] An Architecture for Describing Simple Network 
                Management Protocol (SNMP) Management Frameworks, RFC 
                3411, December 2002. 
         
        [RFC3621] Power Ethernet MIB, RFC 3621, December 2003. 
      
      
     9.2. Informative References 

      
        [DASH] "Desktop and mobile Architecture for System Hardware", 
                http://www.dmtf.org/standards/mgmt/dash/ 
         
        [NIST]  http://www.nist.gov/smartgrid/ 
         
        [Ecma-SDC] Ecma TC38 / SDC Task Group, "Smart Data Centre 
                Resource Monitoring and Control (DRAFT)", March 2011. 
         
        [ESTAR] http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kilowatt_hour 
         
        [EMAN-AS] B. Schoening, Mouli Chandramouli, Bruce Nordman, 
                "Energy Management (EMAN) Applicability Statement", 
                draft-ietf-eman-applicability-statement-02.txt,  
                October 2012. 
         
        [EMAN-REQ] Quittek, J., Chandramouli, M. Winter, R., Dietz, T., 
                Claise, B., and M. Chandramouli, "Requirements for 

      
      
                           Expires October 19, 2013      [Page 27] 
         
     Internet-Draft    EMAN Applicability Statement     April 2013  
         

                Energy Management ", draft-ietf-eman-requirements-12, 
                February 2013. 
         
        [EMAN-MONITORING-MIB] M. Chandramouli, Schoening, B., Dietz, T., 
                Quittek, J. and B. Claise  "Energy and Power Monitoring 
                MIB ", draft-ietf-eman-monitoring-mib-04, October  
                2012.  
         
        [EMAN-AWARE-MIB] J. Parello, B. Claise and Mouli Chandramouli, 
                "draft-ietf-eman-energy-aware-mib-07", work in 
                progress, October 2012. 
         
        [EMAN-FRAMEWORK] Claise, B., Parello, J., Schoening, B., J. 
                Quittek and B. Nordman, "Energy Management Framework", 
                draft-ietf-eman-framework-07, February 2013.  
         
        [EMAN-BATTERY-MIB] Quittek, J., Winter, R., and T. Dietz, 
                "Definition of Managed Objects for Battery Monitoring"  
                draft-ietf-eman-battery-mib-08.txt,  February  2013.
         
        [EMAN-DEF] J. Parello "Energy Management Terminology", draft-
                parello-eman-definitions-07, Work in progress,  
                October, 2012. 
         
        [DMTF] "Power State Management ProfileDMTFDSP1027  Version 2.0"  
                December2009. 
                http://www.dmtf.org/sites/default/files/standards/docum
                ents/DSP1027_2.0.0.pdf 
      
        [ESTAR]  http://www.energystar.gov/ 
         
        [ISO]    http://www.iso.org/iso/pressrelease.htm?refid=Ref1434 
         
      
        [ASHRAE] http://collaborate.nist.gov/twiki-
                sggrid/bin/view/SmartGrid/PAP17Information 

         
        [ZIGBEE] http://www.zigBee.org/ 
         
        [ISO]  http://www.iso.org/iso/pressrelease.htm?refid=Ref1337 
      
      
                           Expires October 19, 2013      [Page 28] 
         
     Internet-Draft    EMAN Applicability Statement     April 2013  
         

         
        [DSP0004] DMTF Common Information Model (CIM) Infrastructure, 
                DSP0004, May 2009. 
                http://www.dmtf.org/standards/published_documents/DSP00
                04_2.5.0.pdf  
         
        [DSP1027] DMTF Power State Management Profile, DSP1027, December 
                2009. 
                http://www.dmtf.org/standards/published_documents/DSP10
                27_2.0.0.pdf 
         
        [PWG5106.4] IEEE-ISTO PWG Power Management Model for Imaging 
                Systems v1.0, PWG Candidate Standard 5106.4-2011, 
                February 2011.ftp://ftp.pwg.org/pub/pwg/candidates/cs-
                wimspower10-20110214-5106.4.mib 
         
        [PWG5106.5] IEEE-ISTO PWG Imaging System Power MIB v1.0, PWG 
                Candidate Standard 5106.5-2011, February 2011. 
         
        [IEC62301] International Electrotechnical Commission, "IEC 62301 
                Household electrical appliances  Measurement of standby 
                power", Edition 2.0, 2011. 
         
        [MODBUS] Modbus-IDA, "MODBUS Application Protocol Specification 
                V1.1b", December 2006. 






















      
      
                           Expires October 19, 2013      [Page 29] 
         
     Internet-Draft    EMAN Applicability Statement     April 2013  
         

      

     Authors' Addresses 

         
        Brad Schoening 
        44 Rivers Edge Drive 
        Little Silver, NJ 07739 
        USA 
         
        Phone: +1 917 304 7190  
        Email: brad.schoening@verizon.net 
         
         
        Mouli Chandramouli 
        Cisco Systems, Inc. 
        Sarjapur Outer Ring Road 
        Bangalore 560103 
        India 
         
        Phone: +91 80 4429 2409 
        Email: moulchan@cisco.com 
         
         
        Bruce Nordman 
        Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory 
        1 Cyclotron Road, 90-4000 
        Berkeley  94720-8136 
        USA 
         
        Phone: +1 510 486 7089 
        Email: bnordman@lbl.gov 
      
         













      
      
                           Expires October 19, 2013      [Page 30] 
         
