

   Internet Working Group                         Ali Sajassi(Editor) 
   Internet Draft                                         Samer Salam 
                                                     Clarence Filsfils 
   Category: Standards Track                                    Cisco 
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                   R. Aggarwal(Editor) 
                                                      Juniper Networks 
                                                                       
                                                           Nabil Bitar 
                                                               Verizon 
                                                                       
                                                            Jim Uttaro 
                                                                  AT&T 
                                                                       
                                                          Aldrin Isaac 
                                                             Bloomberg 
                                                                       
                                                        Wim Henderickx 
                                                        Alcatel-Lucent 
                                                                       
   Expires: April 17, 2011                           October 17, 2010 
                                                                         
    
                   Requirements for Ethernet VPN (E-VPN) 
               draft-sajassi-raggarwa-l2vpn-evpn-req-00.txt 
    
   Status of this Memo 
    
   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with 
   the provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents 
   at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt. 
    
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
    
   Copyright and License Notice 
    
   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the 
    
     
   Sajassi-Aggarwal, et. al.                                  [Page 1] 
    
    
   draft-sajassi-raggarwa-evpn-req-00.txt                    June 2010 
    
   document authors. All rights reserved. 
    
   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal 
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents 
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of 
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents 
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with 
   respect to this document.  Code Components extracted from this 
   document must include Simplified BSD License text as described in 
   Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without 
   warranty as described in the Simplified BSD License. 
    
   This document may contain material from IETF Documents or IETF 
   Contributions published or made publicly available before November 
   10, 2008. The person(s) controlling the copyright in some of this 
   material may not have granted the IETF Trust the right to allow 
   modifications of such material outside the IETF Standards Process. 
   Without obtaining an adequate license from the person(s) controlling 
   the copyright in such materials, this document may not be modified 
   outside the IETF Standards Process, and derivative works of it may 
   not be created outside the IETF Standards Process, except to format 
   it for publication as an RFC or to translate it into languages other 
   than English. 
    
   Abstract 
    
   The widespread adoption of Ethernet L2VPN services and the advent of 
   new applications for the technology (e.g. data center interconnect) 
   have culminated in a new set of requirements that are not readily 
   addressable by the current VPLS solution. In particular, multi-
   homing with all-active forwarding is not supported and there's no 
   existing solution to leverage MP2MP LSPs for optimizing the delivery 
   of multi-destination frames. Furthermore, the provisioning of VPLS, 
   even in the context of BGP-based auto-discovery, requires network 
   operators to specify various network parameters on top of the access 
   configuration. This document specifies the requirements for an 
   Ethernet VPN (E-VPN) solution which addresses the above issues. 
    
    
   Table of Contents 
    
   1. Specification of Requirements................................... 3 
   2. Introduction.................................................... 3 
   3. Terminology..................................................... 4 
   4. Redundancy Requirements......................................... 4 
   4.1. Flow-based Load Balancing..................................... 4 
   4.2. Flow-based Multi-pathing...................................... 5 
   4.3. Geo-redundant PE Nodes........................................ 5 
   4.4. Optimal Traffic Forwarding.................................... 6 
    
     
   Sajassi-Aggarwal, et al.                                   [Page 2] 
    
    
   draft-sajassi-raggarwa-evpn-req-00.txt                    June 2010 
    
   4.5. Flexible Redundancy Grouping Support.......................... 6 
   4.6. Multi-homed Network........................................... 6 
   5. Multicast Optimization Requirements............................. 7 
   6. Ease of Provisioning Requirements............................... 7 
   7. New Service Interface Requirements.............................. 8 
   8. Fast Convergence................................................ 9 
   9. Flood Suppression............................................... 9 
   10. Supporting Flexible VPN Topologies and Policies............... 10 
   11. Security Considerations....................................... 10 
   12. IANA Considerations........................................... 10 
   13. Normative References.......................................... 10 
   14. Informative References........................................ 11 
   15. Authors' Addresses............................................ 11 
    
 
 
 
   1.        Specification of Requirements 
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119]. 
    
    
    
   2.        Introduction 
    
   VPLS, as defined in [RFC4664][RFC4761][RFC4762], is a proven and 
   widely deployed technology. However, the existing solution has a 
   number of limitations when it comes to redundancy, multicast 
   optimization and provisioning simplicity. Furthermore, new 
   applications are driving several new requirements for a VPLS 
   service.  
    
   In the area of multi-homing current VPLS can only support multi-
   homing with active/standby resiliency model, for e.g. as described 
   in [VPLS-BGP-MH]. Flexible multi-homing with all-active Attachment 
   Circuits (ACs) cannot be supported by current VPLS solution. 
    
   In the area of multicast optimization, [VPLS-MCAST] describes how 
   multicast LSPs can be used in conjunction with VPLS. However, this 
   solution is limited to P2MP LSPs, as there's no defined solution for 
   leveraging MP2MP LSPs with VPLS.  
    
   In the area of provisioning simplicity, current VPLS does offer a 
   mechanism for single-sided provisioning by relying on BGP-based 
   service auto-discovery [RFC4761][L2VPN-Sig]. This, however, still 
   requires the operator to configure a number of network-side 
   parameters on top of the access-side Ethernet configuration.  
    
    
     
   Sajassi-Aggarwal, et al.                                   [Page 3] 
    
    
   draft-sajassi-raggarwa-evpn-req-00.txt                    June 2010 
    
   Furthermore, data center interconnect applications are driving the 
   need for new service interface types which are a hybrid combination 
   of VLAN Bundling and VLAN-based service interfaces. These are 
   referred to as "VLAN-aware Bundling" service interfaces.  
    
   Also virtualization applications are fueling an increase in the 
   volume of MAC addresses that are to be handled by the network, which 
   gives rise to the requirement for having the network re-convergence 
   upon failure be independent of the number of MAC addresses learned 
   by the PE.  
    
   In addition, there are requirements for minimizing the amount of 
   flooding of multi-destination frames and localizing the flooding to 
   the confines of a given site.  
    
   Moreover, there are requirements for supporting flexible VPN 
   topologies and policies beyond those currently covered by (H-)VPLS. 
    
   The focus of this document is on defining the requirements for a new 
   solution, namely Ethernet VPN (E-VPN), which addresses the above 
   issues. 
    
   Section 2 provides a summary of the terminology used. Section 3 
   discusses the redundancy requirements. Section 4 describes the 
   multicast optimization requirements. Section 5 articulates the ease 
   of provisioning requirements. Section 6 focuses on the new service 
   interface requirements. Section 7 highlights the fast convergence 
   requirements. Section 8 describes the flood suppression requirement, 
   and finally section 9 discusses the requirements for supporting 
   flexible VPN topologies and policies. 
    
   3.        Terminology 
    
   CE: Customer Edge 
   E-VPN: Ethernet Virtual Private Network 
   MHD: Multi-homed Device 
   MHN: Multi-homed Network 
   LACP: Link Aggregation Control Protocol 
   LSP: Label Switched Path 
   PE: Provider Edge 
   PoA: Point of Attachment 
   PW: Pseudowire 
    
   4.        Redundancy Requirements 
    
   4.1.          Flow-based Load Balancing 
    
   A common mechanism for multi-homing a CE node to a set of PE nodes 
   involves leveraging multi-chassis Ethernet link aggregation groups 
   based on [802.1AX] LACP. [PWE3-ICCP] describes one such scheme. In 
   Ethernet link aggregation, the load-balancing algorithms by which a 
    
     
   Sajassi-Aggarwal, et al.                                   [Page 4] 
    
    
   draft-sajassi-raggarwa-evpn-req-00.txt                    June 2010 
    
   CE distributes traffic over the Attachment Circuits connecting to 
   the PEs are quite flexible. The only requirement is for the 
   algorithm to ensure in-order frame delivery for a given traffic 
   flow. In typical implementations, these algorithms involve selecting 
   an outbound link within the bundle based on a hash function that 
   identifies a flow based on one or more of the following fields: 
    
   i.   Layer 2: Source MAC Address, Destination MAC Address, VLAN 
   ii.  Layer 3: Source IP Address, Destination IP Address 
   iii. Layer 4: UDP or TCP Source Port, Destination Port 
   iv.  Combinations of the above. 
    
   A key point to note here is that [802.1AX] does not define a 
   standard load-balancing algorithm for Ethernet bundles, and as such 
   different implementations behave differently. As a matter of fact, a 
   bundle operates correctly even in the presence of asymmetric load-
   balancing over the links. This being the case, the first requirement 
   for active/active multi-homing is the ability to accommodate 
   flexible flow-based load-balancing from the CE node based on L2, L3 
   and/or L4 header fields. 
    
   A solution MUST be capable of supporting flexible flow-based load 
   balancing from the CE as described above. Further the MPLS network 
   MUST be able to support flow-based load-balancing of traffic 
   destined to the CE, even when the CE is connected to more than one 
   PE. Thus the solution MUST be able to exercise multiple links 
   connected to the CE, irrespective of the number of PEs that the CE 
   is connected to.  
    
    
   4.2.          Flow-based Multi-pathing  
    
   Any solution that meets the active-active flow based load balancing 
   requirement described in section 3.1 MUST also be able to exercise 
   multiple paths between a given pair of PEs. For instance if there 
   are multiple RSVP-TE LSPs between a pair of PEs then the solution 
   MUST be capable of load balancing traffic between those LSPs on a 
   per flow basis. Similarly if LDP is being used as the transport LSP 
   protocol, then the solution MUST be able to leverage LDP ECMP 
   capabilities. The solution MUST also be able to leverage work in the 
   MPLS WG that is in progress to improve the load balancing 
   capabilities of the network based on entropy labels.  
    
   It is worth pointing out that flow-based multi-pathing complements 
   flow-based load balancing described in the previous section. 
    
    
   4.3.          Geo-redundant PE Nodes 
    
   The PE nodes offering multi-homed connectivity to a CE or access 
   network may be situated in the same physical location (co-located), 
    
     
   Sajassi-Aggarwal, et al.                                   [Page 5] 
    
    
   draft-sajassi-raggarwa-evpn-req-00.txt                    June 2010 
    
   or may be spread geographically (e.g. in different COs or POPs). The 
   latter is desirable when offering a geo-redundant solution that 
   ensures business continuity for critical applications in the case of 
   power outages, natural disasters, etc. An active/active multi-homing 
   mechanism SHOULD support both co-located as well as geo-redundant PE 
   placement. The latter scenario often means that requiring a 
   dedicated link between the PEs, for the operation of the multi-
   homing mechanism, is not appealing from cost standpoint. 
   Furthermore, the IGP cost from remote PEs to the pair of PEs in the 
   multi-homed setup cannot be assumed to be the same when those latter 
   PEs are geo-redundant. 
    
    
   4.4.          Optimal Traffic Forwarding 
    
   In a typical network, and considering a designated pair of PEs, it 
   is common to find both single-homed as well as multi-homed CEs being 
   connected to those PEs. An active/active multi-homing solution 
   SHOULD support optimal forwarding of unicast traffic for all the 
   following scenarios: 
    
   i.   single-homed CE to single-homed CE 
   ii.  single-homed CE to multi-homed CE 
   iii. multi-homed CE to single-homed CE 
   iv.  multi-homed CE to multi-homed CE 
    
   This is especially important in the case of geo-redundant PEs, where 
   having traffic forwarded from one PE to another within the same 
   multi-homed group introduces additional latency, on top of the 
   inefficient use of the PE node's and core nodes' switching capacity. 
   A multi-homed group (also known as a multi-chassis LACP group) is a 
   group of PEs supporting a multi-homed CE. 
    
    
   4.5.          Flexible Redundancy Grouping Support  
    
   In order to simplify service provisioning and activation, the multi-
   homing mechanism SHOULD allow arbitrary grouping of PE nodes into 
   redundancy groups where each redundancy group represents all multi-
   homed groups that share the same group of PEs. This is best 
   explained with an example: consider three PE nodes - PE1, PE2 and 
   PE3. The multi-homing mechanism MUST allow a given PE, say PE1, to 
   be part of multiple redundancy groups concurrently. For example, 
   there can be a group (PE1, PE2), a group (PE1, PE3), and another 
   group (PE2, PE3)  where CEs could be multi-homed to any one of these 
   three redundancy groups.  
    
    
   4.6.           Multi-homed Network 
    
    
     
   Sajassi-Aggarwal, et al.                                   [Page 6] 
    
    
   draft-sajassi-raggarwa-evpn-req-00.txt                    June 2010 
    
   There are applications which require an Ethernet network, rather 
   than a single device, to be multi-homed to a group of PEs. The 
   Ethernet network would typically run a resiliency mechanism such as 
   MST or [G.8032] Ring Automated Protection Switching. The PEs may or 
   may not participate in the control protocol of the Ethernet network. 
    
   A solution MUST support multi-homed network connectivity with 
   active/standby redundancy.  
    
   A solution MUST also support multi-homed network with active/active 
   VLAN-based load-balancing (i.e. disjoint VLAN sets active on 
   disparate PEs).  
    
   A solution MAY support multi-homed network with active/active MAC-
   based load-balancing (i.e. different MAC addresses on a VLAN are 
   reachable via different PEs). 
    
   5.        Multicast Optimization Requirements 
    
   There are environments where the usage of MP2MP LSPs may be 
   desirable for optimizing multicast, broadcast and unknown unicast 
   traffic. [VPLS-LSM] precludes the usage of MP2MP LSPs since current 
   VPLS solutions require an egress PE to perform learning when it 
   receives unknown uncast packets over a LSP. This is challenging when 
   MP2MP LSPs are used as MP2MP LSPs do not have inherent mechanisms to 
   identify the sender. The usage of MP2MP LSPs for multicast 
   optimization becomes tractable if the need to identify the sender 
   for performing learning is lifted. A solution MUST be able to 
   provide a mechanism that does not require learning when packets are 
   received over a MP2MP LSP. Further a solution MUST be able to 
   provide procedures to use MP2MP LSPs for optimizing delivery of 
   multicast, broadcast and unknown unicast traffic. 
    
    
   6.        Ease of Provisioning Requirements 
    
   As L2VPN technologies expand into enterprise deployments, ease of 
   provisioning becomes paramount. Even though current VPLS has auto-
   discovery mechanisms which allow for single-sided provisioning, 
   further simplifications are required, as outlined below: 
    
   - Single-sided provisioning behavior MUST be maintained 
   - For deployments where VLAN identifiers are global across the MPLS 
   network (i.e. the network is limited to a maximum of 4K services), 
   it is required that the devices derive the MPLS specific attributes 
   (e.g. VPN ID, BGP RT, etc.) from the VLAN identifier. This way, it 
   is sufficient for the network operator to configure the VLAN 
   identifier(s) on the access circuit, and all the MPLS and BGP 
   parameters required for setting up the service over the core network 
   would be automatically derived without any need for explicit 
   configuration. 
    
     
   Sajassi-Aggarwal, et al.                                   [Page 7] 
    
    
   draft-sajassi-raggarwa-evpn-req-00.txt                    June 2010 
    
   - Implementations SHOULD revert to using default values for 
   parameters as and where applicable. 
    
    
   7.        New Service Interface Requirements 
    
   [MEF] and [IEEE 802.1Q] have the following services specified: 
   - Port mode: in this mode, all traffic on the port is mapped to a 
     single bridge domain and a single corresponding L2VPN service 
     instance. Customer VLAN transparency is guaranteed end-to-end. 
      
   - VLAN mode: in this mode, each VLAN on the port is mapped to a 
     unique bridge domain and corresponding L2VPN service instance. 
     This mode allows for service multiplexing over the port and 
     supports optional VLAN translation. 
      
   - VLAN  bundling: in this mode, a group of VLANs on the port are 
     collectively mapped to a unique bridge domain and corresponding 
     L2VPN service instance. Customer MAC addresses must be unique 
     across all VLANs mapped to the same service instance. 
    
   For each of the above services a single bridge domain is assigned 
   per service instance on the PE supporting the associated service. 
   For example, in case of the port mode, a single bridge domain is 
   assigned for all the ports belonging to that service instance 
   regardless of number of VLANs coming through these ports. 
    
   It is worth noting that the term 'bridge domain' as used above 
   refers to a MAC forwarding table as defined in the IEEE bridge 
   model, and does not denote or imply any specific implementation.  
    
   [RFC 4762] defines two types of VPLS services based on "unqualified 
   and qualified learning" which in turn maps to port mode and VLAN 
   mode respectively.   
    
   A solution is required to support the above three service types plus 
   two additional service types which are primarily intended for hosted 
   data center applications and are described below. 
    
   For hosted data center interconnect applications, network operators 
   require the ability to extend Ethernet VLANs over a WAN using a 
   single L2VPN instance while maintaining data-plane separation 
   between the various VLANs associated with that instance. This gives 
   rise to two new service interface types: VLAN-aware Bundling without 
   Translation, and VLAN-aware Bundling with Translation.  
    
   The VLAN-aware Bundling without Translation service interface has 
   the following characteristics: 
   - The service interface MUST provide bundling of customer VLANs into 
   a single L2VPN service instance. 
    
     
   Sajassi-Aggarwal, et al.                                   [Page 8] 
    
    
   draft-sajassi-raggarwa-evpn-req-00.txt                    June 2010 
    
   - The service interface MUST guarantee customer VLAN transparency 
   end-to-end. 
   - The service interface MUST maintain data-plane separation between 
   the customer VLANs (i.e. create a dedicated bridge-domain per VLAN). 
   - In the special case of all-to-one bundling, the service interface 
   MUST not assume any a priori knowledge of the customer VLANs. In 
   other words, the customer VLANs shall not be configured on the PE, 
   rather the interface is configured just like a port-based service. 
    
   The VLAN-aware Bundling with Translation service interface has the 
   following characteristics: 
   - The service interface MUST provide bundling of customer VLANs into 
   a single L2VPN service instance. 
   - The service interface MUST maintain data-plane separation between 
   the customer VLANs (i.e. create a dedicated bridge-domain per VLAN). 
   - The service interface MUST support customer VLAN translation to 
   handle the scenario where different VLAN Identifiers (VIDs) are used 
   on different interfaces to designate the same customer VLAN. 
    
   The main difference, in terms of service provider resource 
   allocation, between these new service types and the previously 
   defined three types is that the new services require several bridge 
   domains to be allocated (one per customer VLAN) per L2VPN service 
   instance as opposed to a single bridge domain per L2VPN service 
   instance.  
    
    
   8.        Fast Convergence 
    
   A solution MUST provide the ability to recover from PE-CE attachment 
   circuit failures as well as PE node failure for the case of both 
   multi-homed device and multi-homed network. The recovery 
   mechanism(s) MUST provide convergence time that is independent of 
   the number of MAC addresses learned by the PE. This is particularly 
   important in the context of virtualization applications which are 
   fueling an increase in the number of MAC addresses to be handled by 
   the Layer 2 network.  
   Furthermore, the recovery mechanism(s) SHOULD provide convergence 
   time that is independent of the number of service instances 
   associated with the attachment circuit or PE. 
    
    
   9.        Flood Suppression 
    
   The solution SHOULD allow the network operator to choose whether 
   unknown unicast frames are to be dropped or to be flooded. This 
   attribute need to be configurable on a per service instance basis. 
    
   In addition, for the case where the solution is used for data-center 
   interconnect, it is required to minimize the flooding of broadcast 
    
     
   Sajassi-Aggarwal, et al.                                   [Page 9] 
    
    
   draft-sajassi-raggarwa-evpn-req-00.txt                    June 2010 
    
   frames outside the confines of a given site. Of particular interest 
   is periodic ARP traffic.  
    
   Furthermore, it is required to eliminate any unnecessary flooding of 
   unicast traffic upon topology changes, especially in the case of 
   multi-homed site where the PEs have a priori knowledge of the backup 
   paths for a given MAC address. 
    
    
    
   10.         Supporting Flexible VPN Topologies and Policies 
    
   A solution MUST be capable of supporting flexible VPN topologies 
   that are not constrained by the underlying mechanisms of the 
   solution. One example of this is hub and spoke where one or more 
   sites in the VPN are hubs and the others as spokes. The hubs are 
   allowed to send traffic to other hubs and to spokes, while spokes 
   can communicate only with other hubs. The solution MUST provide the 
   ability to support hub and spoke. Further the solution MUST provide 
   the ability to apply policies at the MAC address granularity to 
   control which PEs in the VPN learn which MAC address and how a 
   specific MAC address is forwarded. It MUST be possible to apply 
   policies to allow only some of the member PEs in the VPN to send or 
   receive traffic for a particular MAC address. 
    
    
   11.         Security Considerations 
    
   There are no additional security aspects beyond those of VPLS/H-VPLS 
   that need to be discussed here.  
    
   12.         IANA Considerations 
    
   None. 
    
    
   13.         Normative References 
    
   [RFC4664] "Framework for Layer 2 Virtual Private Networks (L2VPNs)", 
      September 2006. 
    
   [RFC4761] "Virtual Private LAN Service (VPLS) Using BGP for Auto-
      discovery and Signaling", January 2007. 
    
   [RFC4762] "Virtual Private LAN Service (VPLS) Using Label 
      Distribution Protocol (LDP) Signaling", January 2007. 
    
   [802.1AX] IEEE Std. 802.1AX-2008, "IEEE Standard for Local and 
      metropolitan area networks - Link Aggregation", IEEE Computer 
      Society, November, 2008. 
    
    
     
   Sajassi-Aggarwal, et al.                                  [Page 10] 
    
    
   draft-sajassi-raggarwa-evpn-req-00.txt                    June 2010 
    
   14.         Informative References 
    
   [VPLS-BGP-MH] Kothari et al., "BGP based Multi-homing in Virtual 
   Private LAN Service", draft-ietf-l2vpn-vpls-multihoming-00, work in 
   progress, November, 2009. 
    
   [VPLS-MCAST] Aggarwal et al., "Multicast in VPLS", draft-ietf-l2vpn-
   vpls-mcast-06.txt, work in progress, March, 2010. 
    
    
   [PWE3-ICCP] Martini et al., "Inter-Chassis Communication Protocol 
   for L2VPN PE Redundancy", draft-ietf-pwe3-iccp-02.txt, work in 
   progress, Octoer, 2009. 
    
   [PWE3-FAT-PW] Bryant et al., "Flow Aware Transport of Pseudowires 
      over an MPLS PSN", draft-ietf-pwe3-fat-pw-03.txt, work in 
      progress, January 2010. 
    
    
    
    
   15.         Authors' Addresses 
    
   Ali Sajassi 
   Cisco 
   170 West Tasman Drive 
   San Jose, CA  95134, USA 
   Email: sajassi@cisco.com 
    
   Samer Salam 
   Cisco 
   595 Burrard Street, Suite 2123 
   Vancouver, BC V7X 1J1, Canada 
   Email: ssalam@cisco.com 
    
   Rahul Aggarwal 
   Juniper Networks 
   1194 N. Mathilda Ave. 
   Sunnyvale, CA  94089, USA 
   Email: rahul@juniper.net 
    
   Nabil Bitar 
   Verizon Communications 
   Email : nabil.n.bitar@verizon.com 
    
   James Uttaro 
   AT&T 
   200 S. Laurel Avenue 
   Middletown, NJ  07748, USA 
   Email: uttaro@att.com 
    
    
     
   Sajassi-Aggarwal, et al.                                  [Page 11] 
    
    
   draft-sajassi-raggarwa-evpn-req-00.txt                    June 2010 
    
   Aldrin Isaac 
   Bloomberg 
   Email: aisaac71@bloomberg.net 
    
   Clarence Filsfils 
   Cisco 
   Email: cfilsfil@cisco.com 
    
   Wim Henderickx 
   Alcate-lLucent 
   Email: wim.henderickx@alcatel-lucent.be 
    
    
    
     
   Sajassi-Aggarwal, et al.                                  [Page 12] 
    