


MMUSIC                                                           D. Wing
Internet-Draft                                                  P. Patil
Intended status: Standards Track                                T. Reddy
Expires: January 17, 2013                                          Cisco
                                                           July 16, 2012


                        Mobility with ICE (MICE)
                   draft-wing-mmusic-ice-mobility-01

Abstract

   This specification describes how endpoint mobility can be achieved
   using ICE.  Two mechanisms are shown, one where both endpoints
   support ICE and another where only one endpoint supports ICE.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 17, 2013.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2012 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.




Wing, et al.            Expires January 17, 2013                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                    MICE                         July 2012


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Notational Conventions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   3.  Mobility using ICE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     3.1.  Gaining an Interface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     3.2.  Receiving ICE Mobility event . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     3.3.  Losing an Interface  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.4.  New STUN Attributes MOBILITY-EVENT and MOBILITY-SUPPORT  .  6
   4.  Mobility using TURN  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     4.1.  Creating an Allocation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
       4.1.1.  Sending an Allocate Request  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
       4.1.2.  Receiving an Allocate Request  . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
       4.1.3.  Receiving an Allocate Success Response . . . . . . . .  8
       4.1.4.  Receiving an Allocate Error Response . . . . . . . . .  8
     4.2.  Refreshing an Allocation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
       4.2.1.  Sending a Refresh Request  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
       4.2.2.  Receiving a Refresh Request  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
       4.2.3.  Receiving a Refresh Response . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     4.3.  New STUN Attribute MOBILITY-TICKET . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     4.4.  New STUN Error Response Code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   5.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   6.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     6.1.  Considerations for ICE mechanism . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     6.2.  Considerations for TURN mechanism  . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   7.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   8.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     8.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     8.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11





















Wing, et al.            Expires January 17, 2013                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                    MICE                         July 2012


1.  Introduction

   When moving between networks, an endpoint has to change its IP
   address.  This change breaks upper layer protocols such as TCP and
   RTP.  Various techniques exist to prevent this breakage, all tied to
   making the endpoint's IP address static (e.g., Mobile IP, Proxy
   Mobile IP, LISP).  Other techniques exist, which make the upper layer
   protocol ambivalent to IP address changes (e.g., SCTP).  The
   mechanisms described in this document are in that last category.

   ICE [RFC5245] ensures two endpoints have a working media path between
   them, and is typically used by Internet-connected interactive media
   systems (e.g., SIP endpoints).  ICE does not expect either the local
   host or the remote host to change their IP addresses.  Although ICE
   does allow an "ICE restart", this is done by sending a re-INVITE
   which goes over the SIP signaling path.  The SIP signaling path is
   often slower than the media path (which needs to be recovered as
   quickly as possible), consumes an extra half round trip, and incurs
   an additional delay if the mobility event forces the endpoint to re-
   connect with its SIP proxy.  Thus, this document attempts to perform
   mobility entirely on the media path.

   A TURN [RFC5766] server relays media packets and is used for a
   variety of purposes, including overcoming NAT and firewall traversal
   issues and IP address privacy.  The existing TURN specification does
   not allow the client address to change, especially if multiple
   clients share the same TURN username (e.g., the same credentials are
   used on multiple devices).

   This document proposes two mechanisms to achieve RTP mobility: a
   mechanism where both endpoints support ICE, and a mechanism where
   only one endpoint supports ICE.  When both endpoints support ICE, ICE
   itself can be used to provide mobility.  When only one endpoint
   supports ICE, a TURN server provides mobility.  Both mobility
   techniques work across and between network types (e.g., between 3G
   and wired Internet access), so long as the client can still access
   the remote ICE peer or TURN server.

   Readers are assumed to be familiar with ICE [RFC5245].


2.  Notational Conventions

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].

   This note uses terminology defined in [RFC5245].



Wing, et al.            Expires January 17, 2013                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                    MICE                         July 2012


3.  Mobility using ICE

   When both endpoints support ICE, ICE itself can provide mobility
   functions.  One of the primary aspects of ICE is its address
   gathering, wherein ICE has each endpoint determine all of the IP
   addresses and ports that might be usable for that endpoint and
   communicate that list of addresses and ports to its peer, usually
   over SDP.  That enables the next primary aspect of ICE, which is its
   connectivity checks: each ICE endpoint sends a connectivity check to
   that list of addresses and ports.  A connectivity check may
   unknowingly traverse a NAT, which means the ICE endpoint receiving
   the connectivity check cannot validate the source IP address or port
   of the connectivity against the list of IP addresses and ports
   provided by the ICE peer.  In fact, if the source IP address and port
   is not known to the ICE endpoint, it is added to the list of
   candidates (Section 7.2.1.3 of [RFC5245].

   ICE Mobility takes advantage of that existent ICE functionality.
   Media can be switched to the new interface before or after the
   previous interface is lost.

   When an interface is lost, media traffic might or might not be
   utilizing that interface.  If media traffic is currently traversing
   the interface, this is considered a "break before make", because the
   host has not already moved its media traffic to a different
   interface.

   Endpoints that support ICE Mobility perform ICE normally, and MUST
   also include the MOBILITY-SUPPORT attribute in all of their STUN
   requests and their STUN responses.  The inclusion of this attribute
   allows the ICE peer to determine if it can achieve mobility using ICE
   or needs to use TURN (or needs to use some other mechanism, such as
   Mobile IP).  To force the use of TURN to achieve ICE mobility, the
   ICE endpoint SHOULD NOT respond to ICE connectivity checks that have
   an IP address and port different from the TURN server, unless those
   connectivity checks contain the MOBILITY-SUPPORT attribute.  In this
   way, the remote peer will think those other candidates are invalid
   (because its connectivity checks did not succeed).

   After concluding ICE and moving to the ICE completed state (see
   Section 8 of [RFC5245] either endpoint or both endpoints can initiate
   ICE Mobility, no matter if it was the Controlling Agent or the
   Controlled Agent during normal ICE processing.

3.1.  Gaining an Interface

   When gaining an interface which is suitable to send media by the
   host's policy (if any), the ICE endpoint performs ICE Mobility.  ICE



Wing, et al.            Expires January 17, 2013                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                    MICE                         July 2012


   Mobility is performed by:

   1.  The ICE endpoint clears its ICE check list.

   2.  The ICE endpoint initiating an ICE connectivity check on the new
       interface, with the MOBILITY-EVENT attribute.

   3.  If this interface is the only suitable interface for media (that
       is, other suitable interfaces have been lost), then the
       connectivity check from the previous step SHOULD also include the
       USE-CANDIDATE attribute to signals an aggressive nomination (see
       Section 2.6 of [RFC5245]), and media MAY immediately begin
       flowing over that interface.

   4.  The ICE endpoint performs Sections 7.2.1.3, 7.2.1.4, and 7.2.1.5
       of [RFC5245].

   5.  If the ICE connectivity check succeeds then ICE agents creates a
       new pair, adds the pair to the valid list and marks it as
       selected.  The ICE agent can now send media using the newly
       selected candidate pair, even if it is running in Regular
       Nomination mode.

   6.  Once ICE connectivity checks for all of the media streams are
       completed, the controlling ICE endpoint follows the procedures in
       Section 11.1 of [RFC5245], specifically to send updated offer if
       the candidates in the m and c lines for the media stream (called
       the DEFAULT CANDIDATES) do not match ICE's SELECTED CANDIDATES
       (also see Appendix B.9 of [RFC5245]).

3.2.  Receiving ICE Mobility event

   A STUN Binding Request containing the MOBILITY-EVENT attribute MAY be
   received by an ICE endpoint.  If this is received before the endpoint
   is in the ICE Concluded state, it should be silently discarded.

   The agent remembers the highest-priority nominated pairs in the Valid
   list for each component of the media stream, called the previous
   selected pairs.  It continues sending media to that address until it
   finishes with the steps described below.  Because those packets might
   not be received due to the mobility event, it MAY cache a copy of
   those packets.

   The ICE endpoint clears its ICE check list.

   The ICE endpoint performs Sections 7.2.1.3, 7.2.1.4, and 7.2.1.5 of
   [RFC5245].




Wing, et al.            Expires January 17, 2013                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                    MICE                         July 2012


3.3.  Losing an Interface

   When an interface is lost, the SDP MAY be updated, so that the remote
   ICE host does not waste its efforts with connectivity checks to that
   address, as those checks will fail.  Because it can be argued that
   this is merely an optimization, and that the interface loss might be
   temporary (and soon regained), and that ICE has reasonable
   accommodation for candidates where connectivity checks timeout, this
   specification does not strongly encourage updating the SDP to remove
   a lost interface.  Likewise, this specification recommends that ICE
   candidate addresses be maintained actively, subject to the host's
   policy.  For example, battery operated hosts have a strong incentive
   to not maintain mappings to TURN servers, as that maintenance
   requires periodic keepalive messages.  As another example, a host
   that is receiving media over IPv6 may not want to persist with
   keeping a NATted IPv4 mapping alive (because that consumes a NAT
   mapping that could be more useful to a host actively utilizing the
   mapping for real traffic).

   Note: this differs from Section 8.3 of [RFC5245], which encourages
   abandoning un-used candidates.

   Note: A future version of this document will have more normative
   language in this section.

3.4.  New STUN Attributes MOBILITY-EVENT and MOBILITY-SUPPORT

   Two new attributes are defined by this section: MOBILITY-EVENT and
   MOBILITY-SUPPORT.

   The MOBILITY-EVENT attribute indicate the sender experienced a
   mobility event.  This attribute has no value, thus the attribute
   length field MUST always be 0.  Rules for sending and interpretation
   of receiving are described above.

   The MOBILITY-SUPPORT attribute indicates the sender supports ICE
   Mobility, as defined in this document.  This attribute has no value,
   thus the attribute length field MUST always be 0.  Rules for sending
   and interpretation of receiving are described above.


4.  Mobility using TURN

   To achieve mobility, a TURN client should be able to retain an
   allocation on the TURN server across changes in the client IP address
   as a consequence of movement to other networks.

   When the client sends the initial Allocate request to the TURN



Wing, et al.            Expires January 17, 2013                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                    MICE                         July 2012


   server, it will also include the new STUN attribute MOBILITY-TICKET
   (with zero length value), which indicates that the client is capable
   of mobility and desires a ticket.  The TURN server provisions a
   ticket that is sent inside the new STUN attribute MOBILITY-TICKET in
   the Allocate Success response to the client.  The ticket will be used
   by the client when it wants to refresh the allocation but with a new
   client IP address and port.  It also ensures that the allocation can
   only be refreshed this way by the same client.  When a client's IP
   address changes due to mobility, it presents the previously obtained
   ticket in a Refresh Request to the TURN server.  If the ticket is
   found to be valid, the TURN server will retain the same relayed
   address/port for the new IP address/port allowing the client to
   continue using previous channel bindings -- thus, the TURN client
   does not need to obtain new channel bindings.  Any data from external
   peer will be delivered by the TURN server to this new IP address/port
   of the client.  The TURN client will continue to send application
   data to its peers using the previously allocated channelBind
   Requests.

     TURN                                 TURN           Peer
     client                               server          A
       |-- Allocate request --------------->|             |
       |   + MOBILITY-TICKET (length=0)     |             |
       |                                    |             |
       |<--------------- Allocate failure --|             |
       |                 (401 Unauthorized) |             |
       |                                    |             |
       |-- Allocate request --------------->|             |
       |   + MOBILITY-TICKET (length=0)     |             |
       |                                    |             |
       |<---------- Allocate success resp --|             |
       |            + MOBILITY-TICKET       |             |
      ...                                  ...           ...
   (changes IP address)
       |                                    |             |
       |-- Refresh request ---------------->|             |
       |   + MOBILITY-TICKET                |             |
       |                                    |             |
       |<----------- Refresh success resp --|             |
       |   + MOBILITY-TICKET                |             |
       |                                    |             |

4.1.  Creating an Allocation

4.1.1.  Sending an Allocate Request

   In addition to the process described in Section 6.1 of [RFC5766], the
   client includes the MOBILITY-TICKET attribute with length 0.  This



Wing, et al.            Expires January 17, 2013                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                    MICE                         July 2012


   indicates the client is a mobile node and wants a ticket.

4.1.2.  Receiving an Allocate Request

   In addition to the process described in Section 6.2 of [RFC5766], the
   server does the following:

   If the MOBILITY-TICKET attribute is included, and has length zero,
   and the TURN session mobility is forbidden by local policy, the
   server MUST reject the request with the new Mobility Forbidden error
   code.  Following the rules specified in [RFC5389], if the server does
   not understand the MOBILITY-TICKET attribute, it ignores the
   attribute.

   If the server can successfully process the request create an
   allocation, the server replies with a success response that includes
   a STUN MOBILITY-TICKET attribute.  TURN server stores it's session
   state, such as 5-tuple and NONCE, into a ticket that is encrypted by
   a key known only to the TURN server and sends the ticket in the STUN
   MOBILITY-TICKET attribute as part of Allocate success response.

   The ticket is opaque to the client, so the structure is not subject
   to interoperability concerns, and implementations may diverge from
   this format.  TURN Allocation state information is encrypted using
   128-bit key for Advance Encryption Standard (AES) and 256-bit key for
   HMAC-SHA-256 for integrity protection.

4.1.3.  Receiving an Allocate Success Response

   In addition to the process described in Section 6.3 of [RFC5766], the
   client will store the MOBILITY-TICKET attribute, if present, from the
   response.  This attribute will be presented by the client to the
   server during a subsequent Refresh request to aid mobility.

4.1.4.  Receiving an Allocate Error Response

   If the client receives an Allocate error response with error code TBD
   (Mobility Forbidden), the error is processed as follows:

   o TBD (Mobility Forbidden): The request is valid, but the server is
   refusing to perform it, likely due to administrative restrictions.
   The client considers the current transaction as having failed.  The
   client MAY notify the user or operator and SHOULD NOT retry the same
   request with this server until it believes the problem has been
   fixed.

   All other error responses must be handled as described in [RFC5766].




Wing, et al.            Expires January 17, 2013                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                    MICE                         July 2012


4.2.  Refreshing an Allocation

4.2.1.  Sending a Refresh Request

   If a client wants to refresh an existing allocation and update its
   time-to-expiry or delete an existing allocation, it will send a
   Refresh Request as described in Section 7.1 of [RFC5766].  If the
   client wants to retain the existing allocation in case of IP change,
   it will include the MOBILITY-TICKET attribute received in the
   Allocate Success response.  If a Refresh transaction was previously
   made, the MOBILITY-TICKET attribute received in the Refresh Success
   response of the transaction must be used.

4.2.2.  Receiving a Refresh Request

   In addition to the process described in Section 7.2 of [RFC5766], the
   client does the following:

   If the STUN MOBILITY-TICKET attribute is included in the Refresh
   Request then the server will not retrieve the 5-tuple from the packet
   to identify an associated allocation.  Instead TURN server will
   decrypt the received ticket, verify the ticket's validity and
   retrieve the 5-tuple allocation from the contents of the ticket.  If
   this 5-tuple obtained from the ticket does not identify an existing
   allocation then the server MUST reject the request with an error.

   If the source IP address and port of the Refresh Request is different
   from the stored 5-tuple allocation, the TURN server proceeds with
   checks to see if NONCE in the Refresh request is the same as the one
   provided in the ticket.  The TURN server also uses MESSAGE-INTEGRITY
   validation to identify the that it is the same user which had
   previously created the TURN allocation.  If the above checks are not
   successful then server MUST reject the request with a 441 (Wrong
   Credentials) error.

   If all of the above checks pass, the TURN server understands that the
   client has moved to a new network and acquired a new IP address.  The
   source IP address of the request could either be the host transport
   address or server-reflexive transport address.  The server then
   updates it's 5-tuple with the new client IP address and port.  TURN
   server calculates the ticket with the new 5-tuple and sends the new
   ticket in the STUN MOBILITY-TICKET attribute as part of Refresh
   Success response.

4.2.3.  Receiving a Refresh Response

   In addition to the process described in Section 7.3 of [RFC5766], the
   client will store the MOBILITY-TICKET attribute, if present, from the



Wing, et al.            Expires January 17, 2013                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft                    MICE                         July 2012


   response.  This attribute will be presented by the client to the
   server during a subsequent Refresh Request to aid mobility.

4.3.  New STUN Attribute MOBILITY-TICKET

   This attribute is used to retain an Allocation on the TURN server.
   It is exchanged between the client and server to aid mobility.  The
   value is encrypted and identifies identifies session state such as
   5-tuple and NONCE.  The value of MOBILITY-TICKET is a variable-length
   value.

4.4.  New STUN Error Response Code

   This document defines the following new error response code:

      Mobility Forbidden: Mobility request was valid but cannot be
      performed due to administrative or similar restrictions.


5.  IANA Considerations

   IANA is requested to add the following attributes to the STUN
   attribute registry [iana-stun],

   o  MOBILITY-TICKET (0x802E, in the comprehension-optional range)

   o  MOBILITY-EVENT (0x802, in the comprehension-required range)

   o  MOBILITY-SUPPORT (0x8000, in the comprehension-optional range)

   and to add a new STUN error code "Mobility Forbidden" with the value
   501 to the STUN Error Codes registry [iana-stun].


6.  Security Considerations

6.1.  Considerations for ICE mechanism

   A mobility event only occurs after both ICE endpoints have exchanged
   their ICE information.  Thus, both username fragments are already
   known to both endpoints.  Each endpoint contributes at least 24 bits
   of randomness to the ice-ufrag (Section 15.4 of [RFC5245]), which
   provides 48 bits of randomness.  An off-path attacker would have to
   guess those 48 bits to cause the endpoints to perform HMAC-SHA1
   validation of the MESSAGE-INTEGRITY attribute.

   An attacker on the path between the ICE endpoints will see both ice-
   ufrags, and can cause the endpoints to perform HMAC-SHA1 validation



Wing, et al.            Expires January 17, 2013               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft                    MICE                         July 2012


   by sending messages from any IP address.

6.2.  Considerations for TURN mechanism

   TURN server MUST use strong encryption and integrity protection for
   the ticket to prevent an attacker from using a brute force mechanism
   to obtain the ticket's contents or refreshing allocations.

   Security considerations described in [RFC5766] are also applicable to
   this mechanism.


7.  Acknowledgements

   Thanks to Alfred Heggestad for his review and comments.


8.  References

8.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC5245]  Rosenberg, J., "Interactive Connectivity Establishment
              (ICE): A Protocol for Network Address Translator (NAT)
              Traversal for Offer/Answer Protocols", RFC 5245,
              April 2010.

   [RFC5389]  Rosenberg, J., Mahy, R., Matthews, P., and D. Wing,
              "Session Traversal Utilities for NAT (STUN)", RFC 5389,
              October 2008.

   [RFC5766]  Mahy, R., Matthews, P., and J. Rosenberg, "Traversal Using
              Relays around NAT (TURN): Relay Extensions to Session
              Traversal Utilities for NAT (STUN)", RFC 5766, April 2010.

8.2.  Informative References

   [iana-stun]
              IANA, "IANA: STUN Attributes", April 2011,
              <http://www.iana.org/assignments/stun-parameters/stun-pa
              rameters.xml>.








Wing, et al.            Expires January 17, 2013               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft                    MICE                         July 2012


Authors' Addresses

   Dan Wing
   Cisco Systems, Inc.
   170 West Tasman Drive
   San Jose, California  95134
   USA

   Email: dwing@cisco.com


   Prashanth Patil
   Cisco Systems, Inc.
   Cessna Business Park, Varthur Hobli
   Sarjapur Marthalli Outer Ring Road
   Bangalore, Karnataka  560103
   India

   Email: praspati@cisco.com


   Tirumaleswar Reddy
   Cisco Systems, Inc.
   Cessna Business Park, Varthur Hobli
   Sarjapur Marathalli Outer Ring Road
   Bangalore, Karnataka  560103
   India

   Email: tireddy@cisco.com






















Wing, et al.            Expires January 17, 2013               [Page 12]

