


IPv6 maintenance Working Group (6man)                         H. Rafiee
INTERNET-DRAFT                                                C. Meinel
Updates RFC 4941 (if approved)                  Hasso Plattner Institute
Intended status: Proposed Standard                                      
Expires: February 8, 2014                                 August 8, 2013


 Router Advertisement based privacy extension in IPv6 autoconfiguration
                  <draft-rafiee-6man-ra-privacy-05.txt>

Abstract

   Privacy is an important issue which concerns many governments and 
   users, with its importance becoming more evident every day. Nodes 
   change their IP addresses frequently in order to avoid being tracked 
   by attackers. The act of frequently changing IP addresses also helps 
   to prevent the leakage of information by nodes. In IPv6 networks 
   there is currently one solution for maintaining the privacy of nodes 
   when IPv6 StateLess Address AutoConfiguration (SLAAC) (RFC 4862) is 
   used. Unfortunately there are some problems associated with this 
   solution which entails the use of the Privacy Extension (RFC 4941). 
   One of the issues with this RFC concerns the wording that is used 
   which allows the implementation to make the choice as to what 
   approach to use and in so doing, in some cases, the choice made is 
   not the most prudent or best approach and this is not ideal and can 
   cause some problems. Some of these problems are concerned with not 
   generating a new Interface ID (IID) after changing the router prefix. 
   Another concern would be the fact that nodes may use an IID that was 
   generated based on a MAC address as a public address, and then use 
   this in their response. The act of cutting the current connections to 
   other nodes, if the max lifetime of the old IID has elapsed, is also 
   not clearly explained nor is whether or not the already used IID 
   should be kept in stable storage, There is also a concern about the 
   need to have stable storage available for the generation of a 
   randomized IID. The RFC gives no explanation as to how to make use of 
   CGA in its randomizing solution when stable storage is not available 
   or how to use the same approach for random value generation in all 
   implementations where there is a lack of stable storage. The purpose 
   of this document is to address these issues, to update the current 
   RFC and to introduce a new algorithm for the lifetime of IID. 



Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the 
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79. 

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF). Note that other groups may also distribute working 


Rafiee, et al.     Expires February 8, 2014                     [Page 1]

INTERNET DRAFT         RA-base Privacy Extension          August 8, 2013

   documents as Internet-Drafts. The list of current Internet-Drafts is 
   at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current. 

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 

   This Internet-Draft will expire on Expires: February 8, 2014. 

   



Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the 
   document authors. All rights reserved. This document is subject to 
   BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal Provisions Relating to IETF 
   Documents (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the 
   date of publication of this document. Please review these documents 
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect 
   to this document. Code Components extracted from this document must 
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of 
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as 
   described in the Simplified BSD License. 



Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Conventions used in this document  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Algorithm Overview   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     3.1.  Duplicate Address Detection (DAD) Process  . . . . . . . .  5
   4.  Modification to the use of stable storage  . . . . . . . . . .  5
   5.  Interface ID (IID) generation based on the MAC address   . . .  6
   6.  Lifetime of Interface ID (IID)   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     6.1.  Automate the process for setting the lifetime  . . . . . .  6
   7.  Threat Analysis  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     7.1.  Location based tracking  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     7.2.  Obtaining confidential data  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   8.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   9.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   10.  Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   11.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     11.1.  Normative . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10







Rafiee, et al.     Expires February 8, 2014                     [Page 2]

INTERNET DRAFT         RA-base Privacy Extension          August 8, 2013



1.  Introduction 

   Privacy and security have a close relationship. Privacy, simply 
   stated, is the act of allowing a user to choose which data he wants 
   to make available to others or which data he wants to keep from 
   prying eyes. Security, on the other hand, is the ability to protect 
   data or to keep it confidential. There are times, however, where one 
   will have to be sacrificed for the sake of the other. The gathering 
   of location information, for security reasons, might prove 
   detrimental to privacy. But in many cases, when cryptography or other 
   approaches are used to protect the content of the data, it is not 
   only being secured but is also being provided privacy. 

   This document defines the meaning of privacy as it relates to methods 
   for maintaining data confidentiality so that it does not become 
   available to or exposed to unscrupulous people who would use it to 
   the detriment of the user or would use it for their ill gotten gains. 
   There is currently one solution available in IPv6 autoconfiguration 
   (RFC 4682):, Privacy Extension [RFC4941]. The Privacy Extension 
   document explains two different approaches for use in IID generation. 
   In the first approach, the use of stable storage enables a node to 
   find which IIDs are currently in use and which are in reserve. In the 
   second approach, where stable storage is not available, it suggests 
   the use of some randomizing approaches and also comments about other 
   available randomizing mechanisms such as Cryptographically Generated 
   Addresses (CGA) [RFC3972] or Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol 
   (DHCPv6). The Privacy Extension document also refers to the use of 
   names approaches as a mechanism for greater randomization. This 
   document addresses the following problems: 

   - RFC 4941 promotes the use of IIDs generated by a MAC address as a 
   public address for the node 

   - The node might not generate a new IID when it receives a new RA 
   message if the option in the router advertisement tells the node to 
   extend the lifetime of its address, and if the maximum lifetime of 
   that address has not been reached, then the node will keep its 
   current IID without generating a new one. 

   - A node may determine a need for the use of a large stable storage 
   area in which to store each newly generated IID. This needs to be 
   done to prevent the generation of another currently "in use" 
   value.When there is no stable storage available the node may not be 
   able to make use of a greatly randomized IID because, according to 
   section 3.2.2 of RFC 4941, there is nothing to force the use RFC 
   4086. 

   

   The Updates pertain to the following sections and concepts in RFC 
   4941: 


Rafiee, et al.     Expires February 8, 2014                     [Page 3]

INTERNET DRAFT         RA-base Privacy Extension          August 8, 2013


   - Section 3.2.3 in order to explain the use of CGA when security is 
   not the issue. 

   - An additional update to this RFC will explain how to maintain the 
   lifetime of the IP address when the router prefix changes or the 
   lifetime of the IID in general changes. This is needed because, in 
   this RFC, the key role is the lifetime of the IID. This means that 
   the node might not change its IID when it moves to another network 
   unless the node is rebooted. This can afford an attacker the ability 
   to track this node, and in doing so, to obtain enough confidential 
   information about this node, to assist in further attacks. 

   - There should be an update made to step 4, Section 3.2.1, clarifying 
   which IIDs should be kept in stable storage. 

   If there is no stable storage available, and if none of the methods 
   explained in RFC 4086 [RFC4086] for randomization are used, then the 
   node may make a bad choice as to the approach to use for the 
   randomization process, and, thus, may not be able to make use of a 
   highly randomized IID. This is due to the fact that, in section 3.2.2 
   of RFC 4941, the word "might" is used in explaining the proper 
   randomization approach to be used. The approach should be specified. 



2.  Conventions used in this document 

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [RFC2119]. 

   In this document, these words will appear with that interpretation 
   only when in ALL CAPS. Lower case uses of these words are not to be 
   interpreted as carrying RFC 2119 significance. 

   In this document the use of || indicates the concatenation of the 
   values on either side of the sign. 



3.  Algorithm Overview 

   This section explains how to use the modified version of the CGA 
   algorithm for higher randomization of the IID without a need for 
   stable storage. This approach is RECOMMENDED and preferable over the 
   first approach, where stable storage is needed. 

   1. Generate a 16 byte random number called modifier. To generate this 
   modifier implementations SHOULD use a random seed to aid in the 
   randomization of this number. 

   2. Obtain the router prefix from the Router Advertisement 


Rafiee, et al.     Expires February 8, 2014                     [Page 4]

INTERNET DRAFT         RA-base Privacy Extension          August 8, 2013


   3. Obtain the nodes' current time and convert it to a timestamp. The 
   timestamp field consists of a 64-bit, unsigned integer field 
   containing a timestamp whose value is computed from the number of 
   seconds since January 1, 1970, 00:00 UTC, by using a fixed point 
   format. 

   4. Concatenate the modifier with the timestamp and the router prefix. 

   R1=(modifier(16 bytes)||timestamp(8 bytes)|| router prefix) 

   5. Execute SHA2 (256) against the result from step 4. 

   digest=SHA256(R1) 

   The use of SHA2 (256) is RECOMMENDED because the chances of finding a 
   collision are less than when using SHA1 and the time for the 
   generation is acceptable (in microseconds using a standard CPU). In 
   the future, if a faster and collision free algorithm becomes 
   available, then it SHOULD be used. It is RECOMMENDED that the 
   implementation be able to support any new algorithms. 

   6. Take the 64 leftmost bits from the resulting output of step 5 
   (SHA2 digest) and set bits u and g (bits 7 and 8) to one and call 
   this the IID. 

   7. Concatenate the IID with the local subnet prefix in order to set 
   the local IP address. If the lifetime of the old local address has 
   not expired, then the node MIGHT skip this step. Otherwise it will 
   receive a new router prefix. 

   8. Concatenate the IID with the router subnet prefix (Global subnet 
   prefix), obtained from the RA message, and set it as a tentative 
   privacy IP address. This IP address will become permanent after 
   Duplicate Address Detection (DAD) processing. This constitutes 
   another update to RFC 4941. The status of IP addresses defined in RFC 
   4941 are temporary while they SHOULD be permanent with a lifetime as 
   explained in section 4. 



3.1.  Duplicate Address Detection (DAD) Process 

   After the DAD process has completed, if the node finds collisions in 
   the network, then the modifier will be incremented and the DAD 
   process will be repeated. If, after 3 times, it receives the same 
   result, it will consider this an attack and will start using that IP 
   address. 



4.  Modification to the use of stable storage 



Rafiee, et al.     Expires February 8, 2014                     [Page 5]

INTERNET DRAFT         RA-base Privacy Extension          August 8, 2013

   The stable storage (section 3.2.1 RFC 4941) MUST only contain the 
   last generated value of the node. The node MUST not keep older, 
   already used, IIDs. This modification is made to eliminate the need 
   for large stable storage. For the randomization approach, if the node 
   cannot pick the best algorithm from among the ones already explained 
   in RFC 4086, then it MUST also include a timestamp in order to 
   preclude the generation of an already used IID. 



5.  Interface ID (IID) generation based on the MAC address 

   Step 3 in Section 3.3 of RFC 4941 MUST be ignored. When a node uses 
   the mechanism explained in this document to generate an IID, it MUST 
   not use any other IID generation approaches that are based on MAC 
   addresses ( RFC 4862) for either temporary or non temporary IID 
   generation. The node MIGHT use the algorithm explained in this 
   document or another algorithm [StableAddresses] that does not make 
   use of EUI-64 or the MAC address for public (global) addresses. 

   The choice of whether or not to list a node's address in the DNS 
   undisguised depends on many factors, including the set of 
   applications to be run on the host. Not listing a node's address in 
   the public DNS may increase the node's privacy, but may also impair 
   its ability to support certain applications. 

   For debugging and troubleshooting purposes, the implementation MUST 
   provide a way of partially disabling the mechanism explained in this 
   document. Allowing for manually setting and unsettling a flag, which 
   would indicate the debugging mode, is one way to accomplish this. 
   This means that when this flag is set, the node SHOULD not generate 
   new IIDs and SHOULD change the IID's lifetime to a large number. As 
   soon as the trouble shooting process ends, and the flag is set back 
   to zero, then the node MUST generate a new IID and start using it. 
   The lifetime of the old IID must also be set to an appropriate value 
   at this time. 



6.  Lifetime of Interface ID (IID) 

   The node MIGHT make use of the same algorithm and the same lifetime 
   as is explained in RFC 4941, or the node MIGHT choose a lifetime 
   based on some other algorithms or policies. If it uses the lifetime 
   explained in RFC 4941, then it should generate a new IID whenever it 
   receives a new router prefix, regardless of the option in the Router 
   Advertisement message to extend this lifetime. 



6.1.  Automate the process for setting the lifetime 

   The implementations MIGHT consider an option where, when RA messages 


Rafiee, et al.     Expires February 8, 2014                     [Page 6]

INTERNET DRAFT         RA-base Privacy Extension          August 8, 2013

   are being processed , the RA message can be used to update the 
   lifetime for all addresses generated by the use of this approach. 
   This will eliminate the need for the manual step, used during 
   installation, to set the default value for the lifetime (based on 
   network policy) for any future IIDs generated using this approach. 
   The format for this lifetime value will be the same as that explained 
   in section 5.3.1 RFC 3971. The "type" SHOULD be set to the next 
   sequential number available in the SeND options, i.e., 15. When use 
   is made of the lifetime option, this field SHOULD be added to the 
   ICMPv6 option for RA messages. 



7.  Threat Analysis 

   Privacy consists of personal data that contains any information 
   relating to an individual, whether it relates to his or her private, 
   professional or public life. It can be anything from a name, a photo, 
   an email address, bank details, his posts on social networking 
   websites, his medical information, or his computer's IP address. Any 
   unauthorized efforts to obtain this information are considered an 
   attack against a user's privacy. The following sections will explain 
   how the mechanism detailed in this document can protect a user's 
   privacy. 



7.1.  Location based tracking 

   As the node MUST only keep its IID for a short period of time, and 
   MUST also change it when the prefix changes, it is not very easy for 
   an attacker to track this node based on its IP address. This is also 
   the case when the node changes the IID within the same network. The 
   reason for this is because it is very difficult for the attacker to 
   realize that this node is the same node, only with a newly generated 
   IID. This is especially true when there is an unlimited number of 
   nodes on the same network. 



7.2.  Obtaining confidential data 

   When a node changes its IID frequently, within the network and among 
   networks, the attacker probably won't have enough time to obtain the 
   user's confidential data. It will also be difficult for the attacker 
   to correlate the information that he does obtain to a specific user's 
   IP address. This means that it will be difficult for the attacker to 
   obtain more information about this user based on any correlation of 
   data. An example would be when an attacker obtains a confidential 
   document from a user, but he is unsure about the location of this 
   user. If the attacker had the location the user, he would be able to 
   obtain much more information about this user. With this new 
   information he would then be able to start attacks against him. But 


Rafiee, et al.     Expires February 8, 2014                     [Page 7]

INTERNET DRAFT         RA-base Privacy Extension          August 8, 2013

   changing the IID prevents the attacker from finding the location of 
   this user and thus prevents further attacks. 

8.  Security Considerations

   As is explained in the Privacy Extension document. the same 
   approaches are used to maintain security, such as using Secure 
   Neighbor Discovery (SeND)(RFC 3971) or using a monitoring system 
   which would inform the administrator of the status of the network and 
   of any suspended activities in the network. 



9.  IANA Considerations

   This document is updating RFC 4941 in order to prevent nodes from 
   using addresses that were generated based on a MAC address and also 
   some other deficiencies that exist in RFC 4941 



10.  Conclusions

   Privacy has become a very important issue in recent years. There is 
   one solution to the privacy issues, but the current solution has some 
   deficiencies. The purpose of the current document is to address and 
   solve the problem which exists with the Privacy Extension document 
   [RFC4941]. 



11.  References

11.1.  Normative References 

   [RFC2119] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to 
             Indicate Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997. 

   [RFC4291] Hinden, R., Deering, S., "IP Version 6 Addressing 
             Architecture," RFC 4291, February 2006. 

   [RFC3972] Aura, T., "Cryptographically Generated Addresses 
             (CGA)," RFC 3972, March 2005. 

   [RFC4941] Narten, T., Draves, R., Krishnan, S., "Privacy 
             Extensions for Stateless Address Autoconfiguration in 
             IPv6", RFC 4941, September 2007. 

   [RFC3315] Droms, R., Bound, J., Volz, B., Lemon, T., 
             Perkins, C., Carney, M. , " Dynamic Host Configuration 
             Protocol for IPv6 (DHCPv6)", RFC 3315, July 2003. 

   [RFC4086] Eastlake, D., Schiller, J., and S. Crocker, 


Rafiee, et al.     Expires February 8, 2014                     [Page 8]

INTERNET DRAFT         RA-base Privacy Extension          August 8, 2013

             "Randomness Requirements for Security", BCP 106, RFC 4086, 
             June 2005. 

   [StableAddresses] Gont, F., "A method for 
                     Generating Stable Privacy-Enhanced Addresses with 
                     IPv6 Stateless Address Autoconfiguration (SLAAC)", 
                     Work In Progress, 
                     http://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-ietf-6man-stable-privacy-addresses-10, 
                     June 2013 














































Rafiee, et al.     Expires February 8, 2014                     [Page 9]

INTERNET DRAFT         RA-base Privacy Extension          August 8, 2013

Authors' Addresses

      Hosnieh Rafiee
      Hasso-Plattner-Institute
      Prof.-Dr.-Helmert-Str. 2-3
      Potsdam, Germany
      Phone: +49 (0)331-5509-546
      Email: ietf@rozanak.com


      Dr. Christoph Meinel
      (Professor)
      Hasso-Plattner-Institute
      Prof.-Dr.-Helmert-Str. 2-3
      Potsdam, Germany
      Email: meinel@hpi.uni-potsdam.de





































Rafiee, et al.     Expires February 8, 2014                    [Page 10]

