


IPv6 maintenance Working Group (6man)                         H. Rafiee
INTERNET-DRAFT                                                C. Meinel
Updates RFC 4941 (if approved)                  Hasso Plattner Institute
Intended status: Proposed Standard                                      
Expires: April 21, 2014                                 October 21, 2013


 Router Advertisement based privacy extension in IPv6 autoconfiguration
                  <draft-rafiee-6man-ra-privacy-08.txt>

Abstract

   The purpose of this document is to address the privacy issues that 
   exist within the Privacy Extension (RFC 44941) document so that the 
   Privacy Extension document can then be updated to correct these 
   shortcomings. These issues include the generation of public addresses 
   based on EUI-64, not choosing a good randomized function, not 
   changing the Interface ID (IID) when receiving a new router 
   advertisement, and some wording issues that might be ambiguous in 
   their interpretation. 



Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the 
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79. 

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF). Note that other groups may also distribute working 
   documents as Internet-Drafts. The list of current Internet-Drafts is 
   at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current. 

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 

   This Internet-Draft will expire on Expires: April 21, 2014. 

   



Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the 
   document authors. All rights reserved. This document is subject to 
   BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal Provisions Relating to IETF 
   Documents (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the 


Rafiee, et al.       Expires April 21, 2014                     [Page 1]

INTERNET DRAFT         RA-base Privacy Extension        October 21, 2013

   date of publication of this document. Please review these documents 
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect 
   to this document. Code Components extracted from this document must 
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of 
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as 
   described in the Simplified BSD License. 



Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Conventions used in this document  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Algorithm Overview   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     3.1.  Duplicate Address Detection (DAD) Process  . . . . . . . .  5
   4.  Advantages of ra-privacy over CGA and DHCPv6   . . . . . . . .  6
   5.  Modification for the use of stable storage   . . . . . . . . .  6
   6.  Interface ID (IID) generation based on the MAC address   . . .  6
   7.  Lifetime of Interface ID (IID)   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   8.  Threat Analysis  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   9.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   10.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   11.  Appendex  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   12.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   13.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     13.1.  Normative . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     13.2.  Informative . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9



























Rafiee, et al.       Expires April 21, 2014                     [Page 2]

INTERNET DRAFT         RA-base Privacy Extension        October 21, 2013



1.  Introduction 

   Today, privacy is an important concern to everyone in their everyday 
   life. Privacy is not bound to any particular layer in the Open 
   Systems Interconnection (OSI) model, but some layers do have a 
   greater impact on user privacy. This document tries to address the 
   deficiency that exists in the current privacy solution as it relates 
   to the network layer. In other words, how an IP address can affect 
   user privacy. The current solution for IPv6 autoconfiguration (RFC 
   4682) is the use of the Privacy Extension [RFC4941]. The Privacy 
   Extension document explains two different approaches that can be used 
   for IID generation. In the first approach, the use of stable storage 
   enables a node to find which IIDs are currently in use and which are 
   in reserve. In the second approach, where stable storage is not 
   available, it suggests the use of some randomizing approaches and 
   also comments about other available randomizing mechanisms such as 
   Cryptographically Generated Addresses (CGA) [RFC3972] or Dynamic Host 
   Configuration Protocol (DHCPv6). The Privacy Extension document also 
   refers to the use of a named approach as an approach to be used in a 
   mechanism for generating greater randomization. This document 
   addresses the following problems: 

   - RFC 4941 specifies the use of EUI-64 to generate the public address 
   of node 

   - If the node is changing the physical link, it may keep the IID 
   already used on the link it is leaving, to form an IPv6 address on 
   the new link using SLAAC. 

   - This document is also plan to clarify the interpretation of some 
   words used in RFC 4941. One example is a node might nterpret a need 
   for the use of a large, stable storage area in which to store each 
   newly generated IID. This needs to be done to prevent the generation 
   of another currently "in use" value. 

   - This document also clarifies the use of other algorithm and compare 
   it with CGA and DHCPv6 when there is no stable storage available. So 
   that the node may be able to make use of a greatly randomized IID 
   because, according to section 3.2.2 of RFC 4941, there is nothing to 
   force the use of RFC 4086. 

   

   The Updates pertain to the following sections and concepts in RFC 
   4941: 

   - Section 3.2.3: in order to explain the use of a new randomization 
   algorithm when stable storage is not available, and when implementers 
   are not willing to use RFC 4086. This algorithm can provide the same 
   randomization as does CGA by eliminating the complexity of CGA 
   algorithm. DHCPv6 server might be configured to assign a sequential 


Rafiee, et al.       Expires April 21, 2014                     [Page 3]

INTERNET DRAFT         RA-base Privacy Extension        October 21, 2013

   IID to the nodes. This is why, there might be no randomization at all 
   and the node's IID is easily detectable. 

   - An additional update to this RFC will explain how to maintain the 
   lifetime of the IP address when the router prefix changes or the 
   lifetime of the IID, in general, changes. This is needed because, in 
   this RFC, the lifetime of the IID plays a key role. This means that 
   the node might not change its IID when it moves to another network 
   unless the node is rebooted. This can afford an attacker the ability 
   to track this node, and in doing so, to obtain enough confidential 
   information about this node to assist in further attacks. 

   - Step 4, Section 3.2.1: update to clarify which IIDs should be kept 
   in stable storage. 

   If there is no stable storage available, and if none of the methods 
   explained in RFC 4086 [RFC4086] for randomization are used, then it 
   is possible for the node to make a bad choice of what approach to use 
   for the randomization process, and, thus, may not be able to make use 
   of a good randomized IID. 



2.  Conventions used in this document 

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [RFC2119]. 

   In this document, these words will appear with that interpretation 
   only when in ALL CAPS. Lower case uses of these words are not to be 
   interpreted as carrying RFC 2119 significance. 

   In this document the use of || indicates the concatenation of the 
   values on either side of the sign. 



3.  Algorithm Overview 

   This section explains how to make use of a new algorithm that will 
   provide for a higher randomization of the IID without the need for 
   stable storage. The use of this algorithm is RECOMMENDED when there 
   is no stable storage available in the node or the node does not want 
   to store any value in memory. This approach is preferable over the 
   first approach where stable storage is needed, because this approach 
   is easier to use than the stable storage approach. In the case where 
   the node wants to use stable storage, this algorithm can be used for 
   the first time generation of the IID which can then be used to 
   populate the history value. 

   1. Generate a 16 byte random number called modifier. To generate this 
   modifier, implementations SHOULD use a random seed to aid in the 


Rafiee, et al.       Expires April 21, 2014                     [Page 4]

INTERNET DRAFT         RA-base Privacy Extension        October 21, 2013

   randomization of this number. 

   2. Obtain the router prefix from the Router Advertisement message 

   3. Obtain the nodes' current time in nanoseconds and call it 
   timestamp. This field consists of a 64-bit, unsigned integer 
   containing a the number of 100 nano seconds since January 1, 1970, 
   00:00 UTC, by using a fixed point format. (please refer to section 11 
   for more detail) 

   4. Concatenate the modifier with the timestamp and the router prefix. 

   R1=(modifier(16 bytes)||timestamp(8 bytes)|| router prefix) 

   Note: Implementations MIGHT skip step 3 and use this timestamp as a 
   seed to PRND function to generate modifier. So, R1 is as follow 

   R1=(modifier(16 bytes)|| router prefix) 

   5. Execute SHA2 (256) against the result from step 4. 

   digest=SHA256(R1) 

   The use of SHA2 (256) is RECOMMENDED because the chances of finding a 
   collision are less than when using SHA1 and the generation time is 
   acceptable (in microseconds using a standard CPU). In the future, if 
   a faster and collision free algorithm becomes available, then it 
   SHOULD be used. It is RECOMMENDED that the implementation be able to 
   support any new algorithms. 

   6. Take the 64 leftmost bits from the resulting output of step 5 
   (SHA2 digest). Bits u and g do not have any special meaning as in 
   [ugbits]. 

   7. Concatenate the IID with the local subnet prefix in order to set 
   the local IP address. If the lifetime of the old local address has 
   not expired, then the node MIGHT skip this step. Otherwise it will 
   receive a new router prefix. 

   8. Concatenate the IID with the router subnet prefix (Global subnet 
   prefix), obtained from the RA message, and set it as a tentative 
   privacy IP address. This IP address will become permanent after 
   Duplicate Address Detection (DAD) processing. This constitutes 
   another update to RFC 4941. The status of the IP addresses defined in 
   RFC 4941 are temporary, while they SHOULD be permanent with a 
   lifetime as explained in section 4. 



3.1.  Duplicate Address Detection (DAD) Process 

   After the DAD process has completed, if the node finds collisions in 
   the network, then the modifier will be incremented and the DAD 


Rafiee, et al.       Expires April 21, 2014                     [Page 5]

INTERNET DRAFT         RA-base Privacy Extension        October 21, 2013

   process will be repeated. If, after 3 tries, it receives the same 
   result, it will consider this an attack and will start using that IP 
   address. 



4.  Advantages of ra-privacy over CGA and DHCPv6 

   This algorithm has some advantages over the use of CGA and DHCPv6. 

   - CGA generates a highly randomized IID but CGA algorithm is compute 
   intensive. This is the primary reason that CGA algorithm has been 
   only implemented as an experiment but rarely enabled or used in 
   practice. 

   - DHCPv6 server might generates the IIDs sequentially and assign 
   these IIDs to the nodes. This sequential assignment is according to a 
   range of IP addresses and might allow an attacker to scan the nodes 
   in this network and harm their privacy. This is also true, if the 
   node release an IP address and set new IP address. It is again from 
   the same range. 

   - An administrator needs to configure and maintain DHCPv6 server. 
   This is not needed if a node uses Neighbor Discovery Protocol (NDP). 



5.  Modification for the use of stable storage 

   The stable storage (section 3.2.1 RFC 4941) MUST only contain the 
   last value generated by the node. The node MUST not keep older, 
   already used, IIDs. This modification is made to eliminate poor 
   interpretations of wording used in the document. 



6.  Interface ID (IID) generation based on the MAC address 

   Step 3 in Section 3.3 of RFC 4941 MUST be ignored. When a node uses 
   the mechanism explained in this document to generate an IID, it MUST 
   not use any other IID generation approaches that are based on MAC 
   addresses ( RFC 4862) for either temporary or non temporary IID 
   generation. The node MIGHT use the algorithm explained in 
   [StableAddresses] for the generation of a public address that does 
   not make use of EUI-64 or the MAC address for public (global) 
   addresses. 

   The choice of whether or not to list a node's address in the DNS, 
   undisguised, depends on many factors, including the set of 
   applications to be run on the host. Not listing a node's address in 
   the public DNS may afford the node greater privacy, but, at the same 
   time, it may also impair its ability to support certain applications. 
   


Rafiee, et al.       Expires April 21, 2014                     [Page 6]

INTERNET DRAFT         RA-base Privacy Extension        October 21, 2013




7.  Lifetime of Interface ID (IID) 

   The node MIGHT make use of the same algorithm and the same lifetime 
   as is explained in RFC 4941, or the node MIGHT choose a lifetime 
   based on some other algorithms or policies. If it uses the lifetime 
   explained in RFC 4941, then it SHOULD generate a new IID whenever it 
   is in different network, regardless of the option in the Router 
   Advertisement message to extend this lifetime. 



8.  Threat Analysis 

   By updating RFC 4941, a node will be able to prevent many attacks on 
   users' privacy. A list of these attacks are explained in 
   [privacyConsideration]. 

9.  Security Considerations

   As is explained in the Privacy Extension document. the same 
   approaches are used to maintain security, such as using Secure 
   Neighbor Discovery (SeND)(RFC 3971) or using a monitoring system 
   which would inform the administrator of the status of the network and 
   of any suspended activities in the network. 



10.  IANA Considerations

   This document is updating RFC 4941 in order to prevent nodes from 
   using addresses that were generated based on a MAC address and also 
   some of the other deficiencies that exist in RFC 4941 



11.  Appendex

   C++ source code for the comparison of ra-privacy and privacy 
   extension can be found in the following address 

   http://sourceforge.net/u/hrafiee/raprivacy/ci/master/tree/ 



12.  Acknowledgements

   The author would like to thank all those people who directly helped 
   in improving this draft especially Andrew Yourtchenko 




Rafiee, et al.       Expires April 21, 2014                     [Page 7]

INTERNET DRAFT         RA-base Privacy Extension        October 21, 2013


13.  References

13.1.  Normative References 

   [RFC2119] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to 
             Indicate Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997. 

   [RFC4291] Hinden, R., Deering, S., "IP Version 6 Addressing 
             Architecture," RFC 4291, February 2006. 

   [RFC3972] Aura, T., "Cryptographically Generated Addresses 
             (CGA)," RFC 3972, March 2005. 

   [RFC4941] Narten, T., Draves, R., Krishnan, S., "Privacy 
             Extensions for Stateless Address Autoconfiguration in 
             IPv6", RFC 4941, September 2007. 

   [RFC3315] Droms, R., Bound, J., Volz, B., Lemon, T., 
             Perkins, C., Carney, M. , " Dynamic Host Configuration 
             Protocol for IPv6 (DHCPv6)", RFC 3315, July 2003. 

   [RFC4086] Eastlake, D., Schiller, J., and S. Crocker, 
             "Randomness Requirements for Security", BCP 106, RFC 4086, 
             June 2005. 

13.2.  Informative References 

   [StableAddresses] Gont, F., "A method for 
                     Generating Stable Privacy-Enhanced Addresses with 
                     IPv6 Stateless Address Autoconfiguration (SLAAC)", 
                     Work In Progress, 
                     http://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-ietf-6man-stable-privacy-addresses, 
                     2013 

   [privacyConsideration] Cooper, A., Gont, F., 
                          Thaler, D., "Privacy Considerations for IPv6 
                          Address Generation Mechanisms", 
                          http://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-cooper-6man-ipv6-address-generation-privacy, 
                          2013 

   [ugbits] Carpenter B., "Significance of IPv6 Interface 
            Identifiers", http://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-ietf-6man-ug, 
            2013 











Rafiee, et al.       Expires April 21, 2014                     [Page 8]

INTERNET DRAFT         RA-base Privacy Extension        October 21, 2013

Authors' Addresses

      Hosnieh Rafiee
      Hasso-Plattner-Institute
      Prof.-Dr.-Helmert-Str. 2-3
      Potsdam, Germany
      Phone: +49 (0)331-5509-546
      Email: ietf@rozanak.com


      Dr. Christoph Meinel
      (Professor)
      Hasso-Plattner-Institute
      Prof.-Dr.-Helmert-Str. 2-3
      Potsdam, Germany
      Email: meinel@hpi.uni-potsdam.de





































Rafiee, et al.       Expires April 21, 2014                     [Page 9]

