


IPv6 maintenance Working Group (6man)                         H. Rafiee
INTERNET-DRAFT                                                C. Meinel
Updates RFC 4941 , RFC 4862 (if approved)       Hasso Plattner Institute
Intended status: Proposed Standard                                      
Expires: November 23, 2013                                  May 23, 2013


 Router Advertisement based privacy extension in IPv6 autoconfiguration
                  <draft-rafiee-6man-ra-privacy-03.txt>

Abstract

   Privacy is an important issue which concerns many governments and 
   users, with its importance becoming more evident every day. Nodes 
   change their IP addresses frequently in order to avoid being tracked 
   by attackers. The act of frequently changing IP addresses also helps 
   to prevent the leakage of information by nodes. In IPv6 networks 
   there is currently one solution for maintaining the privacy of nodes 
   when IPv6 StateLess Address AutoConfiguration (SLAAC) (RFC 4862) is 
   used. Unfortunately there are some problems associated with this 
   solution which entails the use of the Privacy Extension (RFC 4941). 
   One of the issues with this RFC concerns the wording that is used 
   which allows the implementation to make the choice as to what 
   approach to use and in so doing, in some cases, the choice made is 
   not the most prudent or best approach and this is not ideal and can 
   cause some problems. Some of these problems are concerned with not 
   generating a new Interface ID (IID) after changing the router prefix. 
   Another concern would be the fact that nodes may use an IID that was 
   generated based on a MAC address as a public address, and then use 
   this in their response. The act of cutting the current connections to 
   other nodes, if the max lifetime of the old IID has elapsed, is also 
   not clearly explained nor is whether or not the already used IID 
   should be kept in stable storage, There is also a concern about the 
   need to have stable storage available for the generation of a 
   randomized IID. The RFC gives no explanation as to how to make use of 
   CGA in its randomizing solution when stable storage is not available 
   or how to use the same approach for random value generation in all 
   implementations where there is a lack of stable storage. The purpose 
   of this document is to address these issues and to update the current 
   RFC. 



Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the 
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79. 

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF). Note that other groups may also distribute working 


Rafiee, et al.    Expires November 23, 2013                     [Page 1]

INTERNET DRAFT         RA-base Privacy Extension            May 23, 2013

   documents as Internet-Drafts. The list of current Internet-Drafts is 
   at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current. 

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 

   This Internet-Draft will expire on Expires: November 23, 2013. 

   



Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the 
   document authors. All rights reserved. This document is subject to 
   BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal Provisions Relating to IETF 
   Documents (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the 
   date of publication of this document. Please review these documents 
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect 
   to this document. Code Components extracted from this document must 
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of 
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as 
   described in the Simplified BSD License. 



Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Conventions used in this document  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Algorithm Overview   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     3.1.  Duplicate Address Detection (DAD) Process  . . . . . . . .  5
   4.  Modification to the use of stable storage  . . . . . . . . . .  5
   5.  Interface ID (IID) generation based on the MAC address   . . .  5
   6.  Lifetime of Interface ID (IID)   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     6.1.  Automate the process for setting the lifetime  . . . . . .  7
   7.  Threat Analysis  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     7.1.  Location based tracking  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     7.2.  Obtaining confidential data  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   8.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   9.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   10.  Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   11.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   12.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     12.1.  Normative . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10






Rafiee, et al.    Expires November 23, 2013                     [Page 2]

INTERNET DRAFT         RA-base Privacy Extension            May 23, 2013



1.  Introduction 

   Privacy and security have a close relationship. Privacy, simply 
   stated, is the act of allowing a user to choose which data he wants 
   to make available to others or which data he wants to keep from 
   prying eyes. Security, on the other hand, is the ability to protect 
   your data or to keep your data confidential. There are times, 
   however, where one will have to be sacrificed for the sake of the 
   other. The gathering of location information, for security reasons, 
   might prove detrimental to privacy. But in many cases, when 
   cryptography or other approaches are used to protect the content of 
   the data, you are not only securing it but also providing privacy. 

   This document defines the meaning of privacy as it relates to methods 
   for maintaining our confidential data so that it does not become 
   available to or exposed to unscrupulous people who would use it to 
   harm us or would use it for their ill gotten gains. There is 
   currently only one solution available in IPv6 autoconfiguration (RFC 
   4682):, Privacy Extension [RFC4941]. In the Privacy Extension 
   document two different approaches are used for IID generation. In the 
   first approach, the use of stable storage enables a node to find 
   which IIDs are currently in use and which are in reserve. In the 
   second approach, where stable storage is not available, it suggests 
   the use of some randomizing approaches and also comments about other 
   available randomizing mechanisms such as Cryptographically Generated 
   Addresses (CGA) [RFC3972] or Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol 
   (DHCPv6). The Privacy Extension document also refers to the use of 
   named approaches as a mechanism for greater randomization. Here we 
   offer an update to section 3.2.3 of RFC 4941 in order to explain how 
   to use CGA when security is not the issue. An additional update to 
   this RFC will explain how to maintain the lifetime of the IP address 
   when the router prefix changes or the lifetime of the IID in general. 
   This is needed because, in this RFC, the key role is the lifetime of 
   the IID, which might not expire when the router prefix is changed. 
   This means that the node might not change its IID when it moves to 
   another network unless the node is rebooted. This can afford an 
   attacker the ability to track this node, and obtain enough 
   confidential information about this node, to allow for further 
   attacks. The third problem occurs if the node responds to the request 
   from other nodes using the IID generated based on the MAC address. 
   This could happen if the RFC does not force the node to use only an 
   IID that was generated by use of this approach or other approaches 
   that are not based on a MAC address. The forth problem can occur when 
   the node cuts current connections to other nodes because the maximum 
   lifetime for this IID has expired. Finally, there should be an update 
   made to step 4, section 3.2.1 RFC 4941 clarifying which IIDs should 
   be kept in stable storage. If there is no stable storage available, 
   and if the timestamp is not used as a method of randomization, then 
   the node may not choose a good approach fo ther randomization process 
   and thus may not be able to make use of a greatly randomized IID. 
   This is due to the fact that, in section 3.2.2 RFC 4941, the word 


Rafiee, et al.    Expires November 23, 2013                     [Page 3]

INTERNET DRAFT         RA-base Privacy Extension            May 23, 2013

   "might" is used in explaining the proper randomization approach to be 
   used. The approach should be specified. 



2.  Conventions used in this document 

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [RFC2119]. 

   In this document, these words will appear with that interpretation 
   only when in ALL CAPS. Lower case uses of these words are not to be 
   interpreted as carrying RFC 2119 significance. 

   In this document the use of || indicates the concatenation of the 
   values on either side of the sign. 



3.  Algorithm Overview 

   This section explains how to use the modified version of the CGA 
   algorithm for higher randomization of the IID without a need for 
   stable storage. This approach is RECOMMENDED and preferable over the 
   first approach, where stable storage is needed. 

   1. Generate a 16 byte random number called modifier. To generate this 
   modifier implementations SHOULD use a random seed to aid in the 
   randomization of this number. 

   2. Obtain the router prefix from the Router Advertisement 

   3. Obtain the nodes' current time and convert it to a timestamp. The 
   timestamp field consists of a 64-bit, unsigned integer field 
   containing a timestamp whose value iis computed from the number of 
   seconds since January 1, 1970, 00:00 UTC, by using a fixed point 
   format. 

   4. Concatenate the modifier with the timestamp and the router prefix. 

   R1=(modifier(16 bytes)||timestamp(8 bytes)|| router prefix) 

   5. Execute SHA2 (256) against the result from step 4. 

   digest=SHA256(R1) 

   The use of SHA2 (256) is RECOMMENDED because the chances of finding a 
   collision are less than when using SHA1 and the time for the 
   generation is acceptable (in microseconds using a standard CPU). In 
   the future, if a faster and collision free algorithm becomes 
   available, then it SHOULD be used. It is RECOMMENDED that the 
   implementation be able to support any new algorithms. 


Rafiee, et al.    Expires November 23, 2013                     [Page 4]

INTERNET DRAFT         RA-base Privacy Extension            May 23, 2013


   6. Take the 64 leftmost bits from the resulting output of step 5 
   (SHA2 digest) and set bits u and g (bits 7 and 8) to one and call 
   this the IID. 

   7. Concatenate the IID with the local subnet prefix in order to set 
   the local IP address. If the lifetime of the old local address has 
   not expired, then the node MIGHT skip this step. Otherwise it will 
   receive a new router prefix. 

   8. Concatenate the IID with the router subnet prefix (Global subnet 
   prefix), obtained from the RA message, and set it as a tentative 
   privacy IP address. This IP address will become permanent after 
   Duplicate Address Detection (DAD) processing. This constitutes 
   another update to RFC 4941. The status of IP addresses defined in RFC 
   4941 are temporary while they SHOULD be permanent with a lifetime as 
   explained in section 4. 



3.1.  Duplicate Address Detection (DAD) Process 

   After the DAD process has completed, if the node finds collisions in 
   the network, then the modifier will be incremented and the DAD 
   process will be repeated. If, after 3 times, it receives the same 
   result, it will consider this an attack and will start using that IP 
   address. 



4.  Modification to the use of stable storage 

   The stable storage (section 3.2.1 RFC 4941) MUST only contain the 
   last generated value of the node. The node MUST not keep older, 
   already used, IIDs. This modification is made to eliminate the need 
   for large stable storage. For the randomization approach, if the node 
   cannot pick the best algorithm from among the ones already explained 
   in RFC 4088, then it MUST also include a timestamp in order preclude 
   the generation of an already used IID. 



5.  Interface ID (IID) generation based on the MAC address 

   When a node uses the mechanism explained in this document for IID 
   generation, it MUST not use any other IID generation approaches which 
   are based on MAC addresses ( RFC 4862). It is not RECOMMENDED for the 
   nodes that privacy is so important for them to use public addresses, 
   but in case they need to use public addresses, for generating public 
   addresses, the node SHOULD use the approach explained in this 
   document and set it as a public address. The public addresses are 
   permanent addresses and MIGHT not expire. These addresses are added 
   to DNS records and are RECOMMENDED for use with nodes that are 


Rafiee, et al.    Expires November 23, 2013                     [Page 5]

INTERNET DRAFT         RA-base Privacy Extension            May 23, 2013

   servers or routers. For debugging and trouble shooting purposes, the 
   implementation MUST provide a means of partially disabling the 
   mechanism explained in this document. Allowing for manually setting 
   and unsettling a flag, which would indicate the debugging mode, is 
   one way to accomplish this. This means that when this flag is set, 
   the node SHOULD not generate any new IIDs and SHOULD change the IID's 
   lifetime to a large number. As soon as trouble shooting ends, and the 
   flag is set back to zero, then the node MUST generate a new IID and 
   start using it. The lifetime of the old IID must also be set to an 
   appropriate value at this time. 



6.  Lifetime of Interface ID (IID) 

   One problem with the Privacy Extension document, as explained 
   earlier, is that the IID might not change when the node joins a new 
   network or receives a new router prefix. This is due to the wording 
   used in the RFC. Here we update this document. The router prefix has 
   a higher priority than the IID's current lifetime. This means that, 
   if the node receives a new router prefix, while its current IID is 
   still valid, then it MUST generate a new randomized IID and start 
   using it. The IIDs MUST be valid for only a short period of time 
   which will depend on the network policy in vogue. Any implementations 
   SHOULD provide a means of allowing for users to change the lifetime's 
   default value. 

   Another problem that occurs with the use of this Privacy Extension 
   document is that the node will cut its current connections to the 
   other nodes using this IID when the maximum lifetime for the IID 
   expires. The update to that document will make use of an application 
   layer based lifetime. This means that a node will be allowed to start 
   an x number of new application layer connections using its current 
   IID. It MIGHT not be allowed to start any new connection with this 
   IID if: 

   - none of the x connections are closed and those connections are 
   still valid 

   - the IID has already been used for x number of connections 

   In these cases, the node will need to generate a new IID for another 
   x number of connections. The node can still use any of the current 
   IIDs if: 

   - one of the x connections opened by this IID is closed 

   - the lifetime of this IID has not yet expired 

   In cases where the router prefix changes, the node MUST cut the 
   connection. If for any reason there is a need to maintain the old 
   connections, this document RECOMMENDS the use of Mobile IPv6 (RFC 
   6275). 


Rafiee, et al.    Expires November 23, 2013                     [Page 6]

INTERNET DRAFT         RA-base Privacy Extension            May 23, 2013




6.1.  Automate the process for setting the lifetime 

   The implementations MIGHT consider an option where, when RA messages 
   are being process , the RA message can be used to update the lifetime 
   for all addresses generated by use of this approach. This will 
   eliminate the need for the manual step, used during installation, to 
   set the default value for the lifetime (based on network policy) for 
   any future IIDs generated using this approach. The format for this 
   lifetime value will be the same as that explained in section 5.3.1 
   RFC 3971. The "type" SHOULD be set to the next sequential number 
   available in the SeND options, i.e., 15. when use is made of the 
   lifetime option, This field SHOULD be added to the ICMPv6 option for 
   RA messages. 



7.  Threat Analysis 

   Privacy consists of personal data that contains any information 
   relating to an individual, whether it relates to his or her private, 
   professional or public life. It can be anything from a name, a photo, 
   an email address, bank details, his posts on social networking 
   websites, his medical information, or his computer's IP address. Any 
   unauthorized efforts to obtain this information is considered an 
   attack against a user's privacy. The following sections will explain 
   how the mechanism detailed in this document can protect a user's 
   privacy. 



7.1.  Location based tracking 

   As the node MUST only keep its IID for a short period of time, and 
   MUST also change it when the prefix changes, it is not very easy for 
   an attacker to track this node based on its IP address. This is also 
   the case when the node changes the IID within the same network. The 
   reason for this is because it is very difficult for the attacker to 
   realize that this node is the same node, only with a newly generated 
   IID. This is especially true when there is an unlimited number of 
   nodes on the same network. 



7.2.  Obtaining confidential data 

   When a node changes its IID frequently within the network and among 
   networks, the attacker probably won't have enough time to obtain the 
   user's confidential data. It will also be difficult for the attacker 
   to correlate the information that he does obtain to a specific user's 
   IP address. This means that it will be difficult for the attacker to 


Rafiee, et al.    Expires November 23, 2013                     [Page 7]

INTERNET DRAFT         RA-base Privacy Extension            May 23, 2013

   obtain more information about this user based on any correlation of 
   data. An example would be when an attacker obtains a confidential 
   document from a user, but he is unsure about the location of this 
   user. If the attacker had the location the user, he would be able to 
   obtain much more information about this use, and then he would be 
   abler to start attacks against him. But changing the IID prevents the 
   attacker from finding the location of this user and thus prevents 
   further attacks. 

8.  Security Considerations

   As is explained in the Privacy Extension document. the same 
   approaches are used to maintain security, such as using Secure 
   Neighbor Discovery (SeND)(RFC 3971) or using a monitoring system 
   which would inform the administrator of the status of the network and 
   of any suspended activities in the network. 



9.  IANA Considerations

   - 



10.  Conclusions

   Privacy has become a very important issue in recent years. There is 
   one solution to the privacy issues, but the current solution has some 
   deficiencies. The purpose of the current document is to address and 
   solve the problem which exists with the Privacy Extension document 
   [RFC4941]. 



11.  Acknowledgements

   The authors would like to thank Dave Thaler for his useful and 
   greatly appreciated comments. 



12.  References

12.1.  Normative References 

   [RFC2119] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to 
             Indicate Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997. 

   [RFC4291] Hinden, R., Deering, S., "IP Version 6 Addressing 
             Architecture," RFC 4291, February 2006. 

   [RFC3972] Aura, T., "Cryptographically Generated Addresses 


Rafiee, et al.    Expires November 23, 2013                     [Page 8]

INTERNET DRAFT         RA-base Privacy Extension            May 23, 2013

             (CGA)," RFC 3972, March 2005. 

   [RFC4941] Narten, T., Draves, R., Krishnan, S., "Privacy 
             Extensions for Stateless Address Autoconfiguration in 
             IPv6", RFC 4941, September 2007. 

   [RFC3315] Droms, R., Bound, J., Volz, B., Lemon, T., 
             Perkins, C., Carney, M. , " Dynamic Host Configuration 
             Protocol for IPv6 (DHCPv6)", RFC 3315, July 2003. 














































Rafiee, et al.    Expires November 23, 2013                     [Page 9]

INTERNET DRAFT         RA-base Privacy Extension            May 23, 2013

Authors' Addresses

      Hosnieh Rafiee
      Hasso-Plattner-Institute
      Prof.-Dr.-Helmert-Str. 2-3
      Potsdam, Germany
      Phone: +49 (0)331-5509-546
      Email: ietf@rozanak.com


      Dr. Christoph Meinel
      (Professor)
      Hasso-Plattner-Institute
      Prof.-Dr.-Helmert-Str. 2-3
      Potsdam, Germany
      Email: meinel@hpi.uni-potsdam.de





































Rafiee, et al.    Expires November 23, 2013                    [Page 10]

