


IPv6 maintenance Working Group (6man)                         H. Rafiee
INTERNET-DRAFT                                                C. Meinel
Updates RFC 4941 (if approved)                  Hasso Plattner Institute
Intended status: Proposed Standard                                      
Expires: November 14, 2013                                  May 14, 2013


 Router Advertisement based privacy extension in IPv6 autoconfiguration
                  <draft-rafiee-6man-ra-privacy-02.txt>

Abstract

   Privacy is an important issue concerning many governments and users 
   with its importance becoming more evident every day. Nodes might 
   change their IP addresses frequently in order to avoid being tracked 
   by attackers. This frequent IP address change also helps in the 
   prevention of information being leaked by nodes. In IPv6 networks 
   there is currently one solution to maintain the privacy of nodes when 
   IPv6 StateLess Address AutoConfiguration (SLAAC) (RFC 4662) is used. 
   Unfortunately there are some problems associated with this solution 
   which entails the use of the Privacy Extension (RFC 4941). Some of 
   these problems are not generating a new Interface ID (IID) after 
   changing the router prefix, the fact that nodes may use an IID that 
   was generated based on a MAC address and use this in their response, 
   the act of cutting the current connections to other nodes if the max 
   lifetime of the old IID has elapsed, and a need to have stable 
   storage for generating a randomized IID. The RFC also gives no 
   explanation as to how to use CGA in its randomizing solution when 
   stable storage is not available. The purpose of this document is to 
   address these issues and to update the current RFC. 



Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the 
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79. 

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF). Note that other groups may also distribute working 
   documents as Internet-Drafts. The list of current Internet-Drafts is 
   at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current. 

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 

   This Internet-Draft will expire on Expires: November 14, 2013. 



Rafiee, et al.    Expires November 14, 2013                     [Page 1]

INTERNET DRAFT         RA-base Privacy Extension            May 14, 2013

   



Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the 
   document authors. All rights reserved. This document is subject to 
   BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal Provisions Relating to IETF 
   Documents (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the 
   date of publication of this document. Please review these documents 
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect 
   to this document. Code Components extracted from this document must 
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of 
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as 
   described in the Simplified BSD License. 



Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Conventions used in this document  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   3.  Algorithms Overview  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     3.1.  Duplicate Address Detection (DAD) Process  . . . . . . . .  5
   4.  Interface ID (IID) generation based on the MAC address   . . .  5
   5.  Lifetime of Interface ID (IID)   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     5.1.  Automate the process for setting the lifetime  . . . . . .  6
   6.  Threat Analysis  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     6.1.  Location based tracking  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     6.2.  Obtaining confidential data  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   7.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   8.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   9.  Conclusions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   10.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     10.1.  Normative . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9


















Rafiee, et al.    Expires November 14, 2013                     [Page 2]

INTERNET DRAFT         RA-base Privacy Extension            May 14, 2013



1.  Introduction 

   Privacy and security have a close relationship. Privacy, simply 
   stated, is the act of allowing a user to choose which data he wants 
   to make available to others or which data he wants to keep from 
   others. Security, on the other hand, is the ability to protect your 
   data or to keep your data confidential. There are times, however, 
   where one will have to be sacrificed for the sake of the other. The 
   gathering of location information for security reasons might prove 
   detrimental to privacy. But in many cases, when cryptography or other 
   approaches are used to protect the content of the data, you are not 
   only securing them but also providing privacy. 

   This document defines the meaning of privacy as it relates to methods 
   for maintaining our confidential data so that it does not become 
   available to or is exposed to unscrupulous people who would use it to 
   harm us or to use it for their ill gains. There is currently only one 
   solution available in IPv6 autoconfiguration (RFC-4662) which is the, 
   Privacy Extension [RFC4941]. In the Privacy Extension document two 
   different approaches are used for IID generation. In the first 
   approach, the use of stable storage enables it to find which IIDs are 
   in use and which are in reserve. In the second approach, where stable 
   storage is not available, it suggests the use of some randomizing 
   approaches and also comments about other available randomizing 
   mechanisms such as Cryptographically Generated Addresses (CGA) 
   [RFC3972] or Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (DHCPv6). The 
   Privacy Extension document also referred to the use of named 
   approaches as a mechanism for greater randomization. Here we offer an 
   update to section 3.2.2 of RFC 4941 in order to explain how to use 
   CGA when security is not the issue. An additional update to this RFC 
   will explain how to maintain the lifetime of the IP address when the 
   router prefix changes. This is needed because, in this RFC, the key 
   role is the lifetime of the IID, which might not expire when the 
   router prefix is changed. This means that the node might not change 
   its IID when it moves to another network unless the node is rebooted. 
   This can afford an attacker the ability to track this node, and 
   obtain enough confidential information about this node, to allow for 
   further attacks. The third problem occurs if the node responds to the 
   request from other nodes using the IID generated based on the MAC 
   address. This could happen if the RFC does not force the node to use 
   only the IID generated using this approach. The forth problem can 
   occur when the node cuts current connections to other nodes because 
   the maximum lifetime for this IID has expired. Finally, a node may 
   require a large stable storage area in which to store each generated 
   IID to preclude the use of an already used value. If there is no 
   stable storage available, the node may not be able to make use of a 
   greatly randomized IID. 



2.  Conventions used in this document 


Rafiee, et al.    Expires November 14, 2013                     [Page 3]

INTERNET DRAFT         RA-base Privacy Extension            May 14, 2013


   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [RFC2119]. 

   In this document, these words will appear with that interpretation 
   only when in ALL CAPS. Lower case uses of these words are not to be 
   interpreted as carrying RFC 2119 significance. 

   In this document the use of || indicates the concatenation of the 
   values on either side of the sign. 



3.  Algorithms Overview 

   This section explains how to use the modified version of the CGA 
   algorithm for higher randomization of the IID without the need for 
   stable storage. This approach is RECOMMENDED and preferable over the 
   first approach where stable storage is needed. In this approach the 
   node will not need to maintain a large space. 

   1. Generate a 16 byte random number called modifier. To generate this 
   modifier implementations SHOULD use a random seed to aid in the 
   randomization of this number. 

   2. Obtain Router prefix from the router advertisement 

   3. Obtain the nodes' current time and convert it to timestamp. The 
   timestamp is a 64-bit unsigned integer field containing a timestamp. 
   The value indicates the number of seconds since January 1, 1970, 
   00:00 UTC, by using a fixed point format. 

   4. Concatenate the modifier to the timestamp and router prefix. 

   R1=(modifier(16 bytes)||timestamp(8 bytes)|| router prefix) 

   5. Execute SHA2 (256) on the result from step 4. 

   digest=SHA256(R1) 

   The use of SHA2 (256) is RECOMMENDED because the chances of finding a 
   collision are less than when using SHA1 and the generation time is 
   acceptable (in microseconds using a standard CPU). If, in the future, 
   a faster and collision free algorithm becomes available, then it 
   SHOULD be used. It is RECOMMENDED that the implementation be able to 
   support any new algorithms. 

   6. Take the 64 leftmost bits from the resulting output from step 5 
   (SHA2 digest) and set bits u and g (bits 7 and 8) to zero and call 
   this the IID. 

   7. Concatenate the IID to the local subnet prefix in order to set the 


Rafiee, et al.    Expires November 14, 2013                     [Page 4]

INTERNET DRAFT         RA-base Privacy Extension            May 14, 2013

   local IP address. If the lifetime of the old local address has not 
   expired, then the node MIGHT skip this step. Otherwise it will 
   receive a new router prefix. 

   8. Concatenate the IID to the router subnet prefix (Global subnet 
   prefix), obtained from the RA message, and set it as a tentative 
   global IP address. This IP address will become permanent after 
   Duplicate Address Detection (DAD) processing. This is another update 
   to RFC 4941. The status of IP addresses in RFC 4941 are temporary 
   while it SHOULD be permanent with a life time explained in section 4. 



3.1.  Duplicate Address Detection (DAD) Process 

   After the DAD process, if the node finds collisions in the network 
   then the modifier will be incremented and the DAD process will be 
   repeated. If after 3 times, it receives the same result, it will 
   consider this an attack and will start using that IP address. 



4.  Interface ID (IID) generation based on the MAC address 

   When a node uses the mechanism explained in this document for IID 
   generation, it MUST not use any other IID generation approaches, 
   especially those approaches based on MAC addresses. For debugging and 
   trouble shooting purposes, the implementation MUST provide a means of 
   partially disabling the mechanism explained in this document. 
   Allowing for manually setting and unsettling a flag, which would 
   indicate the debugging mode, is one way to accomplish this. This 
   means that when this flag is set, the node SHOULD not generate any 
   new IIDs and SHOULD change the lifetime for this IID to a large 
   number. As soon as trouble shooting ends and the flag is set back to 
   zero, then the node MUST generate a new IID and start using it. The 
   lifetime of the old IID must also be set to an appropriate value at 
   this time. 



5.  Lifetime of Interface ID (IID) 

   One of the problems with the Privacy Extension document as explained 
   earlier is that the IID might not change when the node joins new 
   network or receives a new router prefix. Here we update this 
   document. The router prefix has a higher priority than the IID's 
   current lifetime. This means that if the node receives new router 
   prefix while its current IID is still valid, it MUST generate new 
   randomized IID and start using it. The IIDs MUST only be valid for a 
   short period of time which will depend on the network policy in 
   vogue. Any implementations SHOULD provide a means of allowing for 
   users to change the lifetime default value. 



Rafiee, et al.    Expires November 14, 2013                     [Page 5]

INTERNET DRAFT         RA-base Privacy Extension            May 14, 2013

   Another problem that occurs with the use of this Privacy Extension 
   document is that the node will cut its current connections to the 
   other nodes using this IID when the maximum lifetime of the IID 
   expires, The update to that document will state that the node can 
   maintain its old connections with its old IID for a certain period of 
   time, but not an indefinite period of time, and it MUST not start any 
   new connections using the old IID. In cases where the router prefix 
   changes, the node SHOULD cut the connection. If for any reason there 
   is a need to maintain the old connections, this document RECOMMENDS 
   the use of Mobile IPv6 (RFC 6275). 



5.1.  Automate the process for setting the lifetime 

   The implementations MIGHT consider an option where the RA messages 
   update the lifetime of all addresses generated when using this 
   approach when processing RA messages. This will eliminate the need 
   for the manual step during installation which sets the default value 
   of lifetime for any future IIDs generated using this approach based 
   on network policy. The format for this lifetime value will be the 
   same as that explained in section 5.3.1 RFC 3971. In this lifetime 
   option the type for SHOULD be set to next sequential number available 
   in the SeND options, i.e., 15. This field SHOULD be added to the 
   ICMPv6 option of RA messages. 



6.  Threat Analysis 

   Privacy consists of personal data that is any information relating to 
   an individual, whether it relates to his or her private, professional 
   or public life. It can be anything from a name, a photo, an email 
   address, bank details, his posts on social networking websites, his 
   medical information, or his computer's IP address. Any unauthorized 
   efforts to obtain this information is considered an attack against a 
   user's privacy. The following sections will explain how the mechanism 
   detailed in this document can protect a user's privacy. 



6.1.  Location based tracking 

   As the node MUST keep its IID for only a short period of time, and 
   MUST also change it when the prefix changes, it is not very easy for 
   an attacker to track this node based on its IP address. This is also 
   the case when the node changes the IID within the same network. The 
   reason for this is because it is very difficult for the attacker to 
   realize that this node is the same node only with a newly generated 
   IID. This is especially true when there is an unlimited number of 
   nodes on the same network. 




Rafiee, et al.    Expires November 14, 2013                     [Page 6]

INTERNET DRAFT         RA-base Privacy Extension            May 14, 2013


6.2.  Obtaining confidential data 

   When a node changes its IID frequently within the network and among 
   networks, the attacker probably won't have enough time to obtain the 
   user's confidential data. It will also be difficult for the attacker 
   to correlate the information that he does obtain to a specific user's 
   IP address. This means that it will be difficult for the attacker to 
   obtain more information about this user based on any correlation of 
   data. An example would be when an attacker obtains a confidential 
   document from a user but he is unsure about the location of this 
   user. If the attacker had the location the user, he would be able to 
   obtain much more information about this use, and then he would be 
   abler to start the attacks against him. But changing the IID prevents 
   the attacker from finding the location of this user and thus prevents 
   further attacks. 

7.  Security Considerations

   As is explained in the Privacy Extension document. the same 
   approaches are used to maintain security, such as using Secure 
   Neighbor Discovery (SeND)(RFC-3971) or using a monitoring system 
   which would inform the administrator of the status of the network and 
   of any suspended activities in the network. 



8.  IANA Considerations

   - 



9.  Conclusions

   Privacy has become a very important issue in recent years. There is 
   one solution to the privacy issues, but the current solution has some 
   deficiencies. The purpose of the current document is to address and 
   solve the problem which exists with the Privacy Extension document 
   [RFC4941]. 



10.  References

10.1.  Normative References 

   [RFC2119] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to 
             Indicate Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997. 

   [RFC4291] Hinden, R., Deering, S., "IP Version 6 Addressing 
             Architecture," RFC 4291, February 2006. 



Rafiee, et al.    Expires November 14, 2013                     [Page 7]

INTERNET DRAFT         RA-base Privacy Extension            May 14, 2013

   [RFC3972] Aura, T., "Cryptographically Generated Addresses 
             (CGA)," RFC 3972, March 2005. 

   [RFC4941] Narten, T., Draves, R., Krishnan, S., "Privacy 
             Extensions for Stateless Address Autoconfiguration in 
             IPv6", RFC 4941, September 2007. 

   [RFC3315] Droms, R., Bound, J., Volz, B., Lemon, T., 
             Perkins, C., Carney, M. , " Dynamic Host Configuration 
             Protocol for IPv6 (DHCPv6)", RFC 3315, July 2003. 













































Rafiee, et al.    Expires November 14, 2013                     [Page 8]

INTERNET DRAFT         RA-base Privacy Extension            May 14, 2013

Authors' Addresses

      Hosnieh Rafiee
      Hasso-Plattner-Institute
      Prof.-Dr.-Helmert-Str. 2-3
      Potsdam, Germany
      Phone: +49 (0)331-5509-546
      Email: ietf@rozanak.com


      Dr. Christoph Meinel
      (Professor)
      Hasso-Plattner-Institute
      Prof.-Dr.-Helmert-Str. 2-3
      Potsdam, Germany
      Email: meinel@hpi.uni-potsdam.de





































Rafiee, et al.    Expires November 14, 2013                     [Page 9]

