A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3382
                                                          
        Title:      Internet Printing Protocol (IPP): The 'collection'
                    attribute syntax
        Author(s):  R. deBry, T. Hastings, R. Herriot, K. Ocke,
                    P. Zehler
        Status:     Standards Track
        Date:       September 2002
        Mailbox:    debryro@uvsc.edu, hastings@cp10.es.xerox.com,
                    bob@herriot.com, KOcke@crt.xerox.com,
                    PZehler@crt.xerox.com
        Pages:      38
        Characters: 78173
        Updates:    2910, 2911

        I-D Tag:    draft-ietf-ipp-collection-05.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3382.txt


This document specifies an OPTIONAL attribute syntax called
'collection' for use with the Internet Printing Protocol (IPP/1.0
and IPP/1.1).  A 'collection' is a container holding one or more
named values, which are called "member" attributes.  A collection
allows data to be grouped like a PostScript dictionary or a Java
Map.  This document also specifies the conformance requirements for a
definition document that defines a collection attribute.  Finally,
this document gives some illustrative example collection attribute
definitions that are not intended as actual attribute specifications.

This document is a product of the Internet Printing Protocol Working
Group of the IETF.

This is now a Proposed Standard Protocol.

This document specifies an Internet standards track protocol for
the Internet community, and requests discussion and suggestions
for improvements.  Please refer to the current edition of the
"Internet Official Protocol Standards" (STD 1) for the
standardization state and status of this protocol.  Distribution
of this memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.
