A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3269

        Title:      Author Guidelines for Reliable Multicast Transport
                    (RMT) Building Blocks and Protocol Instantiation
                    documents 
        Author(s):  R. Kermode, L. Vicisano
        Status:     Informational
        Date:       April 2002
        Mailbox:    Roger.Kermode@motorola.com, lorenzo@cisco.com
        Pages:      12
        Characters: 25258
        Updates/Obsoletes/SeeAlso:    None

        I-D Tag:    draft-ietf-rmt-author-guidelines-03.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3269.txt


This document provides general guidelines to assist the authors of
Reliable Multicast Transport (RMT) building block and protocol
instantiation definitions.  The purpose of these guidelines is to
ensure that any building block and protocol instantiation definitions
produced contain sufficient information to fully explain their
operation and use.  In addition these guidelines provide directions to
specify modular and clearly defined RMT building blocks and protocol
instantiations that can be refined and augmented to safely create new
protocols for use in new scenarios for which any existing protocols
were not designed. 

This document is a product of the Reliable Multicast Transport Working
Group of the IETF.

This memo provides information for the Internet community.  It does
not specify an Internet standard of any kind.  Distribution of this
memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.

