A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3452

        Title:      Forward Error Correction Building Block
        Author(s):  M. Luby, L. Vicisano, J. Gemmell, L. Rizzo,
                    M. Handley, J. Crowcroft
        Status:     Experimental
        Date:       December 2002
        Mailbox:    luby@digitalfountain.com, lorenzo@cisco.com,
                    jgemmell@microsoft.com, luigi@iet.unipi.it,
                    mjh@aciri.org, Jon.Crowcroft@cl.cam.ac.uk
        Pages:      16
        Characters: 38368
        Updates/Obsoletes/See Also:   None

        I-D Tag:    draft-ietf-rmt-bb-fec-07.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3452.txt


This document generally describes how to use Forward Error Correction
(FEC) codes to efficiently provide and/or augment reliability for data
transport.  The primary focus of this document is the application of
FEC codes to one-to-many reliable data transport using IP
multicast.  This document describes what information is needed to
identify a specific FEC code, what information needs to be
communicated out-of-band to use the FEC code, and what information is
needed in data packets to identify the encoding symbols they carry.
The procedures for specifying FEC codes and registering them with the
Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA) are also described.  This
document should be read in conjunction with and uses the terminology
of the companion document titled, "The Use of Forward Error Correction
(FEC) in Reliable Multicast".

This document is a product of the Reliable Multicast Transport Working
Group of the IETF.

This memo defines an Experimental Protocol for the Internet community.
It does not specify an Internet standard of any kind.  Discussion and
suggestions for improvement are requested.  Distribution of this memo
is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.


