
A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3048

        Title:      Reliable Multicast Transport Building Blocks for
                    One-to-Many Bulk-Data Transfer
        Author(s):  B. Whetten, L. Vicisano, R. Kermode, M. Handley,
                    S. Floyd, M. Luby
        Status:     Informational
        Date:       January 2001
        Mailbox:    whetten@talarian.com, lorenzo@cisco.com,
                    Roger.Kermode@motorola.com, mjh@aciri.org,
                    floyd@aciri.org, luby@digitalfountain.com 
        Pages:      20
        Characters: 48965
        Updates/Obsoletes/SeeAlso:    None        

        I-D Tag:    draft-ietf-rmt-buildingblocks-03.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3048.txt


This document describes a framework for the standardization of
bulk-data reliable multicast transport.  It builds upon the experience
gained during the deployment of several classes of contemporary
reliable multicast transport, and attempts to pull out the
commonalities between these classes of protocols into a number of
building blocks.  To that end, this document recommends that certain
components that are common to multiple protocol classes be
standardized as "building blocks".  The remaining parts of the
protocols, consisting of highly protocol specific, tightly intertwined
functions, shall be designated as "protocol cores".  Thus, each
protocol can then be constructed by merging a "protocol core" with a
number of "building blocks" which can be re-used across multiple
protocols. 

This document is a product of the Reliable Multicast Transport Working
Group of the IETF.

This memo provides information for the Internet community.  It does
not specify an Internet standard of any kind.  Distribution of this
memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.