A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3450

        Title:      Asynchronous Layered Coding (ALC) Protocol
                    Instantiation
        Author(s):  M. Luby, J. Gemmell, L. Vicisano, L. Rizzo,
                    J. Crowcroft
        Status:     Experimental
        Date:       December 2002
        Mailbox:    luby@digitalfountain.com, jgemmell@microsoft.com,
                    lorenzo@cisco.com, luigi@iet.unipi.it,
                    Jon.Crowcroft@cl.cam.ac.uk
        Pages:      34
        Characters: 86022
        Updates/Obsoletes/See Also:   None

        I-D Tag:    draft-ietf-rmt-pi-alc-08.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3450.txt


This document describes the Asynchronous Layered Coding (ALC)
protocol, a massively scalable reliable content delivery protocol.
Asynchronous Layered Coding combines the Layered Coding Transport
(LCT) building block, a multiple rate congestion control building
block and the Forward Error Correction (FEC) building block to provide
congestion controlled reliable asynchronous delivery of content to an
unlimited number of concurrent receivers from a single sender.

This document is a product of the Reliable Multicast Transport Working
Group of the IETF.

This memo defines an Experimental Protocol for the Internet community.
It does not specify an Internet standard of any kind.  Discussion and
suggestions for improvement are requested.  Distribution of this memo
is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.

