MPLS Working Group                                       B. Mack-Crane
Internet Draft                                              L. Dunbar
Intended status: Informational                               S. Hares
Expires: April 2011                                            Huawei

                                                      October 12, 2010

         IPv6 Neighbor Discovery Scalability for Large Data Centers
                draft-mackcrane-armd-ipv6-nd-scaling-00.txt


Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 12, 2011.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors. All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the BSD License.




Dunbar                 Expires April 12, 2011                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft           IPv6 ND Scalability              October 2010


Abstract

   Server virtualization allows one physical server to support many
   virtual machines (VMs) so that multiple hosts (20, 30, or hundreds)
   can be running from one physical platform. As virtual machines are
   introduced into a Data Center, the number of hosts within the data
   center can grow dramatically, which can have tremendous impact on the
   network and hosts.

   This document provides an analysis of the scalability of IPv6
   Neighbor Discovery (RFC 4861) in data centers with a large number of
   virtual machines.

Conventions used in this document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 0.

Table of Contents


   1. Introduction................................................3
   2. Network functions provided by IPv6 Neighbor Discovery.........3
   3. Basic ND protocol message use................................4
      3.1. Router Solicitation.....................................4
      3.2. Router Advertisement....................................4
      3.3. Neighbor Solicitation...................................5
      3.4. Neighbor Advertisement..................................5
      3.5. Redirect...............................................5
   4. Some additional protocol activities..........................5
      4.1. Duplicate Address Detection.............................5
      4.2. Anycast and Proxy address resolution....................6
      4.3. Neighbor unreachability detection.......................6
      4.4. Host-based Load Spreading...............................6
      4.5. Router-based Load Spreading.............................6
      4.6. Holding packets while address resolution occurs..........7
   5. Summary and conclusions......................................7
   6. Manageability Considerations.................................7
   7. Security Considerations......................................7
   8. IANA Considerations.........................................8
   9. Acknowledgments.............................................8
   10. References.................................................8
   Authors' Addresses.............................................8
   Intellectual Property Statement.................................9
   Disclaimer of Validity.........................................9



Mack-Crane             Expires April 12, 2011                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft           IPv6 ND Scalability              October 2010




1. Introduction

   Server virtualization allows the sharing of the underlying physical
   machine (server) resources among multiple virtual machines (VMs),
   each running its own operating system. While Server Virtualization is
   a great technology for flexible management of server resources, it
   does impose great challenges to networks which interconnect all the
   servers in data center(s). Large data centers may grow to support
   hundreds of thousands or even millions of hosts (VMs). Even though
   there may be enough link bandwidth to support the traffic volume from
   all those VMs, other issues associated with Layer 2, like frequent
   ARP broadcast by hosts, broadcast unknown, etc., can create problems
   for the network and hosts.

   This document presents an initial analysis of the scalability of IPv6
   Neighbor Discovery (RFC 4861) protocols in the context of a large
   data center network.  Two network cases are considered: 1) a single
   L2 VLAN connecting a very large number of hosts and a relatively
   small number of routers, and 2) a core VLAN connecting a large number
   of routers and few, if any, hosts.  The analysis presented here is a
   rough assessment of which protocol behaviors should scale well and
   which may present some concern.  It does not provide hard numbers and
   is not based on any measurements in live networks.

2. Network functions provided by IPv6 Neighbor Discovery

   The protocols described in RFC 4861 provide a variety of network
   functions used by IPv6 nodes to:

      - find routers and discover link and network parameters,

      - discover each other's presence,

      - determine each other's link-layer addresses, and

      - maintain information about the paths to active neighbors.

   These functions are accomplished using five ICMP messages:

      - Router Solicitation,

      - Router Advertisement,

      - Neighbor Solicitation,



Mack-Crane             Expires April 12, 2011                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft           IPv6 ND Scalability              October 2010


      - Neighbor Advertisement, and

      - Redirect.

   The first part of the analysis considers the basic ND protocol
   activities and how often each message is sent and to what L2
   destination address to determine whether there is any concern that ND
   messages could take too much bandwidth or tax host processors with
   unnecessary work.

   The second part of the analysis considers whether there may be
   scalability concerns related to other protocol behaviors mentioned in
   RFC 4861 for ancillary purposes, for example duplicate address
   detection.

3. Basic ND protocol message use

3.1. Router Solicitation

   The Router Solicitation message is sent by nodes to discover routers
   on the LAN, effectively requesting routers to respond to the node
   with a Router Advertisement message.  This message is sent to the
   all-routers multicast address and so is not seen by other hosts on
   the LAN.

   A Router Solicitation message is generally sent when a node is first
   attached to (or comes up on) the LAN.  The frequency of these events
   should be low and so both the traffic and processing load for Router
   Solicitation messages is expected to be negligible.

3.2. Router Advertisement

   Router Advertisement messages are sent by routers periodically to the
   all-nodes multicast address to announce their presence on the LAN and
   advertise some link parameters.  As long as there are not very many
   routers on the LAN this should not present much traffic or processing
   load.  In the core case where the LAN is connecting many routers the
   traffic and processing load will increase with the number of routers
   and some measures may be needed to limit the traffic, either by
   reducing the transmission rate or disabling the protocol (if it is
   not needed in an all-router environment).

   Router Advertisement is also unicast to the requesting node in
   response to a Router Solicitation message and, as noted above, this
   should not present a significant load.




Mack-Crane             Expires April 12, 2011                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft           IPv6 ND Scalability              October 2010


3.3. Neighbor Solicitation

   A Neighbor Solicitation message is sent by a node when that node has
   no (or a stale) cache entry for the L2 address for a particular next
   hop IPv6 address.  This message is sent to a solicited-node multicast
   address which is manufactured from the next hop IPv6 address.  A
   great advantage of using a solicited-node multicast address is that
   only the solicited neighbor node (or perhaps a very few more) will be
   subscribed to this address.  Therefore the processing load for this
   message is restricted to a small number of nodes and is not likely to
   present a significant burden.

   In general the frequency of Neighbor Solicitation messages will be
   related to the number of each node's communicating peers on the LAN.
   Since this number is directly related to the amount of traffic the
   LAN must support for communications in general the fraction consumed
   by Neighbor Solicitation should be very small.

3.4. Neighbor Advertisement

   Neighbor Advertisement messages are sent in response to Neighbor
   Solicitation messages.  They are unicast to the originator of the
   Neighbor Solicitation message and so the load presented in this case
   should, as with Neighbor Solicitation, be a small fraction of the
   traffic that must be supported on the LAN.

   Unsolicited Neighbor Advertisement messages may also be sent to the
   all-nodes multicast address; however, as this may be done when a
   nodes L2 address changes the frequency of these messages should be
   extremely low.

3.5. Redirect

   Redirect messages are sent by routers to nodes to change the next hop
   that node is using to reach a particular destination.  Although the
   likelihood of redirect depends on the network topology and other
   factors, it is not expected to present a significant load on either
   the network or hosts.

4. Some additional protocol activities

4.1. Duplicate Address Detection

   Duplicate address detection as described in [ADDRCONF] involves
   sending a number of Neighbor Solicitation messages for the address to
   be checked (to that address's solicited-node multicast address).
   This is done before attempting to join the LAN using the address


Mack-Crane             Expires April 12, 2011                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft           IPv6 ND Scalability              October 2010


   being checked.  Since this is an initialization procedure it is not
   expected to present a significant traffic or processing load during
   normal operation.  It is also possible that address autoconfiguration
   will not be used in very large data centers.

4.2. Anycast and Proxy address resolution

   Address resolution for Anycast addresses or addresses for which nodes
   are acting as a Proxy may solicit multiple Neighbor Advertisement
   messages in response.  In this case of Anycast addresses the
   responses are sent with random delay do that the requesting node does
   not see an unmanageable burst of responses.  The response traffic in
   this case may be greater but not likely a problem, and the additional
   processing load is only on the requesting node (which is in control
   of the rate of solicitation).

   In a multi-site data center network it may be desirable to restrict
   the propagation of Anycast address resolution messages if it is
   desired that only responses local to the requesting node's site be
   delivered.

4.3. Neighbor unreachability detection

   Neighbor unreachability detection relies on hints from higher layers
   to determine whether or not a given neighbor is still reachable.  In
   some cases when connectivity is suspect and no higher layer hints are
   available, a Neighbor Solicitation message may be used to verify
   continued connectivity.  This is not expected to be a common
   occurrence between hosts or hosts and routers (since higher layer
   hints are most likely available).  Between routers there may not be
   higher layer hints available but there are likely other means to
   detect connectivity to router peers across the LAN making use of
   Neighbor Solicitation messages unnecessary.

4.4. Host-based Load Spreading

   Host-based load spreading (e.g. RFC 4311) affects the selection of
   next hop router for particular packets.  This may increase the number
   of routers a given host communicates with, but it is not expected to
   add significantly to neighbor discovery traffic or processing load.

4.5. Router-based Load Spreading

   Router-based load spreading (i.e. the use of a NULL SA in a Router
   Advertisement message) requires hosts to solicit a next hop router
   address.  This increases the number of solicitations for router
   addresses, but this should not be significant if the number of


Mack-Crane             Expires April 12, 2011                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft           IPv6 ND Scalability              October 2010


   routers on the LAN is small.  This mechanism may be inappropriate
   (and unneeded) in a core LAN interconnecting a large number of
   routers and therefore not a concern in that case either.

4.6. Holding packets while address resolution occurs

   In multi-site networks or virtualized networks in which the edge-to-
   edge delay may be increased over that in a normal (local) LAN, hold
   time for packets awaiting address resolution may increase
   significantly.  This may be a concern depending on the percentage of
   packets that must wait for address resolution before being forwarded
   on the LAN.

5. Summary and conclusions

   The following summarizes the analysis presented:

      - IPv6 ND looks like it will scale well for the case of a large
        LAN with 1000s of hosts and a relatively small number of
        routers.

      - For the case of a core LAN connecting a large number of routers
        there are some ND protocol behaviors that may not scale well but
        these are either optional or not needed between routers (i.e.,
        there are other mechanisms available to the routers to
        accomplish the same end).

      - Multi-site L2 networks may provide challenges for both holding
        time for packets while address resolution is carried out and
        address resolution for Anycast addresses (for example, if these
        are expected to select only local servers).

      - The impact of network virtualization (many VLANs and virtual
        routers) on platforms that support many virtual networks has not
        been analyzed and may present additional scaling challenges.

6. Manageability Considerations

   This document has no manageability considerations.

7. Security Considerations

   This document adds no security considerations since it does not
   define any new protocol behaviors.  However, it may be worthwhile to
   consider whether or not the size of an L2 network (as discussed here)
   presents any new security challenges.  No analysis in this area is
   provided in this draft.


Mack-Crane             Expires April 12, 2011                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft           IPv6 ND Scalability              October 2010


8. IANA Considerations

   This document has no IANA considerations.

9. Acknowledgments

   This document was prepared using 2-Word-v2.0.template.dot.

10. References

   [RFC4861] Narten, T., Nordmark, E., Simpson, W., and H. Soliman,
             "Neighbor Discovery for IP version 6 (IPv6)", RFC 4861,
             September 2007.

   [RFC4862] Thomson, S., Narten, T., and T. Jinmei, "IPv6 Stateless
             Address Autoconfiguration", RFC 4862, September 2007.




Authors' Addresses

   Ben Mackcrane
   Huawei Technologies
   1700 Alma Drive, Suite 500
   Plano, TX 75075, USA
   Phone: (630) 810 1132
   Email: tmackcrane@huawei.com

   Linda Dunbar
   Huawei Technologies
   1700 Alma Drive, Suite 500
   Plano, TX 75075, USA
   Phone: (972) 543 5849
   Email: ldunbar@huawei.com














Mack-Crane             Expires April 12, 2011                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft           IPv6 ND Scalability              October 2010


   Sue Hares
   Huawei Technologies
   2330 Central Expressway,
   Santa Clara, CA 95050, USA
   Phone:
   Email: shares@huawei.com


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF Trust takes no position regarding the validity or scope of
   any Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be
   claimed to pertain to the implementation or use of the technology
   described in any IETF Document or the extent to which any license
   under such rights might or might not be available; nor does it
   represent that it has made any independent effort to identify any
   such rights.

   Copies of Intellectual Property disclosures made to the IETF
   Secretariat and any assurances of licenses to be made available, or
   the result of an attempt made to obtain a general license or
   permission for the use of such proprietary rights by implementers or
   users of this specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR
   repository at http://www.ietf.org/ipr

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   any standard or specification contained in an IETF Document. Please
   address the information to the IETF at ietf-ipr@ietf.org.

Disclaimer of Validity

   All IETF Documents and the information contained therein are provided
   on an "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE
   REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE
   IETF TRUST AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL
   WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY
   WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION THEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE
   ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS
   FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.



Mack-Crane             Expires April 12, 2011                 [Page 9]

