A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3439

        Title:      Some Internet Architectural Guidelines and
                    Philosophy
        Author(s):  R. Bush, D. Meyer
        Status:     Informational
        Date:       December 2002
        Mailbox:    randy@psg.com, dmm@maoz.com
        Pages:      28
        Characters: 70333
        Updates:    1958
       
        I-D Tag:    draft-ymbk-arch-guidelines-05.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3439.txt


This document extends RFC 1958 by outlining some of the philosophical
guidelines to which architects and designers of Internet backbone
networks should adhere.  We describe the Simplicity Principle, which
states that complexity is the primary mechanism that impedes efficient
scaling, and discuss its implications on the architecture, design and
engineering issues found in large scale Internet backbones.

This memo provides information for the Internet community.  It does
not specify an Internet standard of any kind.  Distribution of this
memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.