A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3532

        Title:      Requirements for the Dynamic Partitioning of
                    Switching Elements
        Author(s):  T. Anderson, J. Buerkle
        Status:     Informational
        Date:       May 2003
        Mailbox:    todd.a.anderson@intel.com,
                    joachim.buerkle@nortelnetworks.com
        Pages:      11
        Characters: 25119
        Updates/Obsoletes/SeeAlso: None

        I-D Tag:    draft-ietf-gsmp-dyn-part-reqs-03.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3532.txt


This document identifies a set of requirements for the mechanisms
used to dynamically reallocate the resources of a switching element
(e.g., an ATM switch) to its partitions.  These requirements are
particularly critical in the case of an operator creating a switch
partition and then leasing control of that partition to a third
party.

This document is a product of the General Switch Management Protocol
Working Group of the IETF.

This memo provides information for the Internet community.  It does
not specify an Internet standard of any kind.  Distribution of this
memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.

