


Transport Area Working Group                                  B. Briscoe
Internet-Draft                                                        BT
Intended status: Informational                            March 02, 2011
Expires: September 3, 2011


    Guidelines for Adding Congestion Notification to Protocols that
                             Encapsulate IP
              draft-briscoe-tsvwg-ecn-encap-guidelines-00

Abstract

   The purpose of this document is to guide the design of congestion
   notification in any lower layer protocol that encapsulates IP.  The
   aim is for explicit congestion signals to propagate consistently from
   lower layer protocols into IP.  Then the IP internetwork layer can
   act as a portability layer to carry congestion notification from non-
   IP-aware congested nodes to the destination transport endpoint.
   Following these guidelines should assure interworking between new
   encapsulations of congestion notification, whether specified by the
   IETF or other standards bodies.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 3, 2011.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents



Briscoe                 Expires September 3, 2011               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft        ECN Encapsulation Guidelines            March 2011


   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.1.  Scope  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   3.  Design Guidelines for Adding Congestion Notification to
       Protocols that Encapsulate IP  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     3.1.  Indication of ECN Support in the Wire Protocol . . . . . .  7
     3.2.  Encapsulation Guidelines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     3.3.  Decapsulation Guidelines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     3.4.  Reframing and Congestion Markings  . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   4.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   5.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   6.  Conclusions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   7.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   8.  Comments Solicited . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   9.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     9.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     9.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12


























Briscoe                 Expires September 3, 2011               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft        ECN Encapsulation Guidelines            March 2011


1.  Introduction

   Explicit Congestion Notification (ECN [RFC3168]) was defined in the
   IP header to allow a congested resource to notify the onset of
   congestion without having to drop packets, by explicitly marking a
   proportion of packets with the congestion experienced (CE) codepoint.

   Some subnetwork technologies (e.g.  Frame Relay) have always
   supported explicit notification of congestion and it is gradually
   being added to others.  The IETF would like to encourage this trend.
   Of course, the IETF does not have standards authority over every link
   layer protocol.  So this document gives guidelines for designing
   propagation of congestion notification across the interface between
   IP and protocols that may encapsulate IP (i.e. that can be layered
   beneath IP).

   Each lower layer technology will exhibit slightly different issues
   and compromises, so the IETF or the relevant standards body must be
   free to define the specifics of each lower layer congestion
   notification scheme.  However, if the guidelines below are followed,
   congestion notification should interwork between different
   technologies, using IP in its role as a 'portability layer'.

   Often link and physical layer resources are 'non-blocking' by design.
   In these cases congestion notification does not need to be
   implemented at the lower layer; ECN in IP would be sufficient.  A
   degenerate example is a point-to-point Ethernet link.  Excess loading
   of the link merely causes the queue from the higher layer to back up,
   while the lower layer remains immune to congestion.  Even a whole
   meshed subnetwork can be made immune to interior congestion by
   careful network design; interior links can be sufficiently
   provisioned relative to the edge capacities to absorb even worst-case
   patterns of load.

   Nonetheless, other subnetworks can involve a mesh of links where
   traffic can converge on interior nodes and cause congestion.  One way
   to support ECN in such cases has been to use so called "layer 3
   switches".  These are Ethernet switches that can bury into the
   Ethernet payload to find an IP header and manipulate or act on
   certain IP fields (Diffserv, ECN etc).  For instance, in Data Center
   TCP [DCTCP], layer 3 switches are used to mark the ECN field of the
   IP header within the Ethernet payload.

   Although marking the IP header on a layer 3 switch is a useful
   tactical approach in a controlled environment such as within a data
   centre, it presents problems in more general settings.  For instance,
   many Ethernet switches are not layer 3 switches so they cannot read
   and modify an IP payload.  Also it might be costly to find an IP



Briscoe                 Expires September 3, 2011               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft        ECN Encapsulation Guidelines            March 2011


   header (v4 or v6) when it may be encapsulated by more than one
   Ethernet header (e.g. when using multiple encapsulations of MAC in
   MAC [IEEE802.1Qah]).

   In these more general cases, ECN may best be supported by
   standardising explicit notification of congestion into the specific
   link layer protocol.  It will then also be necessary to define how
   the end-station of the lower layer subnet propagates this explicit
   signal up to the IP internetwork layer.

   Many logical link technologies are based on self-contained protocol
   data units (PDUs).  In these typical cases, at each decapsulation of
   an outer (lower layer) header, any congestion marking will have to be
   arranged to propagate into the forwarded (upper layer) header.  It
   can then continue forwards, possibly picking up further congestion
   signals from congested resources along the way until it finally
   reaches the destination transport.  Then typically the destination
   will feed this congestion notification back to the source transport.

   The purpose of this document is to guide the design of congestion
   notification in any lower layer, so that explicit congestion signals
   in PDUs at a lower layer will propagate consistently into PDUs of the
   upper IP layer.

   These guidelines are consistent with the way in which propagation of
   ECN has already been defined for IP-in-IP [RFC6040], IP-in-MPLS and
   MPLS-in-MPLS [RFC5129].  [RFC6040] brings the original ECN
   specification [RFC3168] and the specification of IPsec [RFC4301] into
   line.  [RFC5129] defines how a label switched router can mark the
   outer MPLS shim header to signal congestion and, when the packets
   reach the decapsulator at the edge of the MPLS network, the marks can
   be propagated into the IP header (or into an inner MPLS header) and
   onward to the destination transport.

1.1.  Scope

   This document only concerns wire protocol processing of explicit
   notification of congestion and makes no changes or recommendations
   concerning algorithms for congestion marking or congestion response.

   This document focuses on the congestion notification interface
   between IP (v4 or v6) and lower layer protocols that can encapsulate
   IP.  However, it is likely that the guidelines will also be useful
   when a lower layer protocol encapsulates itself (e.g.  Ethernet MAC
   in MAC [IEEE802.1Qah]) or when it encapsulates other protocols.

   In some layer 2 technologies, explicit congestion notification has
   been defined for use internally within the subnet, but the interface



Briscoe                 Expires September 3, 2011               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft        ECN Encapsulation Guidelines            March 2011


   with ECN in IP has not been defined.  If the lower layer has its own
   feedback and load regulation, there is no need to propagate
   congestion signalling up the layers.  For instance, EFCI (explicit
   forward congestion indication) has been present in ATM [ITU-T.I.371]
   for a long time, but it has been used for internal control and
   management rather than being propagated to endpoint transports for
   them to control end-to-end congestion.  FECN (forward ECN) was
   included in Frame Relay standards but Frame Relay has no internal
   rate control mechanisms.  Therefore, as no interface to IP ECN has
   ever been defined, FECN is only used to detect where more capacity
   should be provisioned [Buck00].

   In another example, quantised congestion notification (QCN - also
   known as backward congestion notification or BCN) is being defined
   for Ethernet [IEEE802.1Qau].  QCN avoids the need to define a
   congestion notification interface with IP by limiting itself to
   confined scenarios where all endpoints are directly attached by the
   same layer 2 technology, such as in server area networks.  One aim of
   the guidelines below is to avoid an outcome where one congestion
   notification scheme has been defined for internal use within a
   subnetwork technology, but then another has to be defined for
   interfacing to IP.

   Whether some form of explicit congestion notification already exists
   in a lower layer protocol or whether it is being added, this document
   can be used to design the interface to propagate explicit congestion
   notification between the lower layer protocol and IP.

   S.9.3 of RFC3168 on adding ECN to IP [RFC3168] pointed out that the
   IETF might in future want to define how ECN should be added to IETF
   protocols that encapsulate IP, such as L2TP [RFC2661], GRE [RFC1701,
   RFC2784] or PPTP [RFC2637].  More recently, the IETF is working on
   adding ECN support as a TRILL header option [trill-rbridge-options].
   This document is intended to provide design guidelines for any
   protocol that might encapsulate IP, whether maintained by the IETF or
   by other standards bodies.

2.  Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].

   Further terminology used within this document:







Briscoe                 Expires September 3, 2011               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft        ECN Encapsulation Guidelines            March 2011


   Protocol data unit (PDU):  Information that is delivered as a unit
      among peer entities of a layered network consisting of protocol
      control information (typically a header) and possibly user data of
      that layer.  The scope of this document includes layer 2 and layer
      3 networks, where the PDU is respectively termed a frame or a
      packet.  PDU is a general term for either.  It also includes a
      payload with a shim header lying somewhere between layer 2 & 3.

   Encapsulator:  The link or tunnel endpoint function that adds an
      outer header to a PDU (also termed the 'link ingress', the
      'ingress tunnel endpoint' or just the 'ingress' where the context
      is clear).

   Decapsulator:  The link or tunnel endpoint function that removes an
      outer header from a PDU (also termed the 'link egress', the
      'egress tunnel endpoint' or just the 'egress' where the context is
      clear).

   Incoming header:  The header of an arriving PDU before encapsulation.

   Outer header:  The header added to encapsulate a PDU.

   Inner header:  The header encapsulated by the outer header.

   Outgoing header:  The header forwarded by the decapsulator using
      logic that combines the fields in the outer and inner headers.

   ECN-PDU:  A PDU destined for an ECN-capable transport (i.e. a
      transport that will understand explicit congestion notifications).
      This is intended to be a general term for a PDU at any layer, not
      just an IP PDU.  An IP packet with a non-zero ECN field would be
      an ECN-PDU, but the term is intended to also be used to describe
      PDUs of protocols that encapsulate IP packets.

   Not-ECN-PDU:  A PDU destined for a transport that is not ECN-capable.

   Load Regulator:  For each flow of PDUs, the transport function that
      is capable of controlling the data rate.  Typically located at the
      data source, but in-path nodes can regulate load in some
      congestion control arrangements (e.g. admission control or
      policing nodes).  Note the term "a function capable of controlling
      the load" deliberately includes a transport that doesn't actually
      control the load but ought to (e.g. an application without
      congestion control that uses UDP).







Briscoe                 Expires September 3, 2011               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft        ECN Encapsulation Guidelines            March 2011


   Congestion Baseline:  The function that created (or most recently
      reset) the congestion notification field.

3.  Design Guidelines for Adding Congestion Notification to Protocols
    that Encapsulate IP

   These guidelines are consitent with the guidelines on the design of
   alternate schemes for IP tunnelling of the ECN field [RFC6040] and
   the more general best current practice for the design of alternate
   ECN schemes given in [RFC4774].

   The capitalised term 'SHOULD (NOT)' has been used in preference to
   'MUST (NOT)' because it is difficult to know the compromises that
   will be necessary in each protocol design.  If a particular protocol
   design chooses to contradict a 'SHOULD (NOT)' given in the advice
   below, it MUST include a sound justification.

3.1.  Indication of ECN Support in the Wire Protocol

   An active queue management (AQM) scheme SHOULD NOT apply explicit
   congestion notifications to PDUs that are destined for legacy
   transports that will not understand them.  Therefore the lower layer
   needs to be able to distinguish whether PDUs are destined for an ECN-
   capable transport or not.  We use the term ECN-PDUs for a PDU that is
   destined for an ECN-capable transport, and Not-ECN-PDU for one
   destined for a transport that will not understand ECN.

   In IP, if the ECN field in each PDU is cleared to the Not-ECT (not
   ECN-capable transport) codepoint, it indicates that the transport
   will not understand congestion markings.  The mechanism a lower layer
   uses to distinguish the ECN-capability of PDUs need not mimic that of
   IP, but it should achieve the same outcome.  For instance, ECN-
   capable transports might only be allowed to use PDUs identified by a
   particular set of labels or tags.  Alternatively, logical link
   protocols that use flow state might determine whether a PDU should be
   congestion marked by checking for ECN-support in the flow state.
   Whatever mechanisms might be invented, it SHOULD be possible for the
   lower layer protocol not to forward congestion on Not-ECN-PDUs
   destined for transports that will not understand them.

   The per-domain checking of ECN support in MPLS [RFC5129] is a good
   example of a way to avoid sending congestion markings to transports
   that will not understand them.  In MPLS, header space is extremely
   limited, therefore RFC5129 does not provide a field in the MPLS
   header to indicate that the PDU is destined for an ECN-capable
   transport.  Instead, interior nodes in a domain are allowed to set
   explicit congestion indications without checking whether the PDU is
   destined for a transport that will understand them.  Nonetheless,



Briscoe                 Expires September 3, 2011               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft        ECN Encapsulation Guidelines            March 2011


   this is made safe by requiring that the network operator upgrades all
   decapsulating edges of a whole domain to support ECN at once.
   Therefore, on decapsulation there will always be a check that the
   higher layer transport is ECN-capable (by checking for the Not-ECT
   codepoint in the inner IP header).  If the decapsulator discovers
   that the higher layer (inner header) indicates the transport will not
   understand ECN, it drops an ECN-marked packet on behalf of the
   earlier congested node (see Decapsulation Guideline Paragraph 1 in
   Section 3.3).

   Note that it was only appropriate to define such an incremental
   deployment strategy because MPLS is targeted solely at professional
   operators, who can be expected to ensure that a whole subnetwork is
   consistently configured.  This strategy might not be appropriate for
   other link technologies targeted at zero-configuration deployment by
   the general public (e.g.  Ethernet).  For such 'plug-and-play'
   environments it will be necessary to invent a failsafe approach that
   ensures congestion markings will never fall into black holes however
   inconsistently a system is put together.  Alternatively, congestion
   notification relying on correct system configuration could be
   confined to flavours of Ethernet intended only for professional
   network operators, such as IEEE 802.1ah Provider Backbone Bridges
   (PBB).

3.2.  Encapsulation Guidelines

   1.  Even if an incoming PDU is capable of understanding ECN (an ECN-
       PDU), the ingress to a subnet SHOULD disable ECN when it forwards
       the PDU at the lower layer (e.g. by setting the outer header of
       the PDU to identify it as a Not-ECN-PDU) unless the ingress can
       guarantee that the corresponding egress of the link will
       correctly propagate any congestion markings added to the outer
       header across the subnet.  This guarantee might be provided:

       *  by inherent design of the protocol

       *  by configuration

       *  by the ingress explicitly checking that the egress propagates
          ECN.

   2.  Once the ingress to a subnet has established that ECN will be
       correctly propagated at the egress, on encapsulation it SHOULD
       encode the same level of congestion in outer headers as is
       arriving in incoming headers.  For example it might copy any
       incoming congestion notification into the outer header of the
       lower layer protocol.




Briscoe                 Expires September 3, 2011               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft        ECN Encapsulation Guidelines            March 2011


       This meets the requirement that all outer headers ought to
       reflect congestion accumulated along the whole upstream path, not
       just since the ingress of the subnet.  More precisely, congestion
       notifications in outer headers SHOULD reflect congestion since
       the node that is regulating the load (the Load Regulator).

       This guideline is intended to ensure that any bulk congestion
       monitoring further downstream is meaningful (e.g. by a network
       management node monitoring ECN in passing frames).  The level of
       ECN in passing frames is not meaningful unless the Congestion
       Baseline (where congestion notifications start at zero) is known.
       It is not useful to start a new Congestion Baseline at the start
       of each subnet, but it is useful to define the Congestion
       Baseline at the node that is regulating the load (the Load
       Regulator).

       In some circumstances (e.g. pseudowire emulations with link-local
       flow control), the whole path is divided into segments, each with
       its own congestion notification and feedback loop.  In these
       cases, the function that regulates load at the start of each
       segment will need to reset congestion notification (i.e. clear
       any accumulated congestion notifications) at the start of its
       segment.

3.3.  Decapsulation Guidelines

   Congestion notification SHOULD NOT simply be copied from outer
   headers to the forwarded header.  The outgoing congestion
   notification field SHOULD be calculated from the inner and outer
   headers, using the following rules.  If there is any conflict, rules
   earlier in the list take precedence over rules later in the list:

   1.  If the arriving inner header is a Not-ECN-PDU it implies the
       transport will not understand explicit congestion markings.
       Then:

       *  If the outer header carries an explicit congestion marking,
          the packet SHOULD be dropped--the only indication of
          congestion the transport will understand.

       *  If the outer is an ECN-PDU that carries no indication of
          congestion or a Not-ECN-PDU the PDU SHOULD be forwarded, but
          still only as a Not-ECN-PDU.

   2.  If the outer header does not support explicit congestion
       notification (a Not-ECN-PDU), but the inner header does (an ECN-
       PDU), the inner header SHOULD be forwarded unchanged.




Briscoe                 Expires September 3, 2011               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft        ECN Encapsulation Guidelines            March 2011


   3.  In some lower layer protocols congestion may be signalled as a
       numerical level, such as in quantised congestion notification
       [IEEE802.1Qau].  If such an encoding encapsulates an ECN-capable
       IP packet, a function will be needed to convert the quantised
       congestion level into the frequency of congestion markings in
       outgoing IP packets.

   4.  Congestion indications may be ranked by severity.  For instance
       no congestion would be the weakest indication, with possibly
       increasing levels of congestion encoded by increasingly stronger
       indications, e.g. pre-congestion notification (PCN) can be
       encoded at two severity levels [pcn-3-in-1-encoding].

       If the arriving inner header is an ECN-PDU, where the inner and
       outer headers carry indications of congestion of different
       severity, the more severe indication SHOULD be forwarded in
       preference to the less severe.  Obviously, if the severities in
       both inner and outer are the same, the same severity should be
       forwarded.

   5.  The inner and outer headers might carry a combination of
       congestion notification fields that should not be possible given
       any currently used protocol transitions.  For instance, if
       Encapsulation Guideline Paragraph 2 in Section 3.2 had been
       followed, it should not be possible to have a less severe
       indication of congestion in the outer than in the inner.  It MAY
       be appropriate to log unexpected combiantions of headers and
       possibly raise an alarm.  If a safe outgoing codepoint can be
       defined for such a PDU, the PDU SHOULD be forwarded rather than
       dropped.

       Some implementers discard PDUs with currently unused combinations
       of headers just in case they represent an attack.  However, an
       approach using alarms is preferable so that operators can keep
       track of possible attacks but currently unused combinations are
       not precluded from use in future standards actions.

3.4.  Reframing and Congestion Markings

   Where framing boundaries are different between two layers, congestion
   indications SHOULD be propagated on the basis that a congestion
   indication on a PDU applies to all the octets in the PDU.  On
   average, an encapsulator or decapsulator SHOULD approximately
   preserve the number of marked octets arriving and leaving (counting
   the size of inner headers, but not added encapsulating headers).

   An algorithm for reframing congestion indications over different
   sized PDUs SHOULD NOT hold any marked octets back to be signalled in



Briscoe                 Expires September 3, 2011              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft        ECN Encapsulation Guidelines            March 2011


   later frames.  For instance, a reframing algorithm might maintain a
   count of marked octets arriving and departing.  Such an algorithm
   SHOULD propagate a congestion indication in the next departing PDU if
   there have been more arriving marked octets than departing, even if
   after marking the next PDU the count of departing marked octets will
   be greater than those arriving.

4.  IANA Considerations

   This memo includes no request to IANA.

5.  Security Considerations

   {TBA}

6.  Conclusions

   {TBA}

7.  Acknowledgements

   Bob Briscoe is partly funded by Trilogy, a research project (ICT-
   216372) supported by the European Community under its Seventh
   Framework Programme.  The views expressed here are those of the
   author only.

8.  Comments Solicited

   Comments and questions are encouraged and very welcome.  They can be
   addressed to the IETF Transport Area working group mailing list
   <tsvwg@ietf.org>, and/or to the authors.

9.  References

9.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]                Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to
                            Indicate Requirement Levels", BCP 14,
                            RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC3168]                Ramakrishnan, K., Floyd, S., and D. Black,
                            "The Addition of Explicit Congestion
                            Notification (ECN) to IP", RFC 3168,
                            September 2001.

   [RFC4774]                Floyd, S., "Specifying Alternate Semantics
                            for the Explicit Congestion Notification
                            (ECN) Field", BCP 124, RFC 4774,



Briscoe                 Expires September 3, 2011              [Page 11]

Internet-Draft        ECN Encapsulation Guidelines            March 2011


                            November 2006.

9.2.  Informative References

   [Buck00]                 Buckwalter, J., "Frame Relay: Technology and
                            Practice", Pub. Addison Wesley ISBN-13: 978-
                            0201485240, 2000.

   [DCTCP]                  Alizadeh, M., Greenberg, A., Maltz, D.,
                            Padhye, J., Patel, P., Prabhakar, B.,
                            Sengupta, S., and M. Sridharan, "Data Center
                            TCP (DCTCP)", ACM SIGCOMM CCR 40(4)63--74,
                            October 2010, <http://portal.acm.org/
                            citation.cfm?id=1851192>.

   [IEEE802.1Qah]           IEEE, "IEEE Standard for Local and
                            Metropolitan Area Networks--Virtual Bridged
                            Local Area Networks--Amendment  6: Provider
                            Backbone Bridges", IEEE Std 802.1Qah-2008,
                            August 2008, <http://www.ieee802.org/1/
                            pages/802.1ah.html>.

                            (Access Controlled link within page)

   [IEEE802.1Qau]           IEEE, "IEEE Standard for Local and
                            Metropolitan Area Networks--Virtual Bridged
                            Local Area Networks - Amendment 10:
                            Congestion Notification", 2009, <http://
                            www.ieee802.org/1/pages/802.1au.html>.

                            (Work in Progress; Access Controlled link
                            within page)

   [ITU-T.I.371]            ITU-T, "Traffic Control and Congestion
                            Control in B-ISDN", ITU-T Rec. I.371
                            (03/04), March 2004.

   [RFC1701]                Hanks, S., Li, T., Farinacci, D., and P.
                            Traina, "Generic Routing Encapsulation
                            (GRE)", RFC 1701, October 1994.

   [RFC2637]                Hamzeh, K., Pall, G., Verthein, W., Taarud,
                            J., Little, W., and G. Zorn, "Point-to-Point
                            Tunneling Protocol", RFC 2637, July 1999.

   [RFC2661]                Townsley, W., Valencia, A., Rubens, A.,
                            Pall, G., Zorn, G., and B. Palter, "Layer
                            Two Tunneling Protocol "L2TP"", RFC 2661,



Briscoe                 Expires September 3, 2011              [Page 12]

Internet-Draft        ECN Encapsulation Guidelines            March 2011


                            August 1999.

   [RFC2784]                Farinacci, D., Li, T., Hanks, S., Meyer, D.,
                            and P. Traina, "Generic Routing
                            Encapsulation (GRE)", RFC 2784, March 2000.

   [RFC4301]                Kent, S. and K. Seo, "Security Architecture
                            for the Internet Protocol", RFC 4301,
                            December 2005.

   [RFC5129]                Davie, B., Briscoe, B., and J. Tay,
                            "Explicit Congestion Marking in MPLS",
                            RFC 5129, January 2008.

   [RFC6040]                Briscoe, B., "Tunnelling of Explicit
                            Congestion Notification", RFC 6040,
                            November 2010.

   [pcn-3-in-1-encoding]    Briscoe, B., Moncaster, T., and M. Menth,
                            "Encoding 3 PCN-States in the IP header
                            using a single DSCP",
                            draft-ietf-pcn-3-in-1-encoding-04 (work in
                            progress), January 2011.

   [trill-rbridge-options]  3rd, D., Ghanwani, A., Bestler, C., and V.
                            Manral, "RBridges: TRILL Header Options",
                            draft-ietf-trill-rbridge-options-03 (work in
                            progress), October 2010.

Author's Address

   Bob Briscoe
   BT
   B54/77, Adastral Park
   Martlesham Heath
   Ipswich  IP5 3RE
   UK

   Phone: +44 1473 645196
   EMail: bob.briscoe@bt.com
   URI:   http://bobbriscoe.net/










Briscoe                 Expires September 3, 2011              [Page 13]

