A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3201

        Title:      Definitions of Managed Objects for Circuit to
                    Interface Translation
        Author(s):  R. Steinberger, O. Nicklass
        Status:     Standards Track
        Date:       January 2002
        Mailbox:    robert.steinberger@fnc.fujitsu.com,
                    Orly_n@rad.co.il 
        Pages:      23
        Characters: 45583
        Updates/Obsoletes/SeeAlso:  None

        I-D Tag:    draft-ietf-frnetmib-frsi-04.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3201.txt


This memo defines an extension of the Management Information Base
(MIB) for use with network management protocols in TCP/IP-based
internets.  In particular, it defines objects for managing the
insertion of interesting Circuit Interfaces into the ifTable.  This is
important for circuits that must be used within other MIB modules
which require an ifEntry.  It allows for integrated monitoring of
circuits as well as routing to circuits using unaltered, pre-existing
MIB modules.

This document is a product of the Frame Relay Service MIB Working
Group of the IETF.

This is now a Proposed Standard Protocol.

This document specifies an Internet standards track protocol for
the Internet community, and requests discussion and suggestions
for improvements.  Please refer to the current edition of the
"Internet Official Protocol Standards" (STD 1) for the
standardization state and status of this protocol.  Distribution
of this memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.