


Network Working Group                                              X. Fu
Internet-Draft                                                  M. Betts
Intended status: Standards Track                         ZTE Corporation
Expires: October 28, 2010                                        R. Jing
                                                                  X. Huo
                                                           China Telecom
                                                          April 26, 2010


 Framework for Multi Stages Multiplexing Configuration in G.709 Optical
                           Transport Network
          draft-fuxh-ccamp-multi-stage-multiplex-config-fwk-00

Abstract

   Interworking between regions with 1.25G TS and 2.5G TS has been
   considered in G.709.  Multi stages multiplexing/demultiplexing would
   be desirable to facilitate the introduction of new ODU0 and ODUflex
   signals to an existing network without having to upgrade every node
   in the network.  So ODU0/ODUflex can be mapped into ODU1/ODU2/ODU3
   and transit across the 2.5G TS region.  Multi stages multiplexing/
   demultiplexing are also used to support the multi-domain OTN
   applications based on the tunnel design.  This document describes the
   framework for multi stages multiplexing configuration in G.709
   Optical Transport Network.

Conventions Used In This Document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on October 28, 2010.



Fu, et al.              Expires October 28, 2010                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft   Multi Stages Multiplexing Configuration      April 2010


Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  GMPLS and PCE Extension to Support Multi Stages
       Multiplexing Configuration  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
     2.1.  Routing Extension to Support Multi Stages Multiplexing
           Configuration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
     2.2.  Signaling Extension to Support Multi Stages
           Multiplexing Configuration  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
     2.3.  PCE Extension to Support Multi Stages Multiplexing
           Configuration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   3.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   4.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   5.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
     5.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
     5.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7


















Fu, et al.              Expires October 28, 2010                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft   Multi Stages Multiplexing Configuration      April 2010


1.  Introduction

   Multi stages multiplexing configuration requirement is defined in
   [MULTI-STAGES-MULTIPLEXING-CONFIG-REQ] document.  It describes two
   typical use case of multi stages multiplexing configuration.

   The introduction of ODU0 and ODUflex to the OTN hierarchy creates a
   situation where the newly added ODUk signals have a bit rate that is
   lower than any of the existing signals, which presents some different
   challenges because the new signals can be clients of the existing
   signals.  As a result, there are clear applications where multi
   stages of multiplexing would be desirable to facilitate the
   introduction of these new ODU0 and ODUflex signals to an existing
   network without having to upgrade every node in the network.  Using
   multi stages of multiplexing at the domain boundary allows the
   operator to confine the new rates to only those nodes that need to
   support them.

   A second potential application for multi stages outside of an upgrade
   scenario would be a network design based on tunnels.  Multi stages
   multiplexing are used to support the multi-domain OTN applications
   based on the tunnel design.  If there are a large number of circuits
   that share the same endpoints (or even part of an overall path), it
   may be convenient from a management perspective to first multiplex
   those ODU0, ODU1 and ODUflex into ODU2 or ODU3 to minimize the number
   of connections that need to be made in intermediate nodes.  The ODU2/
   ODU3 effectively creates a tunnel through the ODU4 network that the
   ODU0, ODU1 and ODUflex can use.

   This document describes the framework for multi stages multiplex
   configuration in G.709 Optical Transport Network.


2.  GMPLS and PCE Extension to Support Multi Stages Multiplexing
    Configuration

   From the perspective of Management Plane, it must get multi stages
   multiplexing/demultiplexing capability of each gateway nodes for the
   service provision.  Management Plane must also configure the multi
   stages multiplexing/demultiplexing in Gateway nodes for the end-to-
   end service.

   The gateway nodes provide the multi stages multiplexing/
   demultiplexing capability for introducing new ODU0 and ODUflex
   signals to an existing network and tunnel design.  Gateway also
   supports the signal transfer function between regions with 1.25G TS
   and 2.5G TS.  It needs to extend GMPLS to provide the multi stages
   multiplexing configuration.



Fu, et al.              Expires October 28, 2010                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft   Multi Stages Multiplexing Configuration      April 2010


   From the perspective of Control Plane, it must get multi stages
   multiplexing/demultiplexing capability of each gateway nodes for path
   computation.  It can get Multi stages multiplexing/demultiplexing
   information by Management Plane configuration.  Path computation
   entity can use the IGP protocol or configurations from Management
   Plane to get this information.  Path computation entity must select a
   proper kind of multi stages multiplexing/demultiplexing of gateway
   nodes along a specific end-to-end connection.  Signaling message must
   carry the multi stages multiplexing/demultiplexing that has been
   determined by path computation entity.  Multi stages multiplexing/
   demultiplexing for a specific service must be configured after
   gateway receives the signaling of service creation.

   The purpose of this section is to provide a framework for extensions
   of the current GMPLS and PCE protocols for multi stages multiplexing
   configuration in OTN network.

2.1.  Routing Extension to Support Multi Stages Multiplexing
      Configuration

   It needs to extend the routing protocol to get the multi stages
   multiplexing/demultiplexing capability information of gateway nodes.
   Multi stages multiplexing/demultiplexing capability information must
   be flooded into the path computation entity and the routing domain by
   gateway nodes with the IGP protocol.  LSAs which are advertised by
   gateway nodes must carry multi stages multiplexing/demultiplexing
   capability information of gateway nodes.  Multi stages multiplexing/
   demultiplexing capability should be configured by Management Plane
   (e.g., Network Planning Tool) or discovered by the gateway node based
   on the switching and adaptation capability of switching fabrics and
   cards.

   In order to make path computation entity get the multi stages
   multiplexing capability information of gateway node, the routing
   protocol should be extended to convey the multi stages multiplexing
   capability information.  [MULTI-STAGES-MULTIPLEXING-CONFIG-OSFPTE-
   EXT] describes OSPF-TE extension for multi stages multiplexing
   configuration.  It enhances the sub-TLVs for the Link TLV to support
   Multi Stages Multiplexing Configuration.  It defines extensions to
   the OSPF routing protocol which is defined in [RFC3630], [RFC4202],
   and [RFC4203] in order for multi stages multiplexing configuration.

2.2.  Signaling Extension to Support Multi Stages Multiplexing
      Configuration

   The multi stages multiplexing capability information should be
   discovered/enabled by the OSS and as described in the previous point
   distributed via routing.  Based on the [MULTI-STAGES-MULTIPLEXING-



Fu, et al.              Expires October 28, 2010                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft   Multi Stages Multiplexing Configuration      April 2010


   CONFIG-OSPFTE-EXT], path computation entity can get multi stages
   multiplexing/demultiplexing capability of each gateway nodes for path
   computation.  So the path computation entity must select some proper
   kinds of multi stages multiplexing/demultiplexing for different
   gateway nodes along a specific end-to-end connection.  All kinds of
   multi stages multiplexing which has been determined for all gateway
   nodes along one end-to-end connection by path computation entity must
   be carried with signaling message.  After one gateway node receives
   the signaling message who carries one kind of multi stages
   multiplexing for it, it must config this kind of multi stages
   multiplexing hierarchy to its data plane.  It needs to extend the
   signaling protocol to configure the multi stages multiplexing/
   demultiplexing method within the gateway nodes along one specific
   end-to-end connection.

   The Explicit Route Object [RFC3209] allows the ingress node to
   partially or fully specify the route of an LSP.  The route is encoded
   as a sequence of hops that identifies a node or interface that must
   be crossed.  Further attributes assigned to each hop can be added to
   the route such as per-hop label control [RFC3473] and list of
   prohibited resources between two nodes [RFC4874].  ERO can carry the
   multi stages multiplexing information. ,so it is desirable to extend
   the ERO object.  [HOP_ATTRIBUTES] introduce a new ERO sub-object that
   encodes attributes relevant to a particular node or interface within
   the gateway node.  The HOP_ATTRIBUTES subobject can be inserted into
   ERO, SERO, RRO and SRRO.

   [MULTI-STAGES-MULTIPLEXING-CONFIG-RSVPTE-EXT] describes the RSVP-TE
   extension for multi stages multiplexing configuration in G.709
   Optical Transport Network.  It extends the HOP_ATTRIBUTES defined in
   document [HOP_ATTRIBUTES].  It defineds a new Attributes TLV where
   the kinde of multi stages multiplexing hierarchy relevant to a
   specific interface of internal node is encoded.

   Ingress node initiates the setup of end-to-end connection.  A
   specific kind of multi stages multiplexing relevant to a particular
   gateway node or interface within this gateway node along the path is
   included in a HOP_ATTRIBUTES subobject, which is inserted into the
   ERO.  On reception of a Path message containing HOP_ATTRIBUTES whose
   type of Attributes TLV is Multi States Multiplexing Hierarchy Sub-
   TLV, the receiver of message along the path must check the local data
   plane capability to see if this kind of multi stages multiplexing/
   demultiplexing is acceptable on specific interface or gateway node.
   If there is an acceptable kind of multi stages multiplexing/
   demultiplexing, then this kind of multi stages multiplexing/
   demultiplexing must be configed into the data plane





Fu, et al.              Expires October 28, 2010                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft   Multi Stages Multiplexing Configuration      April 2010


2.3.  PCE Extension to Support Multi Stages Multiplexing Configuration

   Based on the [MULTI-STAGES-MULTIPLEXING-CONFIG-OSPFTE-EXT], path
   computation entity can get multi stages multiplexing/demultiplexing
   capability of each gateway nodes for path computation.  Path
   computation entity in Management Plane and/or Control Plane must
   support the path computation by using the multi stages multiplexing
   capability constraint information.  It must determine some proper
   kinds of multi stages multiplexing hierarchy for different gateway
   node along the path.

   A request from a PCC to a PCE MUST support the inclusion of an
   optional indication of which kinds of multi stages multiplexing
   hierarchy can be used for sepecific gateway node or not.  So the path
   computation entity must consider these multi stage multiplexing
   hierarchy constraints.  In the absence of such an indication, the
   default is that there is no any multi stage multiplexing hierarchy
   constraint for path computation.

   PCReq has a desire to be extended to carry some kindes of multi
   stages multiplexing hierarchy constraints of some specific gateway
   nodes for path computation from PCC.  PCRep also has a desire to be
   extended to carry all kindes of multi stages multiplexing hierarchy
   for each gateway nodes along the path.


3.  Security Considerations

   The use of control plane protocols for signaling, routing, and path
   computation opens an OTN to security threats through attacks on those
   protocols.  The data plane technology for an OTN does not introduce
   any specific vulnerabilities, and so the control plane may be secured
   using the mechanisms defined for the protocols discussed.  For
   further details of the specific security measures refer to the
   documents that define the protocols ([RFC3473], [RFC4203], [RFC4205],
   [RFC4204], and [RFC5440]).  [GMPLS-SEC] provides an overview of
   security vulnerabilities and protection mechanisms for the GMPLS
   control plane.


4.  IANA Considerations

   TBD


5.  References





Fu, et al.              Expires October 28, 2010                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft   Multi Stages Multiplexing Configuration      April 2010


5.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [I-D.ietf-ccamp-gmpls-g709-framework]
              Zhang, F., Li, D., Li, H., Belotti, S., Han, J., Betts,
              M., Grandi, P., and E. Varma, "Framework for GMPLS and PCE
              Control of G.709 Optical Transport Networks",
              draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-g709-framework-00 (work in
              progress), April 2010.

5.2.  Informative References


Authors' Addresses

   Xihua Fu
   ZTE Corporation

   Email: fu.xihua@zte.com.cn


   Malcolm Betts
   ZTE Corporation

   Email: malcolm.betts@zte.com.cn


   Ruiquan Jing
   China Telecom

   Email: jingrq@ctbri.com.cn


   Xiaoli Huo
   China Telecom

   Email: huoxl@ctbri.com.cn












Fu, et al.              Expires October 28, 2010                [Page 7]


