


Network Working Group                                              X. Fu
Internet-Draft                                                       ZTE
Intended status: Standards Track                               V. Manral
Expires: October 13, 2012                          Hewlett-Packard Corp.
                                                              D. McDysan
                                                                A. Malis
                                                                 Verizon
                                                            S. Giacalone
                                                         Thomson Reuters
                                                                M. Betts
                                                                 Q. Wang
                                                                     ZTE
                                                                J. Drake
                                                        Juniper Networks
                                                          April 11, 2012


         Loss and Delay Traffic Engineering Framework for MPLS
               draft-fuxh-mpls-delay-loss-te-framework-05

Abstract

   With more and more enterprises using cloud based services, the
   distances between the user and the applications are growing.  A lot
   of the current applications are designed to work across LAN's and
   have various inherent assumptions.  For multiple applications such as
   High Performance Computing and Electronic Financial markets, the
   response times are critical as is packet loss, while other
   applications require more throughput.

   [RFC3031] describes the architecture of MPLS based networks.  This
   draft extends the MPLS architecture to allow for latency, loss and
   jitter as properties.  It describes requirements and control plane
   implication for latency and packet loss as a traffic engineering
   performance metric in today's network which is consisting of
   potentially multiple layers of packet transport network and optical
   transport network in order to make a accurate end-to-end latency and
   loss prediction before a path is established.

   Note MPLS architecture for Multicast will be taken up in a future
   version of the draft.

Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC 2119].




Fu, et al.              Expires October 13, 2012                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft        Link Latency, Jitter and Loss           April 2012


Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on October 13, 2012.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2012 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.




















Fu, et al.              Expires October 13, 2012                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft        Link Latency, Jitter and Loss           April 2012


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.  Architecture requirements overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     2.1.  Communicate Latency and Loss as TE Metric  . . . . . . . .  4
     2.2.  Requirement for Composite Link . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     2.3.  Requirement for Hierarchy LSP  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     2.4.  Latency Accumulation and Verification  . . . . . . . . . .  5
     2.5.  Restoration, Protection and Rerouting  . . . . . . . . . .  6
   3.  End-to-End Latency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   4.  End-to-End Jitter  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   5.  End-to-End Loss  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   6.  Protocol Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   7.  Control Plane Implication  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     7.1.  Implications for Routing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     7.2.  Implications for Signaling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   8.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   9.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   10. Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   11. References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     11.1. Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     11.2. Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14




























Fu, et al.              Expires October 13, 2012                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft        Link Latency, Jitter and Loss           April 2012


1.  Introduction

   In High Frequency trading for Electronic Financial markets, computers
   make decisions based on the Electronic Data received, without human
   intervention.  These trades now account for a majority of the trading
   volumes and rely exclusively on ultra-low-latency direct market
   access.

   Extremely low latency measurements for MPLS LSP tunnels are defined
   in [draft-ietf-mpls-loss-delay].  They allow a mechanism to measure
   and monitor performance metrics for packet loss, and one-way and two-
   way delay, as well as related metrics like delay variation and
   channel throughput.

   The measurements are however effective only after the LSP is created
   and cannot be used by MPLS Path computation engine to define paths
   that have the latest latency.  This draft defines the architecture
   used, so that end-to-end tunnels can be set up based on latency, loss
   or jitter characteristics.

   End-to-end service optimization based on latency and packet loss is a
   key requirement for service provider.  This type of function will be
   adopted by their "premium" service customers.  They would like to pay
   for this "premium" service.  Latency and loss on a route level will
   help carriers' customers to make his provider selection decision.


2.  Architecture requirements overview

2.1.  Communicate Latency and Loss as TE Metric

   The solution MUST provide a means to communicate latency, latency
   variation and packet loss of links and nodes as a traffic engineering
   performance metric into IGP.

   Latency, latency variation and packet loss may be unstable, for
   example, if queueing latency were included, then IGP could become
   unstable.  The solution MUST provide a means to control latency and
   loss IGP message advertisement rate and avoid instability when the
   latency, latency variation and packet loss value changes frequently.

   In the case where it is known that either the changes are too
   frequent or there is a backup which is preferred, the solution shall
   put the node or the link in unusable state for services requiring a
   particular service capability.  This unusable state is on a
   capability basis and not a global basis.  The condition to get into
   the state is locally configured and all routers in a domain should
   have this criteria synchronized.



Fu, et al.              Expires October 13, 2012                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft        Link Latency, Jitter and Loss           April 2012


   Path computation entity MUST have the capability to compute one end-
   to-end path with latency and packet loss constraint.  For example, it
   has the capability to compute a route with X amount of bandwidth with
   less than Y ms of latency and less than Z% packet loss limit based on
   the latency and packet loss traffic engineering database.  It MUST
   also support the path computation with routing constraints
   combination with pre-defined priorities, e.g., SRLG diversity,
   latency, loss, jitter and cost.  If the performance of link exceeds
   its configured maximum threshold, path computation entity may not
   select this kind of link although end-to-end performance is still
   met.

2.2.  Requirement for Composite Link

   One end-to-end LSP may traverses some Composite Links [CL-REQ].  Even
   if the transport technology (e.g., OTN) component links are
   identical, the latency and packet loss characteristics of the
   component links may differ due to factors such as fiber distance and/
   or fiber characteristics.

   The solution MUST provide a means to indicate that a traffic flow
   should select a component link with minimum latency and/or packet
   loss, maximum acceptable latency and/or packet loss value and maximum
   acceptable delay variation value as specified by protocol.  The
   endpoints of Composite Link will take these parameters into account
   for component link selection or creation.  Details of how transient
   respose is taken is specified in Section 4.1 [CL-REQ].  The exact
   details for component links will be taken up separately and are not
   part of this document.

2.3.  Requirement for Hierarchy LSP

   Heirarchical LSP's may traverse server layer LSP's.  For such LSP's
   there may be some latency and packet loss constraint requirement for
   the segment in server layer.

   The solution MUST provide a means to indicate FA selection or FA-LSP
   creation with minimum latency and/or packet loss, maximum acceptable
   latency and/or packet loss value and maximum acceptable delay
   variation value.  The boundary nodes of FA-LSP will take these
   parameters into account for FA selection or FA-LSP creation.

2.4.  Latency Accumulation and Verification

   The solution SHOULD provide a means to accumulate (e.g., sum) latency
   information of links and nodes along that an LSP traverses, (e.g.,
   Inter-AS, Inter-Area or Multi-Layer) so that the source node can
   validate if the desired maximum latency constraint can be satisfied



Fu, et al.              Expires October 13, 2012                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft        Link Latency, Jitter and Loss           April 2012


   for a packet traversing the LSP.  [Y.1541] provides details of how
   the latency value is accumulated.

   Both One-way and Round-trip latency collection along the LSP by
   signaling protocol and latency verification at the end of LSP should
   be supported.

   The accumulation of the delay is "simple" for the static component
   i.e. its a linear addition, the dynamic/network loading component is
   more interesting and would involve some estimate of the "worst case".
   However, method of deriving this worst case appears to be more in the
   scope of Network Operator policy than standards i.e. the operator
   needs to decide, based on the SLAs offered, the required confidence
   level.

2.5.  Restoration, Protection and Rerouting

   Some customers may insist on having the ability to re-route if the
   latency and loss SLA is not being met.  If a "provisioned" end-to-end
   LSP latency and/or loss could not meet the latency and loss agreement
   between operator and his user, the solution SHOULD support pre-
   defined or dynamic re-routing (e.g., make-before-break) to handle
   this case based on the local policy.  In revertive behaviour is
   supported, the original LSP must not be released and is monitored by
   control plane.  When the end-to-end performance is repaired, the
   service is restored to the original LSP.

   The solution SHOULD support to move an end-to-end LSP away from any
   link whose performance violates the configured threshold.

   End-to-end measurements of the LSP also need to be performed in
   addition to the link-by-link measurements.  A threshold violation of
   the End-to-End criteria as measured by the head end node should cause
   rerouting of the LSP.

   The anomalous path can be switch to protection path or rerouted to
   new path because of end-to-end performance couldn't meet any more.

   If a "provisioned" end-to-end LSP latency and/or loss performance is
   improved (i.e., beyond a configurable minimum value), the solution
   SHOULD support the re-routing to optimize latency and/or loss end-to-
   end cost.

   The latency performance of pre-defined protection or dynamic re-
   routing LSP MUST meet the latency SLA parameter.  The difference of
   latency, jitter or loss value between primary and protection/
   restoration path SHOULD be zero.  [MPLS-TP-USE-CASE] defines a
   Relative Delay Time which is the difference of the Absolute Delay



Fu, et al.              Expires October 13, 2012                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft        Link Latency, Jitter and Loss           April 2012


   Time between using working and protect path.  When the relative
   network latency is increased or decreased, the customer would
   complain.  From network operational point of view, they want to
   minimize the number of customers complains.  The scope of this draft
   is much broader than MPLS-TP and there is a need for a framework to
   identify all of these related requirements.

   Due to some flapping conditions the latency and loss of an LSP may
   change, this may cause the LSP to be frequently switched to a new
   path.  In order to avoid churn, the solution SHOULD specify the
   switchover of the LSP according to maximum acceptable change rate.


3.  End-to-End Latency

   Procedures to measure latency and loss has been provided in ITU-T
   [Y.1731], [G.709] and [ietf-mpls-loss-delay].  The control plane can
   be independent of the mechanism used and different mechanisms can be
   used for measurement based on different standards.

   Latency on a path has two sources: Node latency which is caused by
   the node as a result of process time in each node and: Link latency
   as a result of packet/frame transit time between two neighbouring
   nodes or a FA-LSP/ Composite Link [CL-REQ].

   Latency or one-way delay is the time it takes for a packet within a
   stream going from measurement point 1 to measurement point 2, as
   defined in [Y.1540].

   The architecture uses assumption that the sum of the latencies of the
   individual components approximately adds up to the average latency of
   an LSP.  Though using the sum may not be perfect, it however gives a
   good approximation that can be used for Traffic Engineering (TE)
   purposes.

   The total measured latency of an LSP consists of the sum of the
   latency of the LSP hop, as well as the average latency of switching
   on a device, which may vary based on queuing and buffering.

   Hop latency can be measured by getting the latency measurement
   between the egress of one MPLS LSR to the ingress of the nexthop LSR.
   This value may be constant for most part, unless there is protection
   switching, or other similar changes at a lower layer.

   The switching latency on a device, can be measured internally, and
   multiple mechanisms and data structures to do the same have been
   defined.  [Add references to papers by Verghese, Kompella, Duffield].




Fu, et al.              Expires October 13, 2012                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft        Link Latency, Jitter and Loss           April 2012


   We also looked at other measurement granularities before deciding on
   an interface based measurement.  An approximation of the Flow based
   measurement is the per DSCP value, measurement from the ingress of
   one port to the egress of every other port in the device.

   Another approximation that can be used is per interface DSCP based
   measurement, which can be an agrregate of the average measurements
   per interface.  The average can itself be calculated in ways, so as
   to provide closer approximation.

   For the purpose of this draft it is assumed that the node latency is
   a small factor of the total latency in the networks where this
   solution is deployed.  The node latency is hence ignored for the
   benefit of simplicity in this solution.

   The average link delay over a configurable interval should be
   reported by data plane in micro-seconds.


4.  End-to-End Jitter

   Jitter or Packet Delay Variation of a packet within a stream of
   packets is defined for a selected pair of packets in the stream going
   from measurement point 1 to measurement point 2.

   This architecture uses the assumptions of [Y.1540] to calculate the
   accumulated jitter from the individual components approximately.
   Though using this may not be perfect, it however gives a good
   approximation that can be used for Traffic Engineering (TE) purposes.

   The buffering and queuing within a device will lead to the jitter.
   Just like latency measurements, jitter measurements can be
   approximated as either per DSCP per port pair (Ingress and Egress) or
   as per DSCP per egress port, however such measurements have been left
   out for the sake of simplicity of the solution.

   For the purpose of this draft it is assumed that the node latency is
   a small factor of the total latency in the networks where this
   solution is deployed.  The node latency is hence ignored for the
   benefit of simplicity.

   The jitter is measured in micro-seconds.


5.  End-to-End Loss

   Loss or Packet Drop probability of a packet within a stream of
   packets is defined as the number of packets dropped within a given



Fu, et al.              Expires October 13, 2012                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft        Link Latency, Jitter and Loss           April 2012


   interval.

   This architecture uses the assumptions of [Y.1540] to calculate the
   accumulated loss from the individual components approximately.
   Though using the accumulated metrics may not be perfect, it however
   gives a good approximation that can be used for Traffic Engineering
   (TE) purposes.

   The buffering and queuing mechanisms within a device will decide
   which packet is to be dropped.  Just like latency and jitter
   measurements, the loss can best be appproximated as either per DSCP
   per port pair (Ingresss and Egress) or as per DSCP per egress port.
   However such mechanisms are not used in this solution to keep the
   solution simple.

   The loss is measured in terms of the number of packets per million
   packets.


6.  Protocol Considerations

   The protocol metrics above can be sent in IGP protocol packets as
   defined in [OSPF-TE-EXPRESS-PATH] and [ISIS-TE-EXPRESS-PATH].  They
   can then be used by Source Node or the Path Computation engine to
   decide paths with the desired path properties.  [EXPRESS-PATH]
   describes how to use these traffic engineering metrics to compute
   explicit paths at path computation entity.

   As Link-state IGP information is flooded throughout an area, frequent
   changes can cause a lot of control traffic.  To prevent such
   flooding, data should only be flooded when it crosses a certain
   configured maximum.

   A separate measurement should be done for an LSP when it is UP.  Also
   LSP's path should only be recalculated when the end-to-end metrics
   changes in a way it becomes more than desired.

   Delay, jitter or loss is part of service/QoS description/
   characterization.  RSVP-TE extension is defined in
   [DELAY-LOSS-RSVP-TE].

   This document is a framework tracking the various solution approaches
   and placing them in context.  This document additionally provides a
   framework for the control of MPLS networks based on delay and loss
   TE.






Fu, et al.              Expires October 13, 2012                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft        Link Latency, Jitter and Loss           April 2012


7.  Control Plane Implication

7.1.  Implications for Routing

   The latency and packet loss performance metric MUST be advertised
   into path computation entity by IGP (OSPF-TE, OSPFv3-TE or IS-IS-TE)
   to perform route computation and network planning based on latency
   and packet loss SLA target.

   Latency, latency variation and packet loss value MUST be reported as
   a average value which is calculated by data plane measurements.

   Latency and packet loss characteristics of these links and nodes may
   change dynamically.  In order to control IGP messaging and avoid
   being unstable when the latency, latency variation and packet loss
   value changes, a threshold and a limit on rate of change MUST be
   configured in the IGP control plane.

   Latency and packet loss values changes need to be updated and flooded
   in the IGP control messages only when there is significant changes in
   the value.  When the head end-node deterimines the IGP update affects
   the LSP for which it is ingress, it recalculates the LSP.

   A target value MUST be configured to control plane for each link.  If
   the link performance improves beyond a configurable target value, it
   must be re-advertised.  The receiving node determines whether a
   "provisioned" end-to-end LSP latency and/or loss performance is
   improved.

   It is sometimes important for paths that desire low latency to avoid
   nodes that have a significant contribution to latency.  Control plane
   should report two components of the delay, "static" and "dynamic".
   The dynamic component is always caused by traffic loading and
   queuing.  The "dynamic" portion SHOULD be reported as an approximate
   value.  The static component should be a fixed latency through the
   node without any queuing.  Link latency attribute should also take
   into account the latency of node, i.e., the latency between the
   incoming port and the outgoing port of a network element.  Half of
   the fixed node latency can be added to each link.

   When the Composite Links [CL-REQ] is advertised into IGP, there are
   following considerations.

   o  One option is that the latency and packet loss of composite link
      may be the range (e.g., at least minimum and maximum) latency
      value of all component links.  It may also be the maximum or
      average latency value of all component links.  In both cases, only
      partial information is transmited in the IGP.  So the path



Fu, et al.              Expires October 13, 2012               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft        Link Latency, Jitter and Loss           April 2012


      computation entity has insufficient information to determine
      whether a particular path can support its latency and packet loss
      requirements.  This leads to signaling crankback.

   o  Another option is that latency and packet loss of each component
      link within one Composite Link could be advertised but having only
      one IGP adjacency.

   One end-to-end LSP (e.g., in IP/MPLS or MPLS-TP network) may traverse
   a FA-LSP of server layer (e.g., OTN rings).  The boundary nodes of
   the FA-LSP SHOULD be aware of the latency and packet loss information
   of this FA-LSP.

   If the FA-LSP is able to form a routing adjacency and/or as a TE link
   in the client network, the total latency and packet loss value of the
   FA-LSP can be as an input to a transformation that results in a FA
   traffic engineering metric and advertised into the client layer
   routing instances.  Note that this metric will include the latency
   and packet loss of the links and nodes that the trail traverses.

   If total latency and packet loss information of the FA-LSP changes
   (e.g., due to a maintenance action or failure in OTN rings), the
   boundary node of the FA-LSP will receive the TE link information
   advertisement including the latency and packet value which is already
   changed and if it is over than the threshold and a limit on rate of
   change, then it will compute the total latency and packet value of
   the FA-LSP again.  If the total latency and packet loss value of FA-
   LSP changes, the client layer MUST also be notified about the latest
   value of FA.  The client layer can then decide if it will accept the
   increased latency and packet loss or request a new path that meets
   the latency and packet loss requirement.

7.2.  Implications for Signaling

   In order to assign the LSP to one of component links with different
   latency and loss characteristics, RSVP-TE message needs to carry a
   indication of request minimum latency and/or packet loss, maximum
   acceptable latency and/or packet loss value and maximum acceptable
   delay variation value for the component link selection or creation.
   The composite link will take these parameters into account when
   assigning traffic of LSP to a component link.

   One end-to-end LSP (e.g., in IP/MPLS or MPLS-TP network) may traverse
   a FA-LSP of server layer (e.g., OTN rings).  There will be some
   latency and packet loss constraint requirement for the segment route
   in server layer.  So RSVP-TE message needs to carry a indication of
   request minimum latency and/or packet loss, maximum acceptable
   latency and/or packet loss value and maximum acceptable delay



Fu, et al.              Expires October 13, 2012               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft        Link Latency, Jitter and Loss           April 2012


   variation value.  The boundary nodes of FA-LSP will take these
   parameters into account for FA selection or FA-LSP creation.

   RSVP-TE needs to be extended to accumulate (e.g., sum) latency
   information of links and nodes along one LSP across multi-domain
   (e.g., Inter-AS, Inter-Area or Multi-Layer) so that an latency
   verification can be made at end points.  One-way and round-trip
   latency collection along the LSP by signaling protocol can be
   supported.  So the end points of this LSP can verify whether the
   total amount of latency could meet the latency agreement between
   operator and his user.  When RSVP-TE signaling is used, the source
   can determine if the latency requirement is met much more rapidly
   than performing the actual end-to-end latency measurement.

   Restoration, protection and equipment variations can impact
   "provisioned" latency and packet loss (e.g., latency and packet loss
   increase).  For example, restoration/provisioning action in transport
   network that increases latency seen by packet network observable by
   customers, possibly violating SLAs.  The change of one end-to-end LSP
   latency and packet loss performance MUST be known by source and/or
   sink node.  So it can inform the higher layer network of a latency
   and packet loss change.  The latency or packet loss change of links
   and nodes will affect one end-to-end LSPs total amount of latency or
   packet loss.  Applications can fail beyond an application-specific
   threshold.  Some remedy mechanism could be used.

   Pre-defined protection or dynamic re-routing could be triggered to
   handle this case.  In the case of predefined protection, large
   amounts of redundant capacity may have a significant negative impact
   on the overall network cost.  Service provider may have many layers
   of pre-defined restoration for this transfer, but they have to
   duplicate restoration resources at significant cost.  Solution should
   provides some mechanisms to avoid the duplicate restoration and
   reduce the network cost.  Dynamic re-routing also has to face the
   risk of resource limitation.  So the choice of mechanism MUST be
   based on SLA or policy.  In the case where the latency SLA can not be
   met after a re-route is attempted, control plane should report an
   alarm to management plane.  It could also try restoration for several
   times which could be configured.


8.  IANA Considerations

   No new IANA consideration are raised by this document.







Fu, et al.              Expires October 13, 2012               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft        Link Latency, Jitter and Loss           April 2012


9.  Security Considerations

   This document raises no new security issues.


10.  Acknowledgements

   TBD.


11.  References

11.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC3209]  Awduche, D., Berger, L., Gan, D., Li, T., Srinivasan, V.,
              and G. Swallow, "RSVP-TE: Extensions to RSVP for LSP
              Tunnels", RFC 3209, December 2001.

   [RFC3473]  Berger, L., "Generalized Multi-Protocol Label Switching
              (GMPLS) Signaling Resource ReserVation Protocol-Traffic
              Engineering (RSVP-TE) Extensions", RFC 3473, January 2003.

   [RFC3477]  Kompella, K. and Y. Rekhter, "Signalling Unnumbered Links
              in Resource ReSerVation Protocol - Traffic Engineering
              (RSVP-TE)", RFC 3477, January 2003.

   [RFC3630]  Katz, D., Kompella, K., and D. Yeung, "Traffic Engineering
              (TE) Extensions to OSPF Version 2", RFC 3630,
              September 2003.

   [RFC4203]  Kompella, K. and Y. Rekhter, "OSPF Extensions in Support
              of Generalized Multi-Protocol Label Switching (GMPLS)",
              RFC 4203, October 2005.

11.2.  Informative References

   [CL-REQ]   C. Villamizar, "Requirements for MPLS Over a Composite
              Link", draft-ietf-rtgwg-cl-requirement-04 .

   [DELAY-LOSS-RSVP-TE]
              X. Fu, "RSVP-TE extensions for Delay and Loss Traffic
              Engineering", draft-fuxh-mpls-delay-loss-rsvp-te-ext-01 .

   [EXPRESS-PATH]
              A. Atlas, "Performance-based Path Selection for Explicitly



Fu, et al.              Expires October 13, 2012               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft        Link Latency, Jitter and Loss           April 2012


              Routed LSPs", draft-atlas-mpls-te-express-path-00 .

   [G.709]    ITU-T Recommendation G.709, "Interfaces for the Optical
              Transport Network (OTN)", December 2009.

   [ISIS-TE-EXPRESS-PATH]
              S. Previdi, "IS-IS Traffic Engineering (TE) Metric
              Extensions", draft-ietf-ospf-te-metric-extensions-00 .

   [MPLS-TP-USE-CASE]
              L. Fang, "MPLS-TP Applicability; Use Cases and Design",
              draft-ietf-mpls-tp-use-cases-and-design-01 .

   [OSPF-TE-EXPRESS-PATH]
              S. Giacalone, "OSPF Traffic Engineering (TE) Metric
              Extensions", draft-ietf-ospf-te-metric-extensions-00 .

   [Y.1731]   ITU-T Recommendation Y.1731, "OAM functions and mechanisms
              for Ethernet based networks", Feb 2008.

   [ietf-mpls-loss-delay]
              D. Frost, "Packet Loss and Delay Measurement for MPLS
              Networks", draft-ietf-mpls-loss-delay-03 .


Authors' Addresses

   Xihua Fu
   ZTE

   Email: fu.xihua@zte.com.cn


   Vishwas Manral
   Hewlett-Packard Corp.
   191111 Pruneridge Ave.
   Cupertino, CA  95014
   US

   Phone: 408-447-1497
   Email: vishwas.manral@hp.com
   URI:









Fu, et al.              Expires October 13, 2012               [Page 14]

Internet-Draft        Link Latency, Jitter and Loss           April 2012


   Dave McDysan
   Verizon

   Email: dave.mcdysan@verizon.com


   Andrew Malis
   Verizon

   Email: andrew.g.malis@verizon.com


   Spencer Giacalone
   Thomson Reuters
   195 Broadway
   New York, NY  10007
   US

   Phone: 646-822-3000
   Email: spencer.giacalone@thomsonreuters.com
   URI:


   Malcolm Betts
   ZTE

   Email: malcolm.betts@zte.com.cn


   Qilei Wang
   ZTE

   Email: wang.qilei@zte.com.cn


   John Drake
   Juniper Networks

   Email: jdrake@juniper.net












Fu, et al.              Expires October 13, 2012               [Page 15]

