Network Working Group                           X. Fu(Ed.), M. Betts, Q.
                                                                    Wang
Internet Draft                                                       ZTE
Intended Status: Informational                                 V. Manral
Expires: April 14, 2013                            Hewlett-Packard Corp.
                                               D. McDysan(Ed.), A. Malis
                                                                 Verizon
                                                            S. Giacalone
                                                         Thomson Reuters
                                                                J. Drake
                                                        Juniper Networks

                                                        October 15, 2012

        Delay and Loss Traffic Engineering Problem Statement for MPLS

              draft-fuxh-mpls-delay-loss-te-problem-statement-01

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering Task
   Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that other groups
   may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference material
   or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html

   This Internet-Draft will expire on February 27, 2013.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2012 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the document
   authors. All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal Provisions
   Relating to IETF Documents (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in
   effect on the date of publication of this document. Please review these
   documents carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with
   respect to this document. Code Components extracted from this document
   must include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.





McDysan                 Expires April 14, 2013                 [Page 1]

   Abstract

   Deployment and usage of cloud based applications and services that use
   an underlying MPLS network are expanding and an increasing number of
   applications are extremely sensitive to delay and packet loss.
   Furthermore, in cloud computing an additional decision problem arises of
   simultaneously choosing the data center to host applications along with
   MPLS network connectivity such that the overall performance of the
   application is met. Mechanisms exist to measure and monitor MPLS path
   performance parameters for packet loss and delay, but the mechanisms
   work only after the path has been setup. The cloud-based and performance
   sensitive applications would benefit from measurement of MPLS network
   and potential path information that would be provided for use in the
   computation before LSP setup and then the selection of LSPs.

   This document provides a statement of problems faced by these cloud
   based and performance sensitive applications and describes requirements
   to enable the efficient and accurate measurement of the MPLS network.
   This also allows new performance parameters to be reported and used in
   the computation of MPLS services in support of these cloud based and
   performance sensitive applications.

Table of Contents

   1. Introduction...................................................3
      1.1. Scope.....................................................3
   2. Conventions used in this document..............................3
      2.1. Acronyms..................................................3
      2.2. Terminology and Assumptions...............................4
         2.2.1. Delay................................................4
         2.2.2. Packet Loss..........................................4
         2.2.3. Packet Delay Variation...............................5
   3. Motivation and Background......................................5
      3.1. General Characteristics of Performance Parameters.........5
      3.2. Use Cases for Performance Parameter Sensitive LSP Placement5
   4. Problem Statement..............................................6
      4.1. End-to-end Measurement Insufficient for Performance Sensitive
      LSP Path Selection.............................................6
      4.2. Lower Layer MPLS Networks Unable to Communicate Significant
      Performance Changes............................................7
      4.3. No Method to Communicate Significant Node/Link Performance
      Changes........................................................7
      4.4. Routing Metrics Insufficient for Performance Sensitive Path
      Selection......................................................7
      4.5. LSP Signaling Methods Insufficient for Performance Sensitive
      Path Selection.................................................8
   5. Functional Requirements........................................8
      5.1. Augment LSP Requestor Signaling with Performance Parameter
      Values.........................................................8
      5.2. Specify Criteria for Node and Link Performance Parameter
      Estimation, Measurement Methods................................9
      5.3. Support Node Level Performance Information when Needed....9
      5.4. Augment Routing Information with Performance Parameter Estimates
      ..............................................................10
      5.5. Augment Signaling Information with Concatenated Estimates10


Fu et al                Expires April 14, 2013                 [Page 2]

      5.6. Define Significant Performance Parameter Change Thresholds and
      Frequency.....................................................10
      5.7. Define Thresholds and Timers for Links with Unusable Performance
      ..............................................................11
      5.8. Communicate Significant Performance Changes between Layers11
      5.9. The above requirement applies to layering with different
      technologies (e.g., MPLS over OTN) or to different levels within the
      same technology (e.g., hierarchical LSPs).....................11
      5.10. Support for Networks with Composite Link................11
      5.11. Restoration, Protection and Rerouting...................11
      5.12. Management and Operational Requirements.................12
   6. IANA Considerations...........................................12
   7. Security Considerations.......................................12
   8. References....................................................12
      8.1. Normative References.....................................12
      8.2. Informative References...................................12
   9. Acknowledgments...............................................13

1. Introduction

   This draft is one of two created from draft-fuxh-mpls-delay-loss-te-
   framework-05 in response to comments from an MPLS Review Team (RT). This
   draft focuses on a problem statement and requirements, for delay and
   loss based Traffic Engineering for MPLS networks. A peer document
   focuses on the framework.

   The intent of this document is to focus on stating the technical aspects
   of the application oriented problems to be solved and specific
   requirements targeted to solve these problems.

   It describes requirements and application needs for bounded values of
   delay, packet loss and delay variation.

1.1. Scope

   A (G)MPLS network may have multiple layers of packet, TDM and/or optical
   network technology and an important objective is to make a prediction of
   end-to-end delay, loss and delay variation based upon the current state
   of this network with acceptable accuracy before an LSP is established.

   The (G)MPLS network may cover a single IGP area/level, may be a
   hierarchical IGP under control of a single administrator, or may involve
   multiple domains under control of multiple administrators.

2. Conventions used in this document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [RFC2119].

2.1.  Acronyms

   SLA Service Level Agreement

   SLS Service Level Specification


Fu et al                Expires April 14, 2013                 [Page 3]

   NPO Network Performance Objective

2.2. Terminology and Assumptions

   A Service Level Agreement (SLA) is a contractual agreement that service
   providers have with customers for services comprised of numerical values
   for performance measures; for example, delay, loss and delay variation.
   Additionally, network operators may have Service Level Specification
   (SLS) that is for internal use by the operator. See [ITU-T.Y.1540],
   [ITU-T.Y.1541], RFC 3809, Section 4.9 [RFC3809] for examples of the form
   of such SLA and SLS specifications.

   Network Performance Objective (NPO) is defined in section 5 of [ITU-
   T.Y.1541] in terms of numerical values for performance measures,
   principally delay, loss, and delay variation. The term NPO is used in
   this document since the SLA and SLS measures have network operator and
   service specific implications. Furthermore, the NPO measures are
   sufficiently well defined to address other use cases and the stated
   problems.

   Of particular interest is the composition methods defined in Y.1541 for
   estimating performance parameters of candidate LSP paths based upon the
   performance parameter estimates/measurements of individual nodes and
   links.

   This document assumes that the evaluation interval for a performance
   parameter is on the order of minutes as stated in [ITU-T Y.1541, 5.3.2],
   which is the same of that used in some commercial networks.

2.2.1. Delay

   Section 6.2.1 of [ITU-T Y.1540] defines mean IP Packet Transfer Delay
   (IPTD) as the arithmetic average of the one-way delay observed between
   measurement points IPTD is referred to as "delay" in this document.

   Section 8.2.1 of [ITU-T Y.1541] defines composition of the IPTD UNI-UNI
   performance parameter as "the mean IP packet transfer delay (IPTD)
   performance parameter, the UNI-UNI performance is the sum of the means
   contributed by network sections."

2.2.2. Packet Loss

   Section 6.4 of [ITU-T Y.1540] defines IP Packet Loss Ratio (IPLR) as the
   "ratio of total lost IP packet outcomes to total transmitted IP packets
   in a population of interest," which is referred to as "loss" in this
   document.

   Section 8.2.2 of [ITU-T Y.1541] defines composition of the IPLR UNI-UNI
   performance parameter as "may be estimated by inverting the probability
   of successful packet transfer across n network sections."







Fu et al                Expires April 14, 2013                 [Page 4]

2.2.3. Packet Delay Variation

   Section 6.2.4.2 of [ITU-T Y.1540] defines quantile-based limits on IP
   Packet Delay Variation (IPDV), which is referred to as "delay variation"
   in this document.

   Section 8.2.4 of [ITU-T Y.1541] defines composition of the IPDV UNI-UNI
   performance parameter as "must recognize their sub-additive nature and
   it is difficult to estimate accurately without considerable information
   about the individual delay distributions." Appendix IV of [ITU-T Y.1541]
   gives several examples of IPDV estimate calculations.

3. Motivation and Background

3.1. General Characteristics of Performance Parameters

   In general, nodes and links contribute to the performance parameters in
   the network.Another significant contributor is that of the host stack,
   but that is outside the scope of this document.

   For many applications, the delay NPO is very important. In networks with
   wide geographic separation, propagation delay may dominate delay, while
   in local or metro networks nodal delay may become important.

   Some link technologies (e.g., wireless, wifi, satellite) may have packet
   loss characteristics inherently different from those of other link
   technologies(e.g., fiber optic, cable) networks. Packet loss can be
   caused due to signal degradation/ high noise, which causes corrupted
   packets which in turn are discarded in the network. Furthermore, the
   loading of queues (congestion) may also result in packet loss.

   Delay variation (sometimes also referred to as packet jitter) is
   important to some applications, such as interactive voice, video and/or
   multimedia communication, gaming, and simulations. If delay varies too
   much, then a playback buffer for such applications may underflow or
   overflow, resulting in a disruption to the application. Delay variation
   is caused primarily by queuing within a node. It can also be caused when
   packets take different paths, due to lower layer routing.

3.2. Use Cases for Performance Parameter Sensitive LSP Placement

   In High Frequency trading for Electronic Financial markets, computers
   make decisions based on the Electronic Data received, without human
   intervention.  These trades now account for a majority of the trading
   volumes and rely exclusively on ultra-low-delay direct market access.
   In certain networks, such as financial information networks (e.g. stock
   market data providers), network performance information (e.g. delay) is
   critical to data path selection. In these networks, extremely large
   amounts of money rest on the ability to access market data as quickly as
   possible and to predictably make trades faster than the competition.
   Using metrics such as hop count or link cost as routing may not always
   meet this need. In such networks it would be beneficial to be able to
   make path selection decisions based on performance data (such as delay)
   in a cost-effective and scalable way.



Fu et al                Expires April 14, 2013                 [Page 5]

   In other networks, for example, network-based VPNs there are in place
   between a customer and a provider a Service Level Agreement (SLA) which
   specifies performance objectives, such as delay, loss, and delay
   variation. In some cases these performance objectives are defined
   between specific customer locations. Furthermore, packets may be
   associated with certain classes as identified by packet header fields
   (e.g., IP DSCP, IEEE P-bits, MPLS TC bits) that are associated with
   different performance objectives. In these types of networks, the
   objective is to provide service that is no worse than the performance
   objective.  A single SLA may support many customers of the same type.
   There is also a need to support specific SLAs, typically for very large
   customers who demand premium performance for which they are willing to
   pay a premium price.

   In emerging cloud-based services, an additional decision problem where
   the application may be placed in a choice of more than one data center
   and the (G)MPLS network connectivity may also be chosen [CLO, CSO]. In
   these types of applications, the objective so to meet the overall
   performance of the application deployed in one more or more data
   centers.  The performance of the intra- data center performance
   component is out of scope of this draft, but this overall cloud plus
   networking decision problem would benefit from a prediction of the MPLS
   network performance as part of path establishment.

4. Problem Statement

   With the use cases in the previous section as motivation, there are
   several technical problems that currently standardized IETF protocols do
   not adequately address:

   o  End-to-end Measurement Insufficient for Performance Sensitive LSP
      Path

   o  Routing Metrics Insufficient for Performance Sensitive Path Selection

   o  LSP Signaling Methods Insufficient for Performance Sensitive Path
      Selection

   o  Lower Layer MPLS Networks Unable to Communicate Significant
      Performance Changes

   o  No Method to Communicate Significant Node/Link Performance Changes

   The following sections expand on each of these technical problem areas
   in more detail. Although some of the problem statements are made in
   terms of existing/proposed protocols, there is no intention to imply
   that the solution requires a revision to these protocols.

4.1. End-to-end Measurement Insufficient for Performance Sensitive LSP Path
   Selection

   Methods exist to measure established LSP performance, e.g., [RFC 6374]
   for MPLS-TP, and are most useful in verifying support for an NPO. RFC
   6374 specifies a mechanism to measure and monitor performance parameters
   for packet loss, and one-way and two-way delay, delay variation and


Fu et al                Expires April 14, 2013                 [Page 6]

   throughput. However, if measured performance is not met for an LSP there
   is not a standardized method to aid in an LSP originator or a proxy
   (e.g., PCE) to select a modified path that would meet the performance
   objective.

   Therefore, there is a need to enable path computation that has access to
   an up to date recent performance estimate.

4.2. Lower Layer MPLS Networks Unable to Communicate Significant
   Performance Changes

   Historically, when an IP/MPLS network was operated over a lower layer
   circuit switched network (e.g., SONET rings), a change in delay caused
   by the lower layer network (e.g., due to a maintenance action or
   failure) this was not known to the MPLS network. This resulted in delay
   affecting end user experience, sometimes violating NPO, SLS and/or SLA
   values and/or resulting in user complaints.

   Using lower layer networks to provide restoration and grooming may be
   more efficient than performing packet only restoration, but the
   inability to communicate performance parameters, in particular delay,
   from the lower layer network to the higher layer network is an important
   problem to be solved in not only the composite link case [CL-REQ,
   section 4.2], but also in the case of single links connecting nodes.

   In summary, Multi-layer GMPLS networks do not have a means to
   communicate a significant change in performance (e.g., delay) from one
   layer to another.

4.3. No Method to Communicate Significant Node/Link Performance Changes

   Performance characteristics of links and nodes may change dynamically in
   response to a number of events.  There is currently no way to
   automatically indicate which nodes and/or links have had significant
   performance changes to LSP originators or proxies so that they can
   attempt to recompute and signal a path that would meet the LSP
   performance objective.

4.4. Routing Metrics Insufficient for Performance Sensitive Path Selection

   Optimization on a single metric does not meet the needs for all cases of
   performance sensitive path selection. In some cases, minimizing delay
   relates directly to the best customer experience (e.g., in TCP closer is
   faster or in financial trading the absolute minimum delay possible
   provides a competitive advantage).  In other cases, user experience is
   relatively insensitive to delay, up to a specific limit at which point
   user perception of quality degrades significantly (e.g., interactive
   human voice and multimedia conferencing).  A number of NPOs have a bound
   on point-point delay, and as long as this bound is met, the NPO is met -
   - decreasing the delay is not necessary.  In some NPOs, if the specified
   delay is not met, the user considers the service as unavailable.  An
   unprotected LSP can be manually provisioned on a set of links to meet
   this type of NPO, but this lowers availability since an alternate route
   that meets the delay NPO cannot be determined.



Fu et al                Expires April 14, 2013                 [Page 7]

   One operational approach is to provision IP/MPLS networks over
   unprotected circuits and set the metric and/or TE-metric proportional to
   delay.  This resulted in traffic being directed over the least delay
   path, even if this was not needed to meet an NPO or user experience
   objectives.  This results in reduced flexibility and increased cost for
   network operators.  However, the (TE) metric is often used to represent
   other information, such as link speed, economic cost or in support of
   ECMP (as described below) and may not be able to be set to be
   proportional to delay. Furthermore, if performance metrics such as loss
   and delay variation are to be supported in path selection, then
   proportional mapping is not possible.

   Link attributes and LSP affinities [RFC 3209] can be used operationally
   to encode some information regarding performance, for example,
   indicating wired versus wireless, satellite versus terrestrial, etc.
   However, these attributes/affinities are used to encode other attributes
   and the 32 bit format is limiting in terms of numerical representation
   of performance objective parameters.

   Another operational approach is to set (TE) metrics to (nearly) the same
   value so that LSPs are placed across multiple links using Equal Cost
   Multi-Path (ECMP) path selection.  However, these parallel links may
   have markedly different performance characteristics (e.g., delay) and
   choice of a link that meets the performance objective is needed [CL-REQ,
   section 4.3].

   IGP link and TE metrics are not sufficient to support performance
   sensitive path selection in a single IGP area/level [EXPRESS-PATH].

4.5. LSP Signaling Methods Insufficient for Performance Sensitive Path
   Selection

   Current signaling approaches do not support inter area/level or inter-
   domain performance sensitive path selection.  There is no standard for
   setting link attributes and LSP resource affinities [RFC 3209] between
   administrative domains, and since these have been used within some
   domains they are not a viable candidate to solve the aforementioned
   problems in this context. Augmenting an IGP with performance information
   does not solve the problem in these cases.

   What is needed is a means for the originator/proxy of an LSP to confirm
   whether the estimated performance of a computed LSP path will meet the
   performance objective.

5. Functional Requirements

   This section groups functional requirements intended to address the
   problems stated in the previous section into related areas.

5.1. Augment LSP Requestor Signaling with Performance Parameter Values

   The solution needs to provide a means for an LSP requestor to signal
   performance parameter sensitive paths. The following requirements state
   the types of requests that are required.



Fu et al                Expires April 14, 2013                 [Page 8]

   The solution MUST provide a means to indicate which performance
   parameters are supported by the network area/level or domain.

   The solution MUST provide a means for the LSP requestor to ask for the
   minimum possible value for each supported performance parameter.

   For example, an LSP requestor may ask for an LSP that has the minimum
   possible value of delay.

   The solution MUST provide a means for the LSP requestor to ask for a
   range of acceptable values for each supported performance parameter.

   For example, an LSP requestor may ask for an LSP that has performance
   between a minimum value of delay and packet loss and a maximum value of
   delay and packet.

5.2. Specify Criteria for Node and Link Performance Parameter Estimation,
   Measurement Methods

   The solution MUST provide a means to configure the one-way link and node
   performance parameters for delay, loss and delay variation.

   The solution SHOULD provide a means to dynamically measure and/or
   estimate the one-way link and node performance parameters for delay,
   loss and delay variation.

   As defined in section 2.2. , the estimation interval for the performance
   parameters is assumed to be on the order of minutes. The solution MUST
   not impact stability nor significantly increase convergence time if
   performance parameters change over a timeframe on the order of minutes.

5.3. Support Node Level Performance Information when Needed

   There are several scenarios under which node-related performance
   parameters (delay, loss, delay variation) has a different level of
   importance:

   1. The case of few nodes with large geographic separation, (e.g.,trans-
      oceanic), where link delay alone would be a good approximation.

   2. The case of many nodes with small geographic separation (e.g.,
      interconnected nearby data centers) where node/device delay is very
      important but link delay may be negligible.

   3. The case of some number of nodes with medium geographic separation,
      where usage of both link and node delay may be desirable.

   The intent in case 1 is to measure the predominant delay in uncongested
   service provider networks, where geographic delay dominates and is on
   the order of milliseconds or more.  The argument in cases 2 and 3 for
   including node-level queuing performance parameters is that it better
   represents the performance experienced by applications.  The argument
   against including queuing related performance parameters is that it if
   used in routing decisions it can result in routing instability. This
   tradeoff is discussed in detail in [CL-FW, Section 4.1.1].


Fu et al                Expires April 14, 2013                 [Page 9]

   The solution MUST define methods to include node level performance
   estimate information to routing protocols.

   The solution MUST define methods to include node level performance
   estimate information to signaling protocols.

   A specific deployment of the solution MAY choose to not use the node
   level performance estimates.

5.4. Augment Routing Information with Performance Parameter Estimates

   The solution MUST provide a means to communicate performance parameters
   of both links and nodes as an estimate for use in performance sensitive
   LSP path selection within nodes of a single IGP area/level.

   The solution SHOULD provide a means to communicate delay, loss and delay
   variation of links and nodes as a traffic engineering performance
   parameter for use in performance sensitive LSP path selection across a
   set of nodes in a hierarchy of IGP areas/levels.

5.5. Augment Signaling Information with Concatenated Estimates

   The solution MUST provide a means to signal concatenated performance
   parameter estimates for both links and nodes as an estimate for use in
   performance sensitive LSP path selection traversing two or more separate
   administrative domains. See the terminology section for references on
   the concatenation method for specific performance parameters.

   For example, the solution needs to support the capability to compute a
   route with X amount of bandwidth with less than Y ms of delay and less
   than Z% loss across multiple domains.

   The solution MUST support the means to concatenate performance parameter
   estimates and report this for each traversed domain on the end-end path

   The solution MUST interoperate with existing path selection and
   signaling methods traversing multiple domains.

5.6. Define Significant Performance Parameter Change Thresholds and
   Frequency

   Delay, loss and delay variation measurements and/or estimates may be
   time varying.  The solution MUST provide a means to control the
   advertisement rate of performance parameter estimates to avoid
   instability.

   Any automatic LSP routing and/or load balancing solutions MUST NOT
   oscillate such that performance observed by users changes such that an
   NPO is violated.  Since oscillation may cause reordering, there MUST be
   means to control the frequency of changing the path over which an LSP is
   placed.






Fu et al                Expires April 14, 2013                [Page 10]

5.7. Define Thresholds and Timers for Links with Unusable Performance

   The solution MUST provide a means to configure a performance parameter
   threshold which defines placement of a node or link into an unusable
   state.  The solution MUST provide a means to configure a performance
   parameter threshold which defines transition of a node or a link from an
   unusable state to a useable state.  The solution MUST provide a means to
   control the minimum transition time between these states.

   This unusable state is intended to operate on a link/node capability
   basis and not a global basis.  Since state transition conditions are
   locally configured, all routers within a domain should synchronize this
   configuration value.

   With current TE protocols, a refreshed LSP would use the most recent
   performance parameter estimates and may be rerouted based upon nodes or
   links being placed in an unusable performance state.  Section 5.11.
   defines requirements for a desirable function where performance
   sensitive LSP re-routing would occur.

5.8. Communicate Significant Performance Changes between Layers

   In order to support network NPOs and provide acceptable user experience,
   the solution MUST specify a protocol means to allow a lower layer server
   network to communicate performance parameters (e.g., delay, loss, delay
   variation) to the higher layer client network.

5.9. The above requirement applies to layering with different technologies
   (e.g., MPLS over OTN) or to different levels within the same technology
   (e.g., hierarchical LSPs).

5.10. Support for Networks with Composite Link

   An LSP may traverse a network with Composite Links [CL-REQ]. The
   solution's selection of performance sensitive paths SHOULD be compatible
   with the general availability, stability and transient response
   requirements of [CL-REQ, Section 4.1].

   When an LSP traverses a network with composite links that has component
   links provided by lower layer networks, the solution MUST interoperate
   with the requirements [CL-REQ, Section 4.2].

   When an LSP traverses a network with composite links that has parallel
   component links with different characteristics, the solution MUST
   interoperate with the requirements [CL-REQ, Section 4.3].

5.11. Restoration, Protection and Rerouting

   The ability to re-route an LSP if one or more NPO objectives are not met
   is highly desirable.  The solution SHOULD support the capability to
   configure an LSP as capable of implementing performance sensitive re-
   routing, as detailed in the following conditional requirements.





Fu et al                Expires April 14, 2013                [Page 11]

   If performance sensitive re-routing is implemented, the solution MUST
   provide a means to configure performance parameter threshold crossing
   and time values.

   If performance sensitive re-routing is implemented, the solution MUST
   support a configuration option to move an end-to-end LSP away from any
   link or node whose performance violates the configured threshold.

   If implemented, the solution MUST provide a means to control the
   frequency of LSP rerouting to avoid instability.

   If performance sensitive re-routing is implemented, and revertive
   behavior to a preferred LSP is supported, then the preferred LSP MUST
   not be released.  When the end-to-end performance of the preferred LSP
   becomes acceptable, the service is restored to this preferred LSP.

   The delay performance of pre-defined protection or dynamic reroutable
   LSP MUST be defined by the solution in terms of the maximum acceptable
   delay difference between the primary and protection/restoration path
   MUST be specifiable in the solution.  For example, [MPLS-TP-USE-CASE]
   defines a Relative Delay Time which is the difference of the Absolute
   Delay between the primary and protection path.

5.12. Management and Operational Requirements

   Existing management and diagnostic protocols MUST be able to operate
   over networks supporting performance sensitive LSP placement.

   If performance sensitive re-routing is implemented, and end-to-end
   measurements of the LSP performance are made, then the LSP requestor is
   able to request path placement for a performance sensitive LSP using the
   previously stated requirements.  Since a threshold crossing of the end-
   to-end performance measurement may or may not correspond to a change in
   the concatenated performance parameter estimates, making any automatic
   decision on this basis MUST not create instability.

6. IANA Considerations

   No new IANA consideration are raised by this document.

7. Security Considerations

   This document raises no new security issues.

8. References

8.1. Normative References

   [RFC2119] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
             Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

8.2. Informative References

   [CL-UC]  C. Villamizer et al, "Composite Link Use Cases and Design
             Considerations," draft-ietf-rtgwg-cl-use-cases-01


Fu et al                Expires April 14, 2013                [Page 12]

   [CL-REQ]  C. Villamizar et al, "Requirements for MPLS Over a Composite
             Link", draft-ietf-rtgwg-cl-requirement-08 .

   [CL-FW] C. Villamizar et al, "Composite Link Framework in Multi Protocol
             Label Switching (MPLS)", work in progress

   [ITU-T.Y.1540] ITU-T, "Internet protocol data communication service - IP
             packet transfer and availability performance parameters",
             2011, <http://www.itu.int/rec/T-REC-Y.1540/en>.

   [ITU-T.Y.1541] ITU-T, "Network performance objectives for IP-based
             services", 2011, <http://www.itu.int/rec/T-REC-Y.1541/en>.

   [RFC3809]  Nagarajan, A., "Generic Requirements for Provider Provisioned
             Virtual Private Networks (PPVPN)", RFC 3809, June 2004.

   [CLO]    Young Lee et al, "Problem Statement for Cross-Layer
             Optimization," work in progress.

   [CSO]    Greg Bernstein, Young Lee, "Cross Stratum Optimization Use-
             cases," work in progress.

   [EXPRESS-PATH] A. Atlas, "Performance-based Path Selection for
             Explicitly Routed LSPs", work in progress.

   [RFC3209]  Awduche, D., Berger, L., Gan, D., Li, T., Srinivasan, V., and
             G. Swallow, "RSVP-TE: Extensions to RSVP for LSP Tunnels", RFC
             3209, December 2001.

   [MPLS-TP-USE-CASE] L. Fang, "MPLS-TP Applicability; Use Cases and
             Design", draft-ietf-mpls-tp-use-cases-and-design-01 .

9. Acknowledgments

   This document was prepared using 2-Word-v2.0.template.dot.

   The authors would like to thank the MPLS Review Team of Stewart Bryant,
   Daniel King and He Jia for their many helpful comments suggestions in
   July 2012.

   Copyright (c) 2012 IETF Trust and the persons identified as authors of
   the code. All rights reserved.

   THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS
   IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
   TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A
   PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT OWNER
   OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL,
   EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO,
   PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR
   PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF
   LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING
   NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS
   SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.



Fu et al                Expires April 14, 2013                [Page 13]

   This code was derived from IETF RFC [insert RFC number]. Please
   reproduce this note if possible.

Authors' Addresses

   Xihua Fu
   ZTE
   Email: fu.xihua@zte.com.cn

   Vishwas Manral
   Hewlett-Packard Corp.
   191111 Pruneridge Ave.
   Cupertino, CA  95014
   US
   Phone: 408-447-1497
   Email: vishwas.manral@hp.com

   Dave McDysan
   Verizon
   Email: dave.mcdysan@verizon.com

   Andrew Malis
   Verizon
   Email: andrew.g.malis@verizon.com

   Spencer Giacalone
   Thomson Reuters
   195 Broadway
   New York, NY  10007
   US
   Phone: 646-822-3000
   Email: spencer.giacalone@thomsonreuters.com

   Malcolm Betts
   ZTE
   Email: malcolm.betts@zte.com.cn

   Qilei Wang
   ZTE
   Email: wang.qilei@zte.com.cn

   John Drake
   Juniper Networks
   Email: jdrake@juniper.net













Fu et al                Expires April 14, 2013                [Page 14]

