


Network Working Group                                              X. Fu
Internet-Draft                                                    Y. Bao
Intended status: Informational                           ZTE Corporation
Expires: September 2, 2010                                       Y. Zhao
                                                                J. Zhang
                                                                    BUPT
                                                           March 1, 2010


 A Dual-end Recursive PCE-based Computation (DRPC) Procedure to Compute
  Shortest Constrained Inter-domain Traffic Engineering Label Switched
                                 Paths
                         draft-fuxh-pce-drpc-00

Abstract

   A dual-end recursive PCE-based computation procedure (DRPC) is
   proposed to compute shortest constrained inter-domain traffic
   engineering label switched paths based on BRPC in Multi-protocol
   Label Switching (MPLS) and Generalized MPLS (GMPLS) networks.  Path
   computation is launched at the source PCE and the destination PCE
   simultaneously.  Then two shortest path graphs are generated at the
   middle PCE, which are stitched into a shortest path directional graph
   last.  Therefore, the end-to-end constrained inter-domain traffic
   engineering label switched path, even k shortest paths can be gained
   from the shortest path directional graph directly.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.




Fu, et al.              Expires September 2, 2010               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft               DRPC Procedure                   March 2010


   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 2, 2010.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the BSD License.



































Fu, et al.              Expires September 2, 2010               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft               DRPC Procedure                   March 2010


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.1.  Conventions Used in This Document  . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Terminologies  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   3.  General Assumptions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   4.  DRPC Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     4.1.  PCE Sequence Selection Approaches  . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     4.2.  DRPC Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   5.  PCEP Protocol Extension Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   6.  VSPG Encoding  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   7.  DRPC Procedure Failures  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   8.  Path Computation Failures  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   9.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   10. IANA Consideration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     10.1. New Flags Of The RP Object . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     10.2. New Error-Type And Error-Value . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     10.3. New Flag Of The NO-PATH-VECTOR TLV . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   11. Acknowledgments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   12. Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13






























Fu, et al.              Expires September 2, 2010               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft               DRPC Procedure                   March 2010


1.  Introduction

   With regards to the constraint-based shortest path computation in
   Multi-protocol Label Switching (MPLS) and Generalized MPLS (GMPLS)
   multi-layer and multi-region networks, IETF groups propose the
   architecture of Path Computation Element (PCE) [RFC4655].  As an
   important approach of path computation in PCE architecture, backward
   recursive PCE-based computation (BRPC) procedure can gain a shortest
   path tree along the direction from the destination node to the source
   node, and then get an end-to-end shortest path [RFC5441].  During the
   procedure of BRPC, a PCE sequence should be pre-determined.
   Recently, a hierarchical PCE architecture is designed to determine
   the PCE sequence needed in BRPC procedure [I-D.ietf-pce-hierarchy-
   fwk].  However, when there is a large number of PCEs in the
   predetermined PCE sequence, the path computation time may be long for
   the customer, and the long PCE chain is more vulnerable.  A dual-end
   recursive PCE-based computation procedure (DRPC) is proposed to
   compute shortest constrained inter-domain traffic engineering label
   switched paths.  Path computation is launched at the source PCE and
   the destination PCE simultaneously.  Then two shortest path graphs
   are generated at the middle PCE, which are stitched into a shortest
   path directional graph last.  Therefore, the end-to-end constrained
   inter-domain traffic engineering label switched path, even the k
   shortest paths can be gained from the shortest path directional graph
   directly.  Only the differences from RFC5441 are listed here, the
   overlapped comment all inherit the corresponding terms in RFC5441,
   such as section 7, 8, 10, 11, 13, 14, 16, and so on.

1.1.  Conventions Used in This Document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].


2.  Terminologies

   ABR: Area Border Routers.  Routers used to connect two IGP areas
   (areas in OSPF or levels in IS-IS).

   ASBR: Autonomous System Border Routers.  Routers used to connect
   together ASes of the same or different Service Providers via one or
   more Inter-AS links.

   Boundary Node (BN): a boundary node is either an ABR in the context
   of inter-area Traffic Engineering or an ASBR in the context of
   inter-AS Traffic Engineering.




Fu, et al.              Expires September 2, 2010               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft               DRPC Procedure                   March 2010


   Entry BN of domain (n): a BN connecting domain (n-1) to domain (n)
   along a determined sequence of domains.

   Exit BN of domain (n): a BN connecting domain (n) to domain (n+1)
   along a determined sequence of domains.

   Inter-AS TE LSP: A TE LSP that crosses an AS boundary.  Inter-area TE
   LSP: A TE LSP that crosses an IGP area boundary.

   LSR: Label Switching Router.

   LSP: Label Switched Path.

   PCC: Path Computation Client.  Any client application requesting a
   path computation to be performed by the Path Computation Element.

   PCE (Path Computation Element): an entity (component, application or
   network node) that is capable of computing a network path or route
   based on a network graph and applying computational constraints.

   PCE(i): a PCE with the scope of domain (i).

   TED: Traffic Engineering Database.

   VSPT: Virtual Shortest Path Tree.

   VSPG: Virtual Shortest Path Graph.


3.  General Assumptions

   In the rest of this document, we make the following set of
   assumptions common to inter-area and inter-AS MPLS TE, which are same
   to the assumptions of [RFC 5441].

   o  Each IGP area or Autonomous System (AS) is assumed to be Traffic
      Engineering enabled.

   o  No topology or resource information is distributed between domains
      (as mandated per RFC4105 and RFC4216), which is critical to
      preserve IGP/BGP scalability and confidentiality.

   o  while certain constraints like bandwidth can be used across
      different domains, other TE constraints like resource affinity,
      color, metric, etc. as listed in RFC2702 could be translated at
      domain boundaries.  If required, it is assumed that, at the domain
      boundary nodes, there will exist some sort of local mapping based
      on policy agreement, in order to translate such constraints across



Fu, et al.              Expires September 2, 2010               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft               DRPC Procedure                   March 2010


      domain boundaries during the inter-PCE communication process.

   o  Each AS can be made of several IGP areas.  The path computation
      procedure described in this document applies to the case of a
      single AS made of multiple IGP areas, multiple ASes made of a
      single IGP area or any combination of the above.  For the sake of
      simplicity, each AS will be considered to be made of a single area
      in this document.  The case of an Inter-AS TE LSP spanning
      multiple ASes where some of those ASes are themselves made of
      multiple IGP areas can be easily derived from this case by
      applying the DRPC procedure described in this document,
      recursively.

   o  The domain path (set of domains traversed to reach the destination
      domain) is either administratively pre-determined or discovered by
      some means that is outside of the scope of this document.


4.  DRPC Procedure

4.1.  PCE Sequence Selection Approaches

   A PCE sequence has to be predetermined before DRPC procedure is
   launched, which corresponds to domain path selection.  With regards
   to the problem, a hierarchical PCE architecture is proposed
   [I-D.ietf-pce-hierarchy-fwk].  In the hierarchical PCE architecture,
   a Parent (hierarchical) PCE maintains a domain topology map.  The
   domain topology map contains the domains and their interconnections,
   but has no information about the contents of the domains.

   Each domain has a PCE responsible for computing paths across it.
   These PCEs are known as Child PCEs and have a relationship with the
   Parent PCE.  Each Child PCE also knows the identity of the domains
   that borders on its own domain.

   The Parent PCE learns from configuration or from each Child PCE how
   the domains are interconnected including the traffic engineering (TE)
   capabilities of domain interconnections, but does not know the
   contents of the domains.

   When the ingress PCE receives a path compuation request from the
   source node, and the destination is outside of the ingress domain,
   the ingress PCE will send a PCEP request to the parent PCE.  The
   parent PCE computes a domain path based on the current domain
   topology.  The Parent PCE selects candidate domain paths; it then
   sends computation requests and the PCE sequence information to the
   source PCE and the destination PCE on the PCE sequence.




Fu, et al.              Expires September 2, 2010               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft               DRPC Procedure                   March 2010


4.2.  DRPC Procedure

   Different from BRPC, when there is a path computation request
   arriving and the PCE sequence which will take part in the path
   computation has been fixed, DRPC will launch the path computation
   from dual-end PCE to the middle PCE.  According to the path
   computation request, the source PCE sparks the path computaion to the
   Entry BN of the middle domain. while, the destination PCE sparks the
   path computation to the the Entry BN of the domain next to the middle
   domain.  When the middle PCE receives the two messages which contain
   the two virtual shortest path graphs (VSPG) at the root of the source
   node and the destination node respectively, the middle PCE will
   stitch the two VSPGs into one complete shortest path directional
   graph.  At last, the shortest path or k shortest paths will be
   selected from the shortest path directional graph by the middle PCE
   according to some strategies and transferred to the source node
   through the source PCE.  Similar with BRPC, a pre-determined PCE
   sequence should also be designated before DRPC.

   The VSPG referred above is defined as follows.

   VSPG consists of multi shortest paths from the same node to other
   multi nodes.  In each domain i:

   o  There is a set of X-en(i) entry BNs noted BN-en(k,i) where BN-
      en(k,i) is the kth entry BN of domain(i).

   o  There is a set of X-ex(i) exit BNs noted BN-ex(k,i) where BN-
      ex(k,i) is the kth exit BN of domain(i).

   VSPG (0, i) is the shortest path directional graph returned by PCE
   (i) to PCE (i+1) along the direction from the source PCE to the
   destination PCE, which consists of multi shortest paths from the
   source node to multi BNs, as shown in Fig.1.  PCE (i) stitches the
   shortest path directional graph returned from the upstream PCE and
   the part shortest path directional graph computed by the local PCE
   into a new shortest path directional graph from the source node to
   the entry BNs of the next domain.  PCE(i) transfers the new shortest
   path directional graph to the downstream PCE with the path
   computation request.  The non-shortest paths are deleted during the
   path computation process.










Fu, et al.              Expires September 2, 2010               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft               DRPC Procedure                   March 2010


                         Root(TE LSP source)
                            /     |     \
                           /      |      \
                          /       |       \
                         /        |        \
                        /         |         \
                  BN-en(1,i+1)BN-en(2,i+1)...BN-en(j,i+1)

                   Figure 1: Forward shortest path graph

   VSPG (1, i) is the shortest path directional graph returned by PCE
   (i) to PCE (i-1) along the direction from the destination PCE to the
   source PCE, which consists of multi shortest paths from the
   destination node to multi BNs, as shown in Fig.2.  PCE (i) stitches
   the shortest path directional graph returned from the downstream PCE
   and the part shortest path directional graph computed by the local
   PCE into a new shortest path directional graph from the destination
   node to the exit BNs of the former domain.  PCE(i) transfers the new
   shortest path directional graph to the upstream PCE with the path
   computation request.  The non-shortest paths are deleted during the
   path computation process.


                           Root(TE LSP destination)
                              /     |     \
                             /      |      \
                            /       |       \
                           /        |        \
                          /         |         \
                    BN-en(1,i)  BN-en(2,i)...BN-en(j,i)

                  Figure 2: Backward shortest path graph

   Where [X-en(i)] is the number of entry BNs in domain i and j no large
   than [X-en(i)].

   VSPG=VSPG(0,i)+VSPG(1,i) is the shortest path directional graph from
   the source node to the destination node stitched by the two shortest
   path directional graph gained above.  The former represents the
   shortest path directional graph computed from source node to the
   Entry BN of the middle domain, and the later represents the shortest
   path directional graph computed from destination PCE to the Entry BN
   of the middle domain.  Or the former represents the shortest path
   directional graph computed from source node to the Entry BN of the
   domain next to the middle domain, and the later represents the
   shortest path directional graph computed from destination PCE to the
   Entry BN of the domain next to the middle domain.  In the first case,
   the middle PCE completes the VSPG(0,i) including the path computation



Fu, et al.              Expires September 2, 2010               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft               DRPC Procedure                   March 2010


   in the local domain, and then stitched the two shortest path
   directional graphs together.  In the second case, the middle PCE
   completes the VSPG(1,i) including the path computation in the local
   domain, and then stitched the two shortest path directional graphs
   together.  At last, the shortest path directional graph from the
   source node to the destination node is generated as shown in Fig.3.

   Each link of VSPG (0, i) represents the shortest constrained path TE
   LSP between BN-en(j, i+1) and the source node, which satisfies a set
   of constraints considering TE LSP, such as bandwidth and attributes.
   These are path segments to reach the source node from BN-en (j, i+1).

   Similarly, each link of VSPG (1, i) represents the shortest
   constrained path TE LSP between BN-en(j, i) and the destination node,
   which satisfies a set of constraints considering TE LSP, such as
   bandwidth and attributes.  These are path segments to reach the
   destination node from BN-en (j, i).


                               Root(TE LSP source)
                                 /        \
                                /          \
                               /            \
                           BN-en(1,i-1)...BN-en(j',i-1)
                           /    \      \  /  /   \
                          /      \      /\  /     \
                         /        \   /    X       \
                        /          X      /  \      \
                       /        /   \    /     \     \
                     BN-en(1,i) BN-en(2,i)...BN-en(j,i)
                       \      \    /  \      /  \
                        \       \ /    \   /     \
                         \       /\     \/        \
                          \     /   \  / \         \
                           \   /     /\   \         \
                            \ /    /    \  \         \
                          BN-en(1,i+1)...BN-en(j'',i+1)
                                 \           /
                                  \         /
                                   \       /
                             Root(TE LSP destination)

       Figure 3: Shortest path directional graph from source node to
                             destination node







Fu, et al.              Expires September 2, 2010               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft               DRPC Procedure                   March 2010


5.  PCEP Protocol Extension Requirements

   The two different DRPC procedures require the specification of new
   flags of the RP object carried within the PCReq message to specify
   that the shortest paths satisfying the constraints from the
   destination to the set of entry boundary nodes or from the source to
   the set of entry boundary nodes are requested.

   The following new flags of the RP object is defined:

     VSPG        Flags

     Bit Number  Name Flag

     23          VSPG

     24          0: from source PCE to middle PCE

                 1: from destination PCE to middle PCE

                 Bit 24 is valid under the assumption that bit 23 is
   valid

   When set, the VSPG Flags indicates that the PCC requests the
   computation of an inter-domain TE LSP using the DRPC procedure
   defined in this document.

   Because path segments computed by the two end PCEs in the context of
   the DRPC procedure must be provided along with their respective path
   costs, the C flag of the METRIC object carried within the PCReq
   message must be set.  It is the choice of the requester to
   appropriately set the O bit of the RP object.


6.  VSPG Encoding

   VSPG encoding objects must be contained in the PCRep request
   messages, which consist of a non-ordered list of EROs where each ERO
   represents a path segment from a BN to the destination node or the
   source node specified in the END-POINT object of the corresponding
   PCReq message.  Different from VSPT encoding in RFC5441, there are
   two kinds of objects in VSPG encoding, which are the path segment
   object from the BNs to the source, and the path segment object from
   the BNs to the destination.  Besides, some nodes can appear twice in
   the two objects.

   As shown in Fig.4, along the direction from the source node to the
   destination node, when PCE1 completes the path computation in the



Fu, et al.              Expires September 2, 2010              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft               DRPC Procedure                   March 2010


   local domain, three forward non-ordered EROs are transferred to PCE2.
   The three EROs are as follows:

   o  ERO_F1: S(TE Router ID)-A(Interface IP address)-B(Interface IP
      address)-ABRen2-1(TE Router ID)

   o  ERO_F2: S(TE Router ID)-C(Interface IP address)-ABRen2-2(TE Router
      ID)

   o  ERO_F3: S(TE Router ID)-ABRen2-3(TE Router ID)



                  PCE1              PCE2              PCE3
          -------area1-------|------area2-------|-----area3------
                  ---A---B---ABRen2-1     ABRen3-1---E---
                  |               |          |          |
                  S----C-----ABRen2-2     ABRen3-2------D
                  |               |          |          |
                  -----------ABRen2-3     ABRen3-3--F-G--

        Figure 4:  An Example of VSPG Encoding Using a Set of EROs

   Along the direction from the destination node to the source node,
   when PCE3 completes the path computation in the local domain, three
   backward non-ordered EROs are transferred to PCE2.  The three EROs
   are as follows:

   o  ERO_B1: ABRen3-1 (TE Router ID)-E(Interface IP address)-D(TE
      Router ID)

   o  ERO_B2: ABRen3-2 (TE Router ID)-D(TE Router ID)

   o  ERO_B3: ABRen3-3 (TE Router ID)-F(Interface IP address)-
      G(Interface IP address)-D(TE Router ID)


7.  DRPC Procedure Failures

   If the DRPC procedure cannot be completed because a PCE along the
   domain does not recognize the procedure (VSPG flag of the RP object),
   the PCE sends a PCErr message to the parent PCE with an Error-Type=4
   (not supported object), Error-value-4 (Unsupported parameter).  Then
   the parent PCE sends the failure message to the other PCEs along the
   PCE chain.  The corresponding path computation request is then
   cancelled by the PCE without further notification.  The PCErr message
   must be relayed to the requesting PCC by the source PCE.




Fu, et al.              Expires September 2, 2010              [Page 11]

Internet-Draft               DRPC Procedure                   March 2010


   PCEP-ERROR objects are used to report a PCEP protocol error and are
   characterized by an Error-Type which specifies the type of error and
   an Error-value that provides additional information about the error
   type.  Both the Error-Type and the Error-Value are managed by IANA.
   A new Error-Type and the corresponding error value are defined here.

     Error-type    Meaning

     14            DRPC procedure completion failure

                   Error-value

                   1: DRPC procedure not supported by one or more PCEs
   along the domain path


8.  Path Computation Failures

   If a PCE requires to relay a path computation request according to
   the DRPC procedure defined in this document to a downstream PCE and
   no such PCE is available, the PCE MUST cancel all the procedures of
   path computation on all the other PCEs along the PCE chain through
   the parent PCE, and send a path computation reply to the PCC using a
   PCReq message that contains a NO-PATH object.  In such case, the NO-
   PATH object MUST carry a NO-PATH-VECTOR TLV with the newly defined
   bit named "DRPC Path Computation chain unavailable" set.

   Different from BRPC, bit 5 is defined here.

     Bit number    Name Flag

     5             DRPC Path computation chain unavailable


9.  Security Considerations

   TBD.


10.  IANA Consideration

10.1.  New Flags Of The RP Object

   A new flag of the RP object is defined in this document, which
   contains 2 bits.

     VSPG        Flags




Fu, et al.              Expires September 2, 2010              [Page 12]

Internet-Draft               DRPC Procedure                   March 2010


     Bit Number  Name Flag                               Reference

     23          VSPG

     24          0: from source PCE to middle PCE        this document

                 1: from destination PCE to middle PCE

                 Bit 24 is valid under the assumption that bit 23 is
   valid

10.2.  New Error-Type And Error-Value

   A new Error-Type is defined in this document (Error-Type and Error-
   value to be assigned by IANA).

     Error-type    Meaning                               Reference

     14            DRPC procedure completion failure     this document

                   Error-value

                   1: DRPC procedure not supported by one or more PCEs
   along the domain path

10.3.  New Flag Of The NO-PATH-VECTOR TLV

   A new flag of the NO-PATH-VECTOR TLV defined in is specified in this
   document.

     Bit number    Name Flag                               Reference

     5             DRPC Path computation chain unavailable this document


11.  Acknowledgments

   The RFC text was produced using Marshall Rose's xml2rfc tool.


12.  Normative References

   [I-D.ietf-pce-hierarchy-fwk]
              King, D. and A. Farrel, "The Application of the Path
              Computation Element Architecture to the Determination of a
              Sequence of Domains in MPLS & GMPLS", December 2009.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFC's to Indicate



Fu, et al.              Expires September 2, 2010              [Page 13]

Internet-Draft               DRPC Procedure                   March 2010


              Requirement Levels", RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC4665]  Farrel, A., Vasseur, J., and J. Ash, "A Path Computation
              Element (PCE)-Based Architecture", RFC 4655, August 2006.

   [RFC5441]  Vasseur, J., Zhang, R., Bitar, N., and JL. Le Roux, "A
              Path Computation Element (PCE)-Based Architecture",
              RFC 5441, April 2009.


Authors' Addresses

   Xihua Fu
   ZTE Corporation
   West District,ZTE Plaza,No.10,Tangyan South Road,Gaoxin District
   Xi An  710065
   P.R.China

   Phone: +8613798412242
   Email: fu.xihua@zte.com.cn
   URI:   http://wwwen.zte.com.cn/


   Yuanlin Bao
   ZTE Corporation
   5F,R&D Building 3, ZTE Industrial Park, XiLi LiuXian Road
   Nanshan District,Shenzhen  518055
   P.R.China

   Phone: +86 755 26773731
   Email: bao.yuanlin@zte.com.cn
   URI:   http://wwwen.zte.com.cn/


   Yongli Zhao
   BUPT
   No.10,Xitucheng Road,Haidian District
   Beijing  100876
   P.R.China

   Phone: +8613811761857
   Email: yufengx386@gmail.com
   URI:   http://www.bupt.edu.cn/








Fu, et al.              Expires September 2, 2010              [Page 14]

Internet-Draft               DRPC Procedure                   March 2010


   Jie Zhang
   BUPT
   No.10,Xitucheng Road,Haidian District
   Beijing  100876
   P.R.China

   Phone: +8613911060930
   Email: lgr24@bupt.edu.cn
   URI:   http://www.bupt.edu.cn/










































Fu, et al.              Expires September 2, 2010              [Page 15]


