


Network Working Group                                             XH. Fu
Internet-Draft                                                   YL. Bao
Intended status: Informational                           ZTE Corporation
Expires: March 2, 2011                                          YL. Zhao
                                                                J. Zhang
                                                                    BUPT
                                                         August 29, 2010


 A Dual-end Recursive PCE-based Computation (DRPC) Procedure to Compute
  Shortest Constrained Inter-domain Traffic Engineering Label Switched
                                 Paths
                         draft-fuxh-pce-drpc-01

Abstract

   A dual-end recursive PCE-based computation procedure (DRPC) is
   proposed to compute shortest constrained inter-domain traffic
   engineering label switched paths based on BRPC in Multi-protocol
   Label Switching (MPLS) and Generalized MPLS (GMPLS) networks.  By
   recursively performing shortest path algorithm and transferring the
   segmental path computation result from both ends bi-directionally,
   they meet at one of the middle PCEs, generating a directional
   shortest path graph into which the two shortest path trees are
   stitched together.  Therefore, the end-to-end constrained inter-
   domain traffic engineering label switched path, even k shortest paths
   can be gained from the directional shortest path graph directly.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on March 2, 2011.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the



Fu, et al.                Expires March 2, 2011                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft               DRPC Procedure                  August 2010


   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.1.  Conventions Used in This Document  . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Terminologies  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   3.  General Assumptions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   4.  DRPC Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     4.1.  PCE Sequence Selection Approaches  . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     4.2.  DRPC Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     4.3.  Mode of Operation in Stitching PCE Selection by PCE
           Designation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     4.4.  Mode of Operation in Stitching PCE Selection via PCEP
           Signaling  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   5.  PCEP Protocol Extension Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   6.  VSPG Encoding  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   7.  DRPC Procedure Failures  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   8.  Path Computation Failures  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   9.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
   10. IANA Consideration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
     10.1. New Flags Of The RP Object . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
     10.2. New Error-Type And Error-Value . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
     10.3. New Flag Of The NO-PATH-VECTOR TLV . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
   11. Acknowledgments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
   12. Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18













Fu, et al.                Expires March 2, 2011                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft               DRPC Procedure                  August 2010


1.  Introduction

   With regards to the constraint-based shortest path computation in
   Multi-protocol Label Switching (MPLS) and Generalized MPLS (GMPLS)
   multi-layer and multi-domain networks, IETF groups propose the
   architecture of Path Computation Element (PCE) [RFC4655].  As an
   important approach of path computation in PCE architecture, backward
   recursive PCE-based computation (BRPC) procedure can gain a shortest
   path tree along the direction from the destination node to the source
   node, and then get an end-to-end shortest path [RFC5441].  During the
   procedure of BRPC, a PCE sequence should be pre-determined.
   Recently, a hierarchical PCE architecture is designed to determine
   the PCE sequence needed in BRPC procedure [I-D.ietf-pce-hierarchy-
   fwk].  However, when there is a large number of PCEs in the
   predetermined PCE sequence, the path computation time may be long for
   the customer, and the long PCE chain is more vulnerable.  A dual-end
   recursive PCE-based computation procedure (DRPC) is proposed to
   compute shortest constrained inter-domain traffic engineering label
   switched paths.  Path computation is launched at the source PCE and
   the destination PCE simultaneously.  By recursively performing
   shortest path algorithm and transferring the segmental path
   computation result from both ends bi-directionally, they meet at one
   of the middle PCEs, generating a directional shortest path graph into
   which the two shortest path trees are stitched together.  Therefore,
   the end-to-end constrained inter-domain traffic engineering label
   switched path, even the k shortest paths can be gained from the
   directional shortest path graph directly.  Only the differences from
   RFC5441 are listed here, the overlapped comments all inherit the
   corresponding terms in RFC5441, such as section 7, 8, 10, 11, 13, 14,
   16, and so on.

1.1.  Conventions Used in This Document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].


2.  Terminologies

   ABR: Area Border Routers.  Routers used to connect two IGP areas
   (areas in OSPF or levels in IS-IS).

   ASBR: Autonomous System Border Routers.  Routers used to connect
   together ASes of the same or different Service Providers via one or
   more Inter-AS links.

   Boundary Node (BN): a boundary node is either an ABR in the context



Fu, et al.                Expires March 2, 2011                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft               DRPC Procedure                  August 2010


   of inter-area Traffic Engineering or an ASBR in the context of
   inter-AS Traffic Engineering.

   Entry BN of domain (n): a BN connecting domain (n-1) to domain (n)
   along a determined sequence of domains.

   Exit BN of domain (n): a BN connecting domain (n) to domain (n+1)
   along a determined sequence of domains.

   Inter-AS TE LSP: A TE LSP that crosses an AS boundary.  Inter-area TE
   LSP: A TE LSP that crosses an IGP area boundary.

   LSR: Label Switching Router.

   LSP: Label Switched Path.

   PCC: Path Computation Client.  Any client application requesting a
   path computation to be performed by the Path Computation Element.

   PCE (Path Computation Element): an entity (component, application or
   network node) that is capable of computing a network path or route
   based on a network graph and applying computational constraints.

   PCE(i): a PCE with the scope of domain (i).

   TED: Traffic Engineering Database.

   VSPT: Virtual Shortest Path Tree.

   VSPG: Virtual Shortest Path Graph.

   Source PCE: the PCE in the source domain to launch the DRPC procedure
   and transfer the calculated VSPT forward.

   Destination PCE: the PCE in the destination domain to launch the DRPC
   procedure and transfer the calculated VSPT backward.

   Middle PCE: a PCE in the PCE sequence which is neither Source PCE nor
   Destination PCE.

   Stitching PCE: a PCE which is determined to stitch the two VSPTs from
   both source and destination sides of PCEs into a VSPG.

   Downstream: In forward direction, from Source PCE to Destination PCE.

   Upstream: In backward direction, from Destination PCE to Source PCE.





Fu, et al.                Expires March 2, 2011                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft               DRPC Procedure                  August 2010


3.  General Assumptions

   In the rest of this document, we make the following set of
   assumptions common to inter-area and inter-AS MPLS TE, which are same
   to the assumptions of [RFC 5441].

   o  Each IGP area or Autonomous System (AS) is assumed to be Traffic
      Engineering enabled.

   o  No topology or resource information is distributed between domains
      (as mandated per RFC4105 and RFC4216), which is critical to
      preserve IGP/BGP scalability and confidentiality.

   o  while certain constraints like bandwidth can be used across
      different domains, other TE constraints like resource affinity,
      color, metric, etc. as listed in RFC2702 could be translated at
      domain boundaries.  If required, it is assumed that, at the domain
      boundary nodes, there will exist some sort of local mapping based
      on policy agreement, in order to translate such constraints across
      domain boundaries during the inter-PCE communication process.

   o  Each AS can be made of several IGP areas.  The path computation
      procedure described in this document applies to the case of a
      single AS made of multiple IGP areas, multiple ASes made of a
      single IGP area or any combination of the above.  For the sake of
      simplicity, each AS will be considered to be made of a single area
      in this document.  The case of an Inter-AS TE LSP spanning
      multiple ASes where some of those ASes are themselves made of
      multiple IGP areas can be easily derived from this case by
      applying the DRPC procedure described in this document,
      recursively.

   o  The domain path (set of domains traversed to reach the destination
      domain) is either administratively pre-determined or discovered by
      some means that is outside of the scope of this document.


4.  DRPC Procedure

4.1.  PCE Sequence Selection Approaches

   PCE sequence has to be predetermined before DRPC procedure is
   launched, which corresponds to domain path selection.  The PCE/domain
   path may be either administratively predetermined or discovered by
   some means outside of the scope of this document.

   A hierarchical PCE architecture is highly recommended which is
   proposed in [I-D.ietf-pce-hierarchy-fwk].  In the hierarchical PCE



Fu, et al.                Expires March 2, 2011                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft               DRPC Procedure                  August 2010


   architecture, a Parent (hierarchical) PCE maintains a domain topology
   map.  The domain topology map contains the domains and their
   interconnections, but has no information about the contents of the
   domains.

   Each domain has a PCE responsible for computing paths across it.
   These PCEs are known as Child PCEs and have a relationship with the
   Parent PCE.  Each Child PCE also knows the identity of the border
   nodes and links of its adjacent domains

   The Parent PCE learns from configuration or from each Child PCE how
   the domains are interconnected including the traffic engineering (TE)
   capabilities of domain interconnections, but does not know the
   contents of the domains.

   When the ingress PCE receives a path computation request from the
   source node, and the destination is outside of the ingress domain,
   the ingress PCE will send a path computation request(PCReq Message)
   to the parent PCE.  The parent PCE computes a domain path based on
   the current domain topology.  The Parent PCE selects candidate domain
   paths; it then sends computation requests and the PCE sequence
   information to the source PCE and the destination PCE on the PCE
   sequence.

4.2.  DRPC Procedure

   Definition of VSPG(i), VSPT(0,i) and VSPT(1,i):

   VSPG(i) consists of multi shortest paths from the same node to other
   multi nodes.

   In each domain i,

   o  There is a set of X-en(i) entry BNs noted BN-en(k,i) where BN-
      en(k,i) is the kth entry BN of domain(i).

   o  There is a set of X-ex(i) exit BNs noted BN-ex(k,i) where BN-
      ex(k,i) is the kth exit BN of domain(i).

   The definition of VSPT(1,i) is the same as that of VSPT(i) in BRPC
   (see [RFC5441]).

   VSPT(1,i): MP2P (multipoint-to-point) tree returned by PCE(i) to
   PCE(i-1):







Fu, et al.                Expires March 2, 2011                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft               DRPC Procedure                  August 2010


                            Root (TE LSP destination)
                            /         |            \
                      BN-en(1,i)   BN-en(2,i) ... BN-en(j,i).

                       where [X-en(i)] is the number of
                    entry BNs in domain i and j no larger than [X-en(i)]

           Figure 1: VSPT(1,i) Backward Shortest Path MP2P Tree

   Each link of tree VSPT(1,i) represents the shortest constrained path
   between BN-en(j,i) and the TE LSP destination that satisfies the set
   of required constraints for the TE LSP (bandwidth, affinities, etc.).
   These are path segments to reach the TE LSP destination from BN-
   en(j,i).

   The definition of VSPT(0,i) is vary similar to that of VSPT(1,i).

   VSPT(0,i): P2MP (point-to-multipoint) tree returned by PCE(i) to
   PCE(i+1):


                              Root (TE LSP source)
                             /         |          \
                      BN-en(1,i)   BN-en(2,i) ... BN-en(j,i).

                       where [X-en(i)] is the number of
                    entry BNs in domain i and j no larger than [X-en(i)]

            Figure 2: VSPT(0,i) Forward Shortest Path P2MP Tree

   Each link of tree VSPT(0,i) represents the shortest constrained path
   between BN-en(j,i) and the TE LSP source that satisfies the set of
   required constraints for the TE LSP (bandwidth, affinities, etc.).
   These are path segments to reach BN-en(j,i) from the TE LSP source.

   Different from BRPC, when there is a path computation request
   arriving and the PCE sequence which will take part in the path
   computation has been fixed, DRPC will launch the path computation
   from dual-end PCEs to the middle PCEs bi-directionally.  It is worth
   noting that the middle PCE may not be the PCE in the middle of the
   PCE sequence but the PCE receiving the two path computation requests
   from two directons.  According to the path computation request, the
   source PCE sparks the path computaion to the Entry BN of the
   stitching domain. while, the destination PCE sparks the path
   computation to the the Entry BN of the domain next to the stitching
   domain.  When the stitching PCE receives the two messages which
   contain the two virtual shortest path trees (VSPT) at the root of the
   source node and the destination node respectively, the stitching PCE



Fu, et al.                Expires March 2, 2011                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft               DRPC Procedure                  August 2010


   will stitch the two VSPTs into one complete directional shortest path
   graph.  At last, the shortest path or k shortest paths will be
   selected from the directional shortest path graph by the stitching
   PCE according to some strategies and transferred to the source node
   through the Source PCE.  Similar with BRPC, a pre-determined PCE
   sequence should also be designated before DRPC.

   VSPT(1,i+1) is returned by PCE(i+1) to PCE(i) along the direction
   from the Destination PCE to the Source PCE, which consists of multi
   shortest paths from the multi BN-en(j,i+1)s to the destination node,
   as is shown in Fig.1.

   VSPT(0, i-1) is by PCE(i-1) to PCE (i) along the direction from the
   Source PCE to the Destination PCE, which consists of multi shortest
   paths from the source node to multi BN-en(j,i), as is shown in Fig.2.

   VSPG(i)=VSPT(0,i)+VSPT(1,i+1) is the directional shortest path graph
   from the source node to the destination node stitched by the two
   directional shortest path tree gained above.  The former represents
   the directional shortest path graph computed from source node to the
   Entry BN of the middle domain, and the later represents the
   directional shortest path graph computed from destination PCE to the
   Entry BN of the middle domain.  Or the former represents the
   directional shortest path graph computed from source node to the
   Entry BN of the domain next to the middle domain, and the later
   represents the directional shortest path graph computed from
   destination PCE to the Entry BN of the domain next to the middle
   domain.  In the first case, the middle PCE completes the VSPG(0,i)
   including the path computation in the local domain, and then stitched
   the two directional shortest path graphs together.  In the second
   case, the middle PCE completes the VSPG(1,i) including the path
   computation in the local domain, and then stitched the two
   directional shortest path graphs together.  At last, the directional
   shortest path graph from the source node to the destination node is
   generated as shown in Fig.3.


                                  Root (TE LSP source)
                                 /         |          \
                       BN-en(1,i+1)   BN-en(2,i+1) ... BN-en(j,i+1).
                                 \         |          /
                              Root (TE LSP destination)

                   Figure 3: VSPG(i) Shortest Path Graph

   The Stitching PCE can either be designated by (1) Parent PCE/Source
   PCE before DRPC procedure or by (2) automatic selection in PCEP
   signaling procedure.



Fu, et al.                Expires March 2, 2011                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft               DRPC Procedure                  August 2010


4.3.  Mode of Operation in Stitching PCE Selection by PCE Designation

   In the case of (1), the following steps are described as follows.

   Denote that PCE(1) is the Source PCE, PCE(m) the Stitching PCE, and
   PCE(n) the Destination PCE.

   Step 1:

   PCE(1) computes VSPT(0,1), the tree made of the list of shortest
   constrained paths between the TE LSP source and every BN-en(j,1) by
   using a suitable path computation algorithm (e.g., CSPF) and returns
   the computed VSPT(0,1) to PCE(2).  This can be triggered by Parent
   PCE, PCC or spontaneously.

   Simultaneously, PCE(n) computes VSPT(1,n), the tree made of the list
   of shortest constrained paths between every BN-en(j,n) and the TE LSP
   destination using a suitable path computation algorithm (e.g., CSPF)
   and returns the computed VSPT(n) to PCE(n-1).  This can be triggered
   by Parent PCE, PCE(n-1)(PCReq transferred PCE-by-PCE upstream from
   the Source PCE), or PCE(1) directly.

   Step i: (Downstream)

   For i=2 to m-1: PCE(i) computes VSPT(0,i), the tree made of the
   shortest constrained paths between the TE LSP source and each BN-
   en(j,i+1).  It does this by considering the information in
   VSPT(0,i-1) and its own TED including the links that provide
   connectivity from domain(i) to domain(i+1).  PCE(i) returns the
   computed VSPT(0,i) to PCE(i+1).

   Step i: (Upstream)

   For i=n-1 to m+1: PCE(i) computes VSPT(1,i), the tree made of the
   shortest constrained paths between each BN-en(j,i) and the TE LSP
   destination.  It does this by considering the information in
   VSPT(1,i+1) and its own TED.  PCE(i) returns the computed VSPT(0,i)
   to PCE(i+1).

   Step m:

   PCE(m) computes VSPT(0,m), the tree made of the shortest constrained
   paths between the TE LSP source and each BN-en(j,m+1).  It does this
   by considering the information in VSPT(0,m-1) and its own TED
   including the links that provide connectivity from domain(m) to
   domain(m+1).  PCE(m) stitches the computed VSPT(0,m+1) and
   VSPT(1,m+1) which is returned from PCE(m+1) into a VSPG.  Two
   strategies are permitted to return the shortest path back to PCC.



Fu, et al.                Expires March 2, 2011                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft               DRPC Procedure                  August 2010


   o  PCE(m) transfers the newly stitched directional shortest path
      graph to the Source PCE.  Source PCE generates the shortest path
      and returns it back to PCC.  The non-shortest paths are deleted at
      the Source PCE.

   o  PCE(m) transfers the computed shortest path to the Source PCE in
      PCReq message and the Source PCE returns it back to PCC.  The non-
      shortest paths are deleted at the Stitching PCE.

   The PCReq message can be either transferred from the Stitching PCE to
   the Source PCE upstream PCE-by-PCE, or to the Source PCE directly via
   TCP connection.

   If n=2, the source domain and the destination domain are directly
   interconnected each other.  The Stitching PCE MUST be specified as
   the Source PCE where step i is omitted.

4.4.  Mode of Operation in Stitching PCE Selection via PCEP Signaling

   Denote that PCE(1) is the Source PCE and PCE(n) the Destination PCE.
   In the case of (2), every PCE transfers VSPT to the next PCE without
   knowing a fixed Stitching PCE.  So, the Stitching PCE is selected
   automatically in PCEP signaling procedure where PCReq messages
   upstream and downstream meet each other and there are three
   scenarios.

   Scenario (1): PCE(i) and PCE(i+1) receive PCReq messages with
   VSPT(1,i+1) and VSPT(0,i) respectively after these two messages have
   been sent.  Thus, PCE(i) stitches VSPT(0,i) and VSPT(1,i+1) into
   VSPG(i), whereas PCE(i+1) discards the message, as is shown in Fig.4.





















Fu, et al.                Expires March 2, 2011                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft               DRPC Procedure                  August 2010


                           PCE(i-1)                PCE(i+2)
                               \                     /
                          PCReq \                   / PCReq
                                 \                 /
                                 PCE(i)         PCE(i+1)
                                   \             /
                       {Compute VSPT(0,i)} {Compute VSPT(1,i+1)}
                                     \         /
                                      \       /
                                 PCReq \     /
                                        \   /
                                          X
                                         / \
                                  PCRep /   \
                                       /     \
                                    PCE(i)  PCE(i+1) {Discard}
                                     /
                           {Stitch into VSPG(i)}
                                   /
                                  /
                           PCRep /
                                /
                      PCE(i-1) or PCE(1)

                     Figure 4: Scenario(1) of Case(2)

   Scenario (2): PCE(i) receives a PCReq message with VSPT(1,i+1) after
   it has received a PCReq message with VSPT(0,i), and it is unable to
   stop sending PCReq with computed VSPT(0,i) to PCE(i+1) immediately or
   the message has already been sent.  Thus, PCE(i) stitches VSPT(0,i)
   and VSPT(1,i+1) into VSPG(i), whereas PCE(i+1) discards VSPT(0,i), as
   is shown in Fig.5.



















Fu, et al.                Expires March 2, 2011                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft               DRPC Procedure                  August 2010


                                                   PCE(i+2)
                                                     /
                                                    / PCReq
                                                   /
                                PCE(i-1)        PCE(i+1)
                                     \           /
                                PCReq \         /
                                       \     {Compute VSPT(1,i+1)}
                                      PCE(i)  /
                                         |   /
                         {Compute VSPT(0,i)}/ PCReq
                                         | /
                                         K
                                         | \
                                         |  \
                                         |   \ PCReq
                         {Stitch into VSPG(i)}\
                                        /      \
                                       /      PCE(i+1){Discard}
                                PCRep /
                                     /
                            PCE(i-1) or PCE(1)

                     Figure 5: Scenario(2) of Case(2)

   Scenario (3): PCE(i+1) receives a PCReq message with VSPT(0,i) after
   it has received a PCReq message with VSPT(1,i+2), and it is unable to
   stop sending PCReq with computed VSPT(1,i+1) to PCE(i) immediately.
   Thus, PCE(i) stitches VSPT(0,i) and VSPT(1,i+1) into VSPG(i), whereas
   PCE(i+1) discards VSPT(0,i), as is shown in Fig.6.





















Fu, et al.                Expires March 2, 2011                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft               DRPC Procedure                  August 2010


                            PCE(i-1)
                                 \
                            PCReq \             PCE(i+2)
                                   \             /
                                  PCE(i)        / PCReq
                                     \         /
                      {Compute VSPT(0,i)}  PCE(i+1)
                                       \     |
                                        \    |
                                         \ {Compute VSPT(1,i+1)}
                                    PCReq \  |
                                           \ |
                                          {Discard}
                                             /
                                            /
                                     PCReq /
                                          /
                                         /
                                     PCE(i)
                              {Stitch into VSPG(i)}
                                     /
                                    /
                             PCRep /
                                  /
                       PCE(i-1) or PCE(1)

                     Figure 6: Scenario(3) of Case(2)

   The following steps are described as follows to deal with these three
   situations in a uniform procedure.  Denote that PCE(m) is the
   intersection representing the Stitching PCE.

   Step i: (Downstream)

   For i=1 to m: PCE(i) computes VSPT(0,i), the tree made of the
   shortest constrained paths between the TE LSP source and each BN-
   en(j,i+1).  It does this by considering the information in
   VSPT(0,i-1) and its own TED including the links that provide
   connectivity from domain(i) to domain(i+1).  If PCE(i) has already
   received a valid PCReq from PCE(i+1) which contains VSPT(1,i+1), it
   ignores the message once received from PCE(i-1) downstream.
   Otherwise PCE(i) returns the computed VSPT(0,i) to PCE(i+1).

   Step i: (Upstream)

   For i=n to m: PCE(i) computes VSPT(1,i), the tree made of the
   shortest constrained paths between each BN-en(j,i) and the TE LSP
   destination.  It does this by considering the information in



Fu, et al.                Expires March 2, 2011                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft               DRPC Procedure                  August 2010


   VSPT(1,i+1) and its own TED.  PCE(i) returns the computed VSPT(0,i)
   to PCE(i+1).  If PCE(i) has already received a valid PCReq from
   PCE(i-1) which contains VSPT(0,i), it computes VSPT(0,i+1) and
   transfer the VSPT(0,i+1) to PCE(i+1).

   Once a valid PCReq message received from PCE(i+1) upstream after
   receiving PCReq from PCE(i-1), PCE(i) stitches these two VSPTs into a
   VSPG(i).  Two strategies are permitted to return the shortest path
   back to PCC.

   o  PCE(i) transfers the newly stitched directional shortest path
      graph in PCRep message to the Source PCE.  Source PCE generates
      the shortest path and returns it back to PCC.  The non-shortest
      paths are deleted at the Source PCE.

   o  PCE(i) transfers the computed shortest path to the Source PCE in
      PCRep message and the Source PCE returns it back to PCC.  The non-
      shortest paths are deleted at the Stitching PCE.

   The PCRep message can be either transferred from the Stitching PCE to
   the Source PCE upstream PCE-by-PCE, or to the Source PCE directly via
   TCP connection.  These are identical with case (1).


5.  PCEP Protocol Extension Requirements

   The two different DRPC procedures require the specification of new
   flags of the RP object carried within the PCReq message to specify
   that the shortest paths satisfying the constraints from the
   destination to the set of entry boundary nodes or from the source to
   the set of entry boundary nodes are requested.

   The following new flags of the RP object is defined:

     VSPG        Flags

     Bit Number  Name Flag

     23          VSPG

     24          0: from source PCE to middle PCE

                 1: from destination PCE to middle PCE

                 Bit 24 is valid under the assumption that bit 23 is
   valid

   When set, the VSPG Flags indicates that the PCC requests the



Fu, et al.                Expires March 2, 2011                [Page 14]

Internet-Draft               DRPC Procedure                  August 2010


   computation of an inter-domain TE LSP using the DRPC procedure
   defined in this document.

   Because path segments computed by the two end PCEs in the context of
   the DRPC procedure must be provided along with their respective path
   costs, the C flag of the METRIC object carried within the PCReq
   message must be set.  It is the choice of the requester to
   appropriately set the O bit of the RP object.


6.  VSPG Encoding

   VSPG encoding objects must be contained in the PCRep request
   messages, which consist of a non-ordered list of EROs where each ERO
   represents a path segment from a BN to the destination node or the
   source node specified in the END-POINT object of the corresponding
   PCReq message.  Different from VSPT encoding in RFC5441, there are
   two kinds of objects in VSPG encoding, which are the path segment
   object from the BNs to the source, and the path segment object from
   the BNs to the destination.  Besides, some nodes can appear twice in
   the two objects.

   As shown in Fig.7, along the direction from the source node to the
   destination node, when PCE1 completes the path computation in the
   local domain, three forward non-ordered EROs are transferred to PCE2.
   The three EROs are as follows:

   o  ERO_F1: S(TE Router ID)-A(Interface IP address)-B(Interface IP
      address)-ABRen2-1(TE Router ID)

   o  ERO_F2: S(TE Router ID)-C(Interface IP address)-ABRen2-2(TE Router
      ID)

   o  ERO_F3: S(TE Router ID)-ABRen2-3(TE Router ID)



                  PCE1              PCE2              PCE3
          -------area1-------|------area2-------|-----area3------
                  ---A---B---ABRen2-1     ABRen3-1---E---
                  |               |          |          |
                  S----C-----ABRen2-2     ABRen3-2------D
                  |               |          |          |
                  -----------ABRen2-3     ABRen3-3--F-G--

        Figure 7:  An Example of VSPG Encoding Using a Set of EROs

   Along the direction from the destination node to the source node,



Fu, et al.                Expires March 2, 2011                [Page 15]

Internet-Draft               DRPC Procedure                  August 2010


   when PCE3 completes the path computation in the local domain, three
   backward non-ordered EROs are transferred to PCE2.  The three EROs
   are as follows:

   o  ERO_B1: ABRen3-1 (TE Router ID)-E(Interface IP address)-D(TE
      Router ID)

   o  ERO_B2: ABRen3-2 (TE Router ID)-D(TE Router ID)

   o  ERO_B3: ABRen3-3 (TE Router ID)-F(Interface IP address)-
      G(Interface IP address)-D(TE Router ID)


7.  DRPC Procedure Failures

   If the DRPC procedure cannot be completed because a PCE along the
   domain does not recognize the procedure (VSPG flag of the RP object),
   the PCE sends a PCErr message to the parent PCE with an Error-Type=4
   (not supported object), Error-value-4 (Unsupported parameter).  Then
   the parent PCE sends the failure message to the other PCEs along the
   PCE chain.  The corresponding path computation request is then
   cancelled by the PCE without further notification.  The PCErr message
   must be relayed to the requesting PCC by the source PCE.

   PCEP-ERROR objects are used to report a PCEP protocol error and are
   characterized by an Error-Type which specifies the type of error and
   an Error-value that provides additional information about the error
   type.  Both the Error-Type and the Error-Value are managed by IANA.
   A new Error-Type and the corresponding error value are defined here.

     Error-type    Meaning

     14            DRPC procedure completion failure

                   Error-value

                   1: DRPC procedure not supported by one or more PCEs
   along the domain path


8.  Path Computation Failures

   If a PCE requires to relay a path computation request according to
   the DRPC procedure defined in this document to a downstream PCE and
   no such PCE is available, the PCE MUST cancel all the procedures of
   path computation on all the other PCEs along the PCE chain through
   the parent PCE, and send a path computation reply to the PCC using a
   PCRep message that contains a NO-PATH object.  In such case, the NO-



Fu, et al.                Expires March 2, 2011                [Page 16]

Internet-Draft               DRPC Procedure                  August 2010


   PATH object MUST carry a NO-PATH-VECTOR TLV with the newly defined
   bit named "DRPC Path Computation chain unavailable" set.

   Different from BRPC, bit 5 is defined here.

     Bit number    Name Flag

     5             DRPC Path computation chain unavailable


9.  Security Considerations

   TBD.


10.  IANA Consideration

10.1.  New Flags Of The RP Object

   A new flag of the RP object is defined in this document, which
   contains 2 bits.

     VSPG        Flags

     Bit Number  Name Flag                               Reference

     23          VSPG

     24          0: from source PCE to middle PCE        this document

                 1: from destination PCE to middle PCE

                 Bit 24 is valid under the assumption that bit 23 is
   valid

10.2.  New Error-Type And Error-Value

   A new Error-Type is defined in this document (Error-Type and Error-
   value to be assigned by IANA).

     Error-type    Meaning                               Reference

     14            DRPC procedure completion failure     this document

                   Error-value

                   1: DRPC procedure not supported by one or more PCEs
   along the domain path



Fu, et al.                Expires March 2, 2011                [Page 17]

Internet-Draft               DRPC Procedure                  August 2010


10.3.  New Flag Of The NO-PATH-VECTOR TLV

   A new flag of the NO-PATH-VECTOR TLV defined in is specified in this
   document.

     Bit number    Name Flag                               Reference

     5             DRPC Path computation chain unavailable this document


11.  Acknowledgments

   The RFC text was produced using Marshall Rose's xml2rfc tool.


12.  Normative References

   [I-D.ietf-pce-hierarchy-fwk]
              King, D. and A. Farrel, "The Application of the Path
              Computation Element Architecture to the Determination of a
              Sequence of Domains in MPLS & GMPLS", December 2009.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFC's to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC4665]  Farrel, A., Vasseur, J., and J. Ash, "A Path Computation
              Element (PCE)-Based Architecture", RFC 4655, August 2006.

   [RFC5441]  Vasseur, J., Zhang, R., Bitar, N., and JL. Le Roux, "A
              Path Computation Element (PCE)-Based Architecture",
              RFC 5441, April 2009.


Authors' Addresses

   Xihua Fu
   ZTE Corporation
   West District,ZTE Plaza,No.10,Tangyan South Road,Gaoxin District
   Xi'an  710065
   P.R.China

   Phone: +8613798412242
   Email: fu.xihua@zte.com.cn
   URI:   http://www.zte.com.cn/







Fu, et al.                Expires March 2, 2011                [Page 18]

Internet-Draft               DRPC Procedure                  August 2010


   Yuanlin Bao
   ZTE Corporation
   5F,R&D Building 3, ZTE Industrial Park, XiLi LiuXian Road
   Nanshan District
   Shen Zhen  518055
   P.R.China

   Phone: +86 755 26773731
   Email: bao.yuanlin@zte.com.cn
   URI:   http://www.zte.com.cn/


   Yongli Zhao
   BUPT
   No.10,Xitucheng Road,Haidian District
   Beijing  100876
   P.R.China

   Phone: +8613811761857
   Email: yonglizhao@bupt.edu.cn
   URI:   http://www.bupt.edu.cn/


   Jie Zhang
   BUPT
   No.10,Xitucheng Road,Haidian District
   Beijing  100876
   P.R.China

   Phone: +8613911060930
   Email: lgr24@bupt.edu.cn
   URI:   http://www.bupt.edu.cn/



















Fu, et al.                Expires March 2, 2011                [Page 19]


