


Network Working Group                                         M. Azinger
Internet-Draft                                   Frontier Communications
Updates: 1887 (if approved)                                  Corporation
Intended status: BCP                                               T. Li
Expires: March 28, 2011                                    Cisco Systems
                                                                 J. Weil
                                                      Cox Communications
                                                      September 24, 2010


         A Scalable Addressing Allocation Architecture for IPv6
                  draft-azinger-scalable-addressing-00

Abstract

   This document presents a scalable architecture for assigning and
   aggregating IPv6 address space.  The current IPv4 addressing
   aggregation strategy was defined in [RFC1519] (and updated in
   [RFC4632]) and the IPv4 address allocation architecture was defined
   in [RFC1518].  A similar address allocation architecture was proposed
   for IPv6 in [RFC1887].  The objective of this document is to update
   the previous documents and provide the best current guidance on an
   address allocation architecture to help manage the growth of routing
   tables in IPv6.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on March 28, 2011.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal



Azinger, et al.          Expires March 28, 2011                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft        Scalable Addressing for IPv6        September 2010


   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Organizational, technical, and policy issues . . . . . . . . .  3
     2.1.  Delegation to IANA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     2.2.  Delegation to NRO  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     2.3.  Technical issues vs. policy issues . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   3.  Contributing factors to the scalability problem  . . . . . . .  5
   4.  Aggregation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   5.  Allocation plan  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   6.  Current Statistics and Projections . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     6.1.  Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     6.2.  Projections  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     6.3.  Impact of Scalable Addressing  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   7.  Protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   8.  Rules for Route Advertisements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   9.  Responsibility of configuration and aggregation  . . . . . . . 11
   10. Procedural Changes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   11. Recommendations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   12. Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   13. IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   14. Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   15. References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     15.1. Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     15.2. Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12

















Azinger, et al.          Expires March 28, 2011                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft        Scalable Addressing for IPv6        September 2010


1.  Introduction

   The Internet has continued to evolve and the demands placed on its
   infrastructure continue to grow at an increasing rate.  While there
   are a number of contributing factors there are a few key elements
   that have led to a concerning escalation in routing table growth and
   have made scalability an area of serious concern for network
   operators.  Effort must be put forward to minimize the impact of IPv6
   deployment to the routing subsystem.  Two key aspects of this system
   include routing table churn composed of routing advertisements and
   withdrawals and the routing table size as measured by the number of
   entries in the DFZ, the Default-Free zone.  While retaining current
   Internet practices, this document addresses the problem of routing
   table size by examining steps to minimize the impact of Multi-homing
   and Traffic Engineering, two widely implemented features that provide
   enhanced network resiliency and traffic path control.

2.  Organizational, technical, and policy issues

2.1.  Delegation to IANA

   [RFC2860] is a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) between IETF and
   ICANN that delegates the technical work of assignment and allocation
   of addresses to IANA (a function of ICANN) on behalf of the IETF and
   IRTF (see sections 1 and 4.3).  The MoU directs IANA to comply with
   "the criteria and procedures specified in RFCs, including Proposed,
   Draft, and full Internet Standards and Best Current Practice
   documents" (section 4.1).

   Technical disputes in this agreement are first directed to the IESG,
   and if not resolved, arbitrated by the IAB (sections 4.1, 4.2).

   The document specifically stipulates that policy issues around IP
   addressing are outside of the scope of the MoU (section 4.4).

2.2.  Delegation to NRO

   ICANN in turn delegates block allocation to the Number Resource
   Organization (NRO) [ASOMoU].  The NRO is composed of the Regional
   Internet Registries (RIRs) [NROMoU].

2.3.  Technical issues vs. policy issues

   The documents cited above make it clear that policy issues are
   delegated from the IETF through ICANN and IANA to the RIRs.  The same
   documents make it equally clear that the IETF is still responsible
   for technical matters and procedures.




Azinger, et al.          Expires March 28, 2011                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft        Scalable Addressing for IPv6        September 2010


   The routing subsystem is a key component of the Internet.  Without
   routing, no packets are delivered.  The routing subsystem consists of
   multiple routing protocols as well as the procedures for utilizing
   these protocols to provide coherent and timely routing services.  The
   procedures for deploying and operating the routing subsystem are
   characterized in the routing architecture.  Specifying the routing
   architecture is a technical issue.

   A key issue in the routing architecture is the scalability of the
   architecture.  If the architecture fails to scale, then the routing
   subsystem can fail, either in its basic functionality, from a
   performance perspective, or from a cost perspective.  For the routing
   architecture to scale, the amount of data propagated within the
   routing subsystem must be limited, as the routing subsystem must
   ultimately have a hardware instantiation, and unlimited hardware
   simply does not exist.

   As technology progresses over time, the intrinsic capabilities of
   hardware improves.  There are multiple dimensions for improvement,
   each with their own trend lines and projections.  Based on these
   trends, we can reasonably expect that hardware scalability will
   improve over time, tracking these trends.  As a result, for the
   routing architecture to scale, it must operate within the growth
   rates of these trends.  Thus, ensuring that the routing subsystem
   scales at no more than an appropriate rate of growth is a technical
   issue.

   The scalability of the routing subsystem is wholly dependent on the
   addressing architecture for the network.  Routing views the network
   as a graph composed of nodes and edges between those nodes.  Carrying
   information about each node and edge of the graph does not scale, so
   routing works by creating abstractions of entire subgraphs.  The most
   productive abstractions happen when the subgraph is closely
   topologically related, such as when all of the nodes in the subgraph
   are interconnected by the edges in the subgraph.  We can further
   create hierarchies of abstractions to get further scalability.

   Poorly chosen abstractions that do not align with the topology of the
   network result in abstractions that do not reduce the data burden on
   routing, as additional data is needed for path computation.  Thus,
   the correct procedures for creating abstractions in the topology are
   also a technical issue.

   To manipulate data about the network in a convenient manner, we give
   names to nodes in the network, where each name is an address.  If
   names are assigned in a manner that is consistent with the hierarchy
   of abstractions, then a single name can also be used to represent a
   subgraph of the network, such as a single site.  These types of names



Azinger, et al.          Expires March 28, 2011                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft        Scalable Addressing for IPv6        September 2010


   are known as prefixes or aggregates and the overall procedure for
   assigning addresses to nodes and aggregates to subgraphs is the
   addressing architecture for the network.  Clearly, the correct
   application and operation of the addressing architecture is central
   to the operation and ongoing scalability of the routing architecture.

   The operation of the addressing architecture involves both technical
   issues and policy issues.  Procedures for determining subgraph
   boundaries and subsequent prefix allocations are clearly driven by
   the technical requirements of the architecture.  From a technical
   perspective, the graph is composed of many different types of nodes.
   These include leaf nodes, multiply connected nodes with a minimal
   number of edges, and densely connected nodes.  Determining the
   current connectivity of a site is clearly a technical issue.  Judging
   how that site might evolve in the future and thus the role that the
   site should play in the addressing architecture is a matter of
   policy.

   These issues are simply examples.  There are likely to be many more,
   some of which may be contentious.  Completely separating the
   technical issues from the policy issues is decidedly non-trivial and
   is most likely an inefficient exercise.  In reality and for pragmatic
   purposes, it is necessary that all issues be resolved in a consistent
   and compatible manner.  The end goal is clearly shared: the
   successful operation of a scalable routing and addressing
   architecture.

   This document deals with the technical aspects of the addressing
   architecture.

3.  Contributing factors to the scalability problem

   There are several factors that work against routing table
   scalability.  A full description of the contributing factors and
   views can be read in [I-D.narten-radir-problem-statement].  The
   exhaustion of the unassigned IPv4 address space is the principal
   motivator resulting in two of the key growth drivers.  The first
   driver is the presence of increasingly longer prefixes in the DFZ
   Over the years the longest prefix generally accepted globally has
   increased from a relatively small number of classful prefixes to a
   preponderance of classless /24 CIDR prefixes.  As IPv4 address
   availability diminishes, more Internet users are and will continue to
   push their providers to route even longer prefixes externally that in
   the past were filtered.  This is something that we must look to
   minimize and find ways to deter as much as possible for IPv6.

   The second driver resulting from IPv4 address exhaustion is the rapid
   uptake in IPv6 deployment by providers and end users.  This adoption,



Azinger, et al.          Expires March 28, 2011                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft        Scalable Addressing for IPv6        September 2010


   while clearly in the best interest for the long term viability of the
   Internet, contributes a unique set of challenges that must be
   addressed to promote efficient routing table growth.  Some of these
   challenges visible today are the liberal assignment of Provider
   Independent (PI) space to end users, micro-allocations, and critical
   network infrastructure allocations by the various RIRs.

   These drivers have increased the need for more guidance on the
   addressing architecture in order to limit the number of unnecessary
   entries in the global routing table.  The future impact of this
   increased pressure on routing table growth is an area of immediate
   concern.

4.  Aggregation

   The common method for reducing state on both internal and external
   routing tables is through aggregation of information.  Borrowing from
   experience gained in operating IPv4 networks, in order for
   aggregation to succeed in reducing the global routing system growth
   rate, the IPv6 address assignment process needs to make aggregation
   of routing information along topological lines.  In general, the
   topology of the network has not changed since IPv4 CIDR and even with
   IPv6 the topology of the network is still determined by the service
   providers who have built it.  Topologically significant address
   assignments are necessarily service-provider oriented.

   Start of Excerpt from [RFC4632]
      The assignment of prefixes is intended to roughly follow the
      underlying Internet topology so that aggregation can be used to
      facilitate scaling of the global routing system.  One implication
      of this strategy is that prefix assignment and aggregation is
      generally done according to provider-subscriber relationships,
      since that is how the Internet topology is determined.
      Aggregation is simple for an end site that is connected to one
      service provider: it uses address space assigned by its service
      provider, and that address space is a small piece of a larger
      block allocated to the service provider.  No explicit route is
      needed for the end site; the service provider advertises a single
      aggregate route for the larger block.  This advertisement provides
      reachability and routeability for all the customers numbered in
      the block.
      There are two, more complex, situations that reduce the
      effectiveness of aggregation:
      *  An organization that is multi-homed.  Because a multi-homed
         organization must be advertised into the system by each of its
         service providers, it is often not feasible to aggregate its
         routing information into the address space of any one of those
         providers.  Note that the organization still may receive its



Azinger, et al.          Expires March 28, 2011                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft        Scalable Addressing for IPv6        September 2010


         address assignment out of a service provider's address space
         (which has other advantages), but that a route to the
         organization's prefix is, in the most general case, explicitly
         advertised by all of its service providers.  For this reason,
         the global routing cost for a multi-homed organization is
         generally the same as it was prior to the adoption of CIDR.  A
         more detailed consideration of multi-homing practices can be
         found in [RFC4116].
      *  An organization that changes service provider but does not
         renumber.  This has the effect of "punching a hole" in one of
         the original service provider's aggregated route
         advertisements.  CIDR handles this situation by requiring that
         the newer service provider to advertise a specific
         advertisement for the re-homed organization; this advertisement
         is preferred over provider aggregates because it is a longer
         match.  To maintain efficiency of aggregation, it is
         recommended that an organization that changes service providers
         plan eventually to migrate its network into a an prefix
         assigned from its new provider's address space.  To this end,
         it is recommended that mechanisms to facilitate such migration,
         such as dynamic host address assignment that uses [RFC2131]),
         be deployed wherever possible, and that additional protocol
         work be done to develop improved technology for renumbering.
   End of Excerpt from [RFC4632]

   It is important to recognize that some efficiency can still be gained
   with multi-homed sites (and in general, for any site composed of
   multiple, logical IPv6 networks).

   Start of Excerpt from [RFC4632]
      By allocating a contiguous power-of-two block address space to the
      site (as opposed to multiple, independent prefixes), the site's
      routing information may be aggregated into a single prefix.  Also,
      since the routing cost associated with assigning a multi-homed
      site out of a service provider's address space is no greater than
      the old method of sequential number assignment by a central
      authority, it makes sense to assign all end-site address space out
      of blocks allocated to service providers.
      It is also worthwhile to mention that since aggregation may occur
      at multiple levels in the system, it may still be possible to
      aggregate these anomalous routes at higher levels of whatever
      hierarchy may be present.  For example, if a site is multi-homed
      to two relatively small providers that both obtain connectivity
      and address space from the same large provider, then aggregation
      by the large provider of routes from the smaller networks will
      include all routes to the multi-homed site.  The feasibility of
      this sort of second-level aggregation depends on whether
      topological hierarchy exists among a site, its directly-connected



Azinger, et al.          Expires March 28, 2011                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft        Scalable Addressing for IPv6        September 2010


      providers, and other providers to which they are connected; it may
      be practical in some regions of the global Internet but not in
      others.
   End of Excerpt from [RFC4632]

5.  Allocation plan

   Allocations of shorter prefixes are best provided to network service
   providers from their regional registries.  RIR initial and subsequent
   allocation policy to service providers should allow for a minimum of
   2 years worth of usage based on historical or business plan
   projections.  Organizations should be assigned appropriate subnets
   from their network service providers larger aggregate allocations
   that are in turn appropriately sized for organizations wishing to
   multi-home.

   Start of Excerpt from [RFC4632]
      Hierarchical delegation of addresses in this manner implies that
      sites with addresses assigned out of a given service provider are,
      for routing purposes, part of that service provider and will be
      routed via its infrastructure.  This implies that routing
      information about multi-homed organizations (i.e., organizations
      connected to more than one network service provider) will still
      need to be known by higher levels in the hierarchy.
      A historical perspective on these issues is described in
      [RFC1518].  Additional discussion may also be found in [RFC3221].
   End of Excerpt from [RFC4632]

   Similarly to the days of classful routing, IPv6 is following the same
   historical path of giving PI assignments.  It is in the interests of
   the network infrastructure to document a best practice for obtaining
   IPv6 addresses, and it is recommended that most, if not all, network
   numbers be distributed through service providers.  Using the process
   proposed in this document will support this from becoming a growing
   problem and will also reduce the scalability concerns core engineers
   face and the workload for Regional Registries.

6.  Current Statistics and Projections

   The good news is that IPv6 has started growing at a significant rate.
   The bad news is that IPv6 has started growing at a significant rate.
   Table 1 shows the observed growth for 2009.









Azinger, et al.          Expires March 28, 2011                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft        Scalable Addressing for IPv6        September 2010


              +----------------+---------+---------+--------+
              |                | Jan '09 | Dec '09 | Growth |
              +----------------+---------+---------+--------+
              | Prefix count   |   1,600 |   2,460 |    54% |
              | Roots          |   1,310 |   1,970 |    50% |
              | More Specifics |     290 |     490 |    69% |
              | AS Count       |   1,220 |   1,830 |    50% |
              | Transit        |     300 |     390 |    30% |
              | Stub           |     920 |   1,440 |    56% |
              +----------------+---------+---------+--------+

         Table 1: IPv6 Routing Table Statistics for 2009 [Huston].

   There are several salient points that should be extracted from this
   table.  The first, and foremost, is that the routing table is now
   growing rapidly.  At 54% growth, this is faster than Moore's law
   would accommodate.  The roots are prefixes that have no 'less
   specifics' in the routing table.  Even at 50% growth per year, this
   number exceeds Moore's law.  More specifics are typically injected to
   support traffic engineering or multi-homing.

   The AS count growth shows the number of new organizations
   participating in BGP.  Transit ASes are routing domains that have
   multiple peer ASes.  Stub ASes are routing domains that have only a
   single peer AS.

6.1.  Analysis

   These numbers show that 610 new organizations have joined IPv6
   routing.  Of these new organizations, 85% are stub ASes.  The new
   organizations are injecting 860 new prefixes.  Of these, 76% are root
   prefixes.  Since any new AS must inject at least one prefix into
   routing to be counted, there would appear to be a very high
   correlation between new stub ASes and new root prefixes.  From this,
   it seems reasonable to conclude that the bulk of the new root
   prefixes are injected by stub ASes.  Further, since it seems unlikely
   that most of these stub ASes will turn into transit ASes in the
   future, it also seems reasonable to conclude that these organizations
   are actually end-user organizations who are injecting routes based on
   their PI address assignments.

   Thus, the bulk of the routing table growth appears to be due to PI
   prefix injection.

6.2.  Projections

   Given the high state of flux in the deployment of IPv6, it seems
   difficult to conclude that the statistics from 2009 will be



Azinger, et al.          Expires March 28, 2011                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft        Scalable Addressing for IPv6        September 2010


   representative of future routing table growth.  Thanks to the influx
   of new users who are being forced onto IPv6 by the impending IPv4
   runout, there are plausible arguments that would suggest that growth
   could accelerate.  There are also plausible arguments that suggest
   that as IPv6 deployment reaches ubiquity, that the growth might
   curtail in a logistic S-curve.  Lacking more data, it is difficult to
   clearly argue that either of these results is inevitable.

   It is possible, however, to look at the implications of the current
   growth rate, if it is sustained at the 2009 rate of 54%.  Table 2
   shows this growth rate:

                         +------+---------------+
                         | Year |          Size |
                         +------+---------------+
                         | 2009 |         2,460 |
                         | 2010 |         3,788 |
                         | 2011 |         5,834 |
                         | 2012 |         8,985 |
                         | 2013 |        13,836 |
                         | 2014 |        21,308 |
                         | 2015 |        32,814 |
                         | 2020 |       284,225 |
                         | 2025 |     2,461,879 |
                         | 2040 | 1,599,843,323 |
                         +------+---------------+

                  Table 2: 54% growth rate, extrapolated

6.3.  Impact of Scalable Addressing

   With the adoption of the plan outlined here, growth of the routing
   table in a default-free router is greatly reduced since most new
   address assignments will come from one of the large blocks allocated
   to the service providers.  This plan recognizes the continued need
   for multi-homing and the requirement to offer multi-homing via IPv6.
   Due to this requirement multi-homing will be the main reason for the
   continued growth of the routing table size but not because of
   independent subnet statements based solely on the desire for
   independence.

7.  Protocol

   This document requires that all parties implement routing protocols
   for IPv6 as previously published for IPv4 in [RFC4632].






Azinger, et al.          Expires March 28, 2011                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft        Scalable Addressing for IPv6        September 2010


8.  Rules for Route Advertisements

   This document requires that all parties follow the rules for route
   advertisements for IPv6 as previously published in [RFC1887] and as
   similarly published for IPv4 in [RFC4632].

9.  Responsibility of configuration and aggregation

   This document requires that all parties take responsibility of
   configuration or aggregation for IPv6 as previously published
   [RFC1887] and as similarly published for IPv4 in [RFC4632].

10.  Procedural Changes

   It is possible that some organizations will need to alter their
   filters to follow the guidance of this document.  This is minimal and
   should not be considered an issue.

11.  Recommendations

   Internet Registries should begin to hand out IPv6 blocks of /32 or
   shorter to network service providers in order to accommodate both
   their growth and their customers' growth.  In addition Internet
   Registries should severely limit or eliminate the amount of PI
   assignments in order to help facilitate the decrease in routing table
   growth.  Service providers will allocate /48's to their customer
   organizations with multi-homing requirements.  Implementation and
   deployment of these modifications should occur immediately.

12.  Security Considerations

   The recommendations in this document create no new security concerns.

13.  IANA Considerations

   This document makes no requests to IANA.

14.  Acknowledgements

   The authors would like to extend their thanks to the authors of
   [RFC1887] and [RFC4632] (and by extension, to the authors of
   [RFC1519]).  Much of that work has been incorporated directly into
   this document as it is conceptually identical and simply translated
   to IPv6 herein.

15.  References





Azinger, et al.          Expires March 28, 2011                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft        Scalable Addressing for IPv6        September 2010


15.1.  Normative References

   [RFC1887]                             Rekhter, Y. and T. Li, "An
                                         Architecture for IPv6 Unicast
                                         Address Allocation", RFC 1887,
                                         December 1995.

   [RFC4632]                             Fuller, V. and T. Li,
                                         "Classless Inter-domain Routing
                                         (CIDR): The Internet Address
                                         Assignment and Aggregation
                                         Plan", BCP 122, RFC 4632,
                                         August 2006.

15.2.  Informative References

   [RFC1518]                             Rekhter, Y. and T. Li, "An
                                         Architecture for IP Address
                                         Allocation with CIDR",
                                         RFC 1518, September 1993.

   [RFC1519]                             Fuller, V., Li, T., Yu, J., and
                                         K. Varadhan, "Classless Inter-
                                         Domain Routing (CIDR): an
                                         Address Assignment and
                                         Aggregation Strategy",
                                         RFC 1519, September 1993.

   [RFC2131]                             Droms, R., "Dynamic Host
                                         Configuration Protocol",
                                         RFC 2131, March 1997.

   [RFC2860]                             Carpenter, B., Baker, F., and
                                         M. Roberts, "Memorandum of
                                         Understanding Concerning the
                                         Technical Work of the Internet
                                         Assigned Numbers Authority",
                                         RFC 2860, June 2000.

   [RFC3221]                             Huston, G., "Commentary on
                                         Inter-Domain Routing in the
                                         Internet", RFC 3221,
                                         December 2001.

   [RFC4116]                             Abley, J., Lindqvist, K.,
                                         Davies, E., Black, B., and V.
                                         Gill, "IPv4 Multihoming
                                         Practices and Limitations",



Azinger, et al.          Expires March 28, 2011                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft        Scalable Addressing for IPv6        September 2010


                                         RFC 4116, July 2005.

   [I-D.narten-radir-problem-statement]  Narten, T., "On the Scalability
                                         of Internet Routing", draft-
                                         narten-radir-problem-statement-
                                         05 (work in progress),
                                         February 2010.

   [Huston]                              Huston, G., "BGP in 2009", <htt
                                         p://www.potaroo.net/
                                         presentations/
                                         2010-03-04-bgp2009.pdf>.

   [ASOMoU]                              "ICANN Address Supporting
                                         Organization (ASO) MoU", <http:
                                         //www.nro.net/documents/
                                         aso-mou.html>.

   [NROMoU]                              "NRO Memorandum of
                                         Understanding", <http://
                                         www.nro.net/documents/
                                         nro1.html>.

Authors' Addresses

   Marla Azinger
   Frontier Communications Corporation
   Vancouver, WA
   USA

   EMail: marla.azinger@frontiercorp.com
   URI:   http://www.frontiercorp.com/


   Tony Li
   Cisco Systems
   170 West Tasman Dr.
   San Jose, CA  95134
   USA

   Phone: +1 408 853 9317
   EMail: tony.li@tony.li









Azinger, et al.          Expires March 28, 2011                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft        Scalable Addressing for IPv6        September 2010


   Jason Weil
   Cox Communications
   1400 Lake Hearn Dr.
   Atlanta, GA  95134
   USA

   Phone: +1 404 269 6809
   EMail: jason.weil@cox.com











































Azinger, et al.          Expires March 28, 2011                [Page 14]


