



 CCAMP Working Group                                       V.Beeram (Ed) 
 Internet Draft                                                I.Bryskin  
 Intended status: Standards Track                               W.Doonan 
                                                 ADVA Optical Networking 
                                                            J.Drake (Ed) 
                                                               G.Grammel 
                                                        Juniper Networks  
                                                             Manuel Paul 
                                                          Ruediger Kunze 
                                                        Deutsche Telekom 
                                                    Friedrich Armbruster 
                                                           Cyril Magaria 
                                                                     NSN 
                                                  Oscar Gonzalez de Dios  
                                                              Telefonica 
                                                   
 Expires: September 12, 2012                              March 12, 2012 
                                         
      
                                         
                                           
                                GMPLS-UNI BCP 
                    draft-beeram-ccamp-gmpls-uni-bcp-01.txt 


 Status of this Memo 

    This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the 
    provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.  

    Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
    Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
    other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
    Drafts. 

    Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
    months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents 
    at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as 
    reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 

    The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
    http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 

    The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
    http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html 

    This Internet-Draft will expire on September, 2012. 

 Copyright Notice 
      
      
      
      
 Beeram, et al         Expires September 10, 2012               [Page 1] 
    




 Internet-Draft              GMPLS-UNI BCP                    March 2012 
         

    Copyright (c) 2012 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the 
    document authors. All rights reserved. 

    This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal 
    Provisions Relating to IETF Documents 
    (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of 
    publication of this document.  Please review these documents 
    carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with 
    respect to this document.  Code Components extracted from this 
    document must include Simplified BSD License text as described in 
    Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without 
    warranty as described in the Simplified BSD License. 

 Abstract 

    This document pools together the best current practices that are 
    being used to apply the GMPLS Overlay model at the User-Network 
    Interface (UNI) reference point (as defined in [G.8080])  

 Table of Contents 

         
    1. Introduction...................................................3 
    2. Multi-Layered Approach.........................................3 
    3. Traffic Engineering............................................4 
       3.1. Augmenting the Client-Layer Topology......................6 
          3.1.1. Virtual TE Links.....................................7 
       3.2. Macro SRLGs...............................................8 
       3.3. MELGs.....................................................9 
       3.4. Switching Constraints....................................10 
    4. Connection Setup..............................................10 
    5. Path computation aspects......................................11 
    6. L1VPNs........................................................12 
    7. Use cases.....................................................13 
       7.1. Service optimization and restoration in Multi-Layer Networks
       ..............................................................13 
       7.2. IP/MPLS Offloading with UNI automation...................14 
       7.3. Use of PCE and VNTM in Multilayer Network Operation......15 
    8. Security Considerations.......................................15 
    9. IANA Considerations...........................................15 
    10. References...................................................15 
       10.1. Normative References....................................15 
       10.2. Informative References..................................16 
    11. Acknowledgments..............................................16 
         

      
      
      
 Beeram, et al         Expires September 10, 2012               [Page 2] 
         





 Internet-Draft              GMPLS-UNI BCP                    March 2012 
         

 1. Introduction 

    Generalized Multiprotocol Label Switching (GMPLS) provides tools to 
    create end-to-end services in various transport technologies. These 
    tools can be used to support service management in different types 
    of deployment models. [RFC 4208] discusses how GMPLS can be applied 
    to the overlay model. There are a good number of implementations 
    that have built on the basic concepts discussed in [RFC 4208] and 
    have successfully demonstrated interoperability. This document is an 
    attempt to pool together the best current practices that are being 
    used to apply the GMPLS Overlay model at the User-Network Interface 
    (UNI) reference point (as defined in [G.8080]).  

    [RFC 4208] recommends the use of hierarchical service activation 
    when GMPLS is used for the core network and section 7.3.3 of 
    [RFC4847], "Virtual Link Service Model" augments this by introducing 
    a representation of server-layer network resources into a client-
    layer network topology.  This memo explains how this augmentation 
    enhances client-layer networking in an overlay model. The concepts 
    discussed in this document are based primarily on experiences drawn 
    from interoperating GMPLS-enabled IP routers with Optical Transport 
    elements, but any GMPLS supported technology may be used in the 
    client and server-layer networks. 

      

         

 2. Multi-Layered Approach 

    When an end-to-end service crosses a boundary between two regions of 
    dissimilar transport technology, it is necessary to execute distinct 
    forms of service activation within each region.  

                      Fig 1: Sample Hybrid Topology 
                            (See PDF version) 
                                
    For example, in the hybrid network illustrated in Fig 1, 
    provisioning a transport service between two GMPLS-enabled IP 
    routers on either side of the optical WDM transport topology 
    requires operations in two distinct layer networks; the client-layer 
    network interconnecting the routers themselves, and the server-layer 
    network interconnecting the optical transport elements in between 
    the routers.  

      
      
      
 Beeram, et al         Expires September 10, 2012               [Page 3] 
         




 Internet-Draft              GMPLS-UNI BCP                    March 2012 
         

    Activation of the end-to-end service begins with a path 
    determination process, followed by the initiation of a signaling 
    process from the ingress along the determined path, per the set of 
    figures shown in Fig 2. 

                      Fig 2: Hierarchical Service Action 
                              (see PDF version) 
         

 3. Traffic Engineering 

    The previous section outlines the basic method for activating end-
    to-end services across a multi-layer network.  As a necessary part 
    of that process an initial path selection process was performed, 
    whereby an appropriate path between the desired endpoints was 
    determined through some means. Further, per expectations set 
    through current practices with regard to service provisioning in 
    homogeneous networks, operators expect that the underlying control 
    plane system will provide automated mechanisms for computing the 
    desired path or paths between network endpoints.   

    In particular, operators do not expect under normal circumstances to 
    be required to explicitly specify the end-to-end path; rather, 
    operators expect to be able to specify just the endpoints of the 
    path and rely on an automated computational process to identify and 
    qualify all the elements and links on the path between them.  Hence 
    when operating a hybrid network such as that described in Fig 1, it 
    is necessary to extend existing traffic engineering and path 
    computation mechanisms to operate in a similar manner. 

    Path computation and qualification operations occur at the path 
    computation element (PCE) selected by ingress element of an end-to-
    end service.  In order to be able to compute and qualify paths, the 
    PCE must SHOULD be provided with information regarding the traffic 
    engineering capabilities of the layer network to which it is 
    associated, in particular the topology of the layer network and what 
    layer-specific transport capabilities exist at the various nodes 
    and links in that topology. 

    It is important to note that topology information is layer-specific; 
    e.g. path computation and qualification operations occur within a 
    given layer, and hence information about topology and resource 
    availability are required for the specific layer to which the 
    connection belongs. The topology and resource availability 
    information required by elements in the client-layer is quite 
    distinct from that required by the elements in the server-layer 
     
      
      
 Beeram, et al         Expires September 10, 2012               [Page 4] 
         




 Internet-Draft              GMPLS-UNI BCP                    March 2012 
         

    network. Hence, the server-layer traffic engineering links are of no 
    importance for the client-layer network, and it is actually 
    desirable to block their advertisements into the client TE domain by 
    the server-layer border nodes. 

    For example, in the sample hybrid network (Fig 1) there are multiple 
    optical transport elements supporting the connection between the 
    GMPLS-enabled IP routers, and hence the physical topology between 
    them includes several nodes and links. However, the optical 
    elements between the IP routers are not able to switch traffic 
    within the client-layer network of routers (e.g. IP/MPLS), as the 
    optical elements are lambda switches, not IP/MPLS switches.  Hence 
    while the intervening optical elements may physically exist along 
    the path, they are not a part of the topology available to the 
    IP/MPLS routers for the purposes of traffic engineering in the 
    client-layer network. 
    
    An example of what the client-layer Traffic Engineering topology 
    would look like for the sample hybrid network is shown in the top 
    half of Fig 3. 

              Fig 3: Traffic Engineering - ERO with "loose hop" 
                              (See PDF version) 
         

    In this example, the TE topology associated with the client-layer 
    network is indicated by the links and nodes colored yellow, whereas 
    the TE topology associated with the server-layer network is 
    indicated by the links and nodes colored green.  The nodes at the 
    edge of the server-layer network are visible in both the topologies. 
    The yellow topology is capable of switching traffic within the 
    client-layer, whereas the green topology is capable of switching 
    traffic within the server-layer.  

    In this example, if the "B" router attempts to determine a path to 
    the "D" router it will be unable to do so, as the yellow topology to 
    which the B and D routers is connected does not include a fully-
    yellow path between them. The only way to setup an end-to-end path 
    in this case is to use an ERO with a "loose hop" across the server-
    layer domain as illustrated in Fig 3. This would cause the server-
    layer to create the necessary link in the client-layer topology on 
    the fly. However, this approach has a few drawbacks - [a] the 
    necessity for the operator to specify the ERO with the "loose" hop; 
    [b] potential sub-optimal usage of server-layer network resources; 
    and [c] unpredictability with regard to the fate-sharing of the new 

      
      
      
 Beeram, et al         Expires September 10, 2012               [Page 5] 
        




 Internet-Draft              GMPLS-UNI BCP                    March 2012 
         

    link (that is created on the fly) with other links of the client-
    layer topology.  

    In order to be able to compute an end-to-end path between the two 
    client-layer endpoints, the yellow topology  MUST  be sufficiently 
    augmented to indicate where there are paths through the green 
    topology which can provide connectivity between nodes in the yellow 
    topology. In other words, in order for a client to compute path(s) 
    across the server-layer network to other clients, the feasible paths 
    across the server-layer network  SHOULD be periodically computed by 
    the server-layer network and made available (in terms of TE links 
    and nodes that exist in the client-layer network) to all the 
    clients. This is discussed in detail in the next section. 

    In the overlay model the client and network domains, generally 
    speaking, exist in separate layer networks. One important use case, 
    however, is when the client and network topologies are in the same 
    layer network. For example, IP routers that are connected via GMPLS 
    UNI to a WDM network may be capable of terminating optical trails 
    that are lambda switched by the network. Because the network domain 
    normally would not want to leak its actual topology information into 
    the client domain, clients would not be able to compute end-to-end 
    paths across the network domain despite that client and network 
    links belong to the same (WDM) layer network. The method described 
    in the following sections of this document solves the problem of 
    partitioned client topology for this case as well. 

         

 3.1. Augmenting the Client-Layer Topology 

    In the example hybrid network shown below in Fig 4, consider a 
    scenario where each GMPLS-enabled IP router is connected to the 
    optical WDM transport network via a transponder.  Further consider 
    the situation where the transponder at node F can be connected to 
    the transponder in node J via the optical path F-G-H-J. A lambda LSP 
    can be provisioned in the server-layer along this path, and then 
    advertised as a TE link into the client-layer. With the availability 
    of this link, the path computation function at node A is able to 
    compute an end-to-end path from A to C. 

          Fig 4: Traffic Engineering - End to End Path Computation 
                              (See PDF version) 
         


      
      
      
 Beeram, et al         Expires September 10, 2012               [Page 6] 
         




 Internet-Draft              GMPLS-UNI BCP                    March 2012 
         

    In this case, in order for the TE link to be made available in the 
    client-layer network topology, the network resources corresponding 
    to the underlying server-layer LSP MUST be fully provisioned 
    beforehand.  

    As another scenario, consider a network configuration where the 
    transponders at nodes E, F, J and I are connected to each other via 
    directionless ROADM components. It is physically possible to 
    connect any transponder to any other transponder in the server-layer 
    network. As there are transport capabilities available in the 
    server-layer network between every element containing an adaptation 
    function to the client-layer network, the operator in this case 
    would not wish to reserve any network resources in the server-layer 
    network until a client LSP is signaled. The next section proposes a 
    method to address this common operational requirement.   

 3.1.1. Virtual TE Links 

    A "Virtual TE Link" as defined in section 7.3.3 of [RFC4847] is a TE 
    link that is advertised into the client-layer network, with the 
    available but not necessarily reserved/commuted resources in the 
    server-layer network necessary to support that TE link.  In other 
    words, "Virtual TE Links" represent specific transport capabilities 
    available in the server-layer network which can support the 
    establishment of LSPs in the client-layer network.  

    The two fundamental properties of a Virtual TE Link are: [a] it is 
    advertised just like a real TE link and thus contributes to the 
    buildup of the client-layer network topology; and [b] it does not 
    require allocation of resources at the server-layer until used, thus 
    allowing the sharing of server-layer network resources with other 
    Virtual TE links. 

         

         

        Fig 5: Traffic Engineering - End to End Path Computation (w/ 
                             "Virtual TE Links") 
                              (See PDF version) 
         

    In the example shown in Fig 5, the availability of a lambda channel 
    along the path F-G-H-J results in the advertisement by nodes F and J 
    of a Virtual TE Link between F and J into the client-layer network 
    topology (yellow line).  With the advertisement of this Virtual TE 
      
      
      
 Beeram, et al         Expires September 10, 2012               [Page 7] 
         




 Internet-Draft              GMPLS-UNI BCP                    March 2012 
         

    Link, the path computation function at node A is able to compute an 
    end-to-end path from A to C. 

    Whenever a Virtual TE Link gets selected and signaled in the ERO of 
    a client-layer connection, it ceases temporarily to be "virtual" and 
    transforms into a regular TE-link. When this transformation takes 
    place, the clients will notice the change in the advertised 
    available bandwidth of this TE-link. Also, all other Virtual TE 
    links that share resources with the TE-link in question start 
    advertising "zero" available bandwidth. Likewise, the TE network 
    image reverts back to the original form as soon as the last client-
    layer connection, going through the TE link in question, is 
    released, i.e. Virtual TE Link becomes "virtual" again 

 3.2. Macro SRLGs 

    The Virtual TE links that are advertised into the client-layer 
    network topology cannot be assumed to be totally independent. It is 
    quite possible for a given Virtual TE Link to share fate with one or 
    more other Virtual TE Link(s). This is because the underlying 
    server-layer LSPs (real or potential) can traverse the same server-
    layer network link and/or node, and failure of any such shared 
    link/node would make all such LSPs inoperable (along with the 
    Virtual TE Links supported by the LSPs). If diverse end-to-end paths 
    for client-layer LSPs are to be computed, the fate-sharing 
    information of the Virtual TE Links needs to be taken into account. 
    The standard way of addressing this problem is to use SRLGs as a 
    part of Virtual TE Link advertisements.  

    A traditional SRLG represents a shared physical network resource 
    upon which normal function of a link depends. Such SRLGs can also be 
    referred to as physical SRLGs.  Zero, one or more physical SRLGs 
    could be identified and advertised for every TE link in a given 
    layer network. However, there is a scalability issue with physical 
    SRLGs in multi-layer environments. For example, if a WDM layer LSP 
    serves an IP layer link, every WDM link and node traversed by the 
    LSP MUST be considered as a separate SRLG. The number of SRLGs to be 
    advertised to client (e.g. IP) layer per TE link would be directly 
    proportional to the number of hops traversed by the underlying 
    server-layer LSP. 

    The notion of Macro SRLGs addresses this scaling problem. Macro 
    SRLGs have the same protocol format as their physical counterparts 
    and can be assigned automatically for each Virtual TE Link that is 
    advertised into the client-layer network as a result of the 
    existence of an underlying server-layer LSP (instantiated or 
      
      
      
 Beeram, et al         Expires September 10, 2012               [Page 8] 
         





 Internet-Draft              GMPLS-UNI BCP                    March 2012 
         

    otherwise). A Macro SRLG represents a set of shared path segments 
    that are traversed by two or more of the underlying server-layer 
    LSPs. Each shared path segment can be viewed as a sequence of shared 
    resources where each individual resource has a physical SRLG 
    associated with it (example depicted in Fig 6). The actual procedure 
    for deriving these Macro SRLGs is beyond the scope of this document. 

                            Fig 6: Macro SRLGs 
                            (See PDF version) 
                                          
 3.3. MELGs 

    If two or more Virtual TE Links share fate, it means that the links 
    could be concurrently activated and used by client LSPs with a 
    caveat that the links could be taken out of service by a single 
    network failure, and, thus, cannot be used in the same protection 
    scheme. There could be a stronger (than fate sharing) relationship 
    between two or more Virtual TE Links. Because a set of Virtual TE 
    Links could be mapped onto the same uncommitted network resources, 
    the situation can arise when only one Virtual TE Link from the set 
    could be activated at any given time. In other words, two or more 
    Virtual TE Links could be mutually exclusive.  

    One example of mutually exclusive Virtual TE Links is when the paths 
    for the network domain LSPs supporting the Virtual TE Links not only 
    intersect, but also require usage of the same resource (e.g. lambda 
    channel) on the intersection. Another example is when the said paths 
    depend on a common physical resource (e.g. transponder, regenerator, 
    wavelength converter, etc.) that could be used only by one LSP at a 
    time. 

    For a client path computation function (especially a centralized one 
    capable of concurrent computation of multiple end-to-end paths) it 
    is important to know about such mutually exclusive relationship 
    between Virtual TE Links. This memo introduces a concept of Mutually 
    Exclusive Link Group (MELG) and suggests a new sub-TLV - MELGs sub-
    TLV - to be added to the top level TE Link TLV. The purpose of the 
    MELGs sub-TLV is: 

    - To indicate via a separate network unique number (MELG ID) an 
      element or a situation that makes the advertised Virtual TE Link 
      to belong to one or more mutually exclusive link groups. Path 
      computer will be able to decide on whether two or more Virtual TE 
      Links are mutually exclusive or not by finding the overlap of 

      
      
      
 Beeram, et al         Expires September 10, 2012               [Page 9] 
         





 Internet-Draft              GMPLS-UNI BCP                    March 2012 
         

      advertised MELGs (similar to deciding on whether two or more TE 
      Links share fate or not by finding common SRLGs) 
    - To indicate whether the advertised Virtual TE link is committed or 
      not at the moment of the advertising. Such bit of information is 
      important for a path computer: committing new  Virtual TE links 
      (vs. re-using committed ones) has a consequence of committing more 
      network resources and disabling other Virtual TE links that have 
      common MELGs with newly committed Virtual TE Link 

    Exact format of the MELGs sub-TLV is described in [MELG]  

                         [TBD: MELG Figure/Example] 

         

 3.4. Switching Constraints 

    Certain types of network configurations necessitate the 
    specification of connectivity constraints in the Virtual TE Link 
    advertisements. If the switching constraints associated with the 
    binding of Virtual and access TE links terminated on a given network 
    border node do not get advertised into the client domain, there is a 
    risk of an invalid path being computed (Fig 7). This document 
    recommends the use of the extensions specified in [GEN_CNSTR] to 
    address this issue. 

         
                        Fig 7: Switching Constraints 
                              (See PDF version) 

      

 4. Connection Setup 

    Experience with control plane operations in multi-layer networks 
    indicates there are benefits to coordinating certain signaling 
    operations, in the following manner. Consider the scenario where the  
    network domain is a WDM layer topology comprising of ROADMs. The 
    set-up time for a service at the WDM layer can be fairly long, as it 
    can involve time-consuming power-equalization procedures, amongst 
    other layer-specific operations. This means that at very least, the 
    setup timers for the client-layer service would need to be somehow 
    coordinated with that of the server-layer service. To avoid this 
    operationally awkward issue, a phased connection setup process as 
    depicted in Fig 8 is proposed. 
      
      
      
 Beeram, et al         Expires September 10, 2012              [Page 10] 
         




 Internet-Draft              GMPLS-UNI BCP                    March 2012 
         

                       Fig 8: Phased Connection Setup 
                              (See PDF version) 
         

    As long as the LSP segment across the server-layer network is not 
    completely "UP" (e.g., Fully Power Equalized), the nodes at the edge 
    of the server-layer network through which the LSP passes would 
    signal the client-layer PATH/RESV messages with the T (Testing) bit 
    set in the ADMIN_STATUS. The T bit would be cleared in these 
    messages only after the LSP segment across the server-layer network 
    is deemed fully operable.   

 5. Path computation aspects 

    It is assumed that a client domain path computation function makes 
    use of advertised client domain TE links as well as Virtual TE Links 
    while computing end-to-end paths for client LSPs. The said path 
    computation function could be local (i.e. located on client LSP 
    ingress nodes, (Corresponding to RFC4655 Composite PCE node) or 
    remote (i.e. network/External PCEs). Path computations could be 
    triggered by client nodes or NMS. Generally speaking, the 
    responsibility of the client domain path computation function is to 
    compute one or two paths for each source-destination pair of the TE-
    LSPs. Path computation SHOULD  be subject to one or more path 
    optimization criterions (such as shortest path, minimal latency, 
    etc.) and path computation constraints (e.g. link unreserved 
    bandwidth, link colors, layer-specific constraints, explicit 
    exclusions, etc.) 

    As the augmented topology does hide server layer links and nodes, it 
    is RECOMMENDED to support SRLG diverse path computation. 

    Furthermore the path computation  SHOULD consider the connectivity 
    and switching constraint in addition to all usual TE path 
    computation constraints (e.g. unreserved bandwidth, link colors, 
    layer-specific constraint) when available. 

    When using PCE architecture and PCEP protocol those aspects are 
    covered by RFC5440, RFC5521 and RFC5541.  

    As described in section 3.3. Virtual TE link may not only share risk 
    but may also depend on the same also server layer resources, thus 
    creating mutual exclusivity between Virtual TE Links. Therefore, 
    network topologies containing Virtual TE links have an increased 
    probability of LSP setup failures. In such topologies concurrent 
    path computation that takes in consideration MELG will reduce 
      
      
      
 Beeram, et al         Expires September 10, 2012              [Page 11] 
         





 Internet-Draft              GMPLS-UNI BCP                    March 2012 
         

    signaling failures (Not considering MELGs may result, for example, 
    in two LSPs routed on two Virtual TE-Links sharing the same server 
    layer resource). PCEP supports concurrent path computation per 
    RFC5440, expressing MELG constraint is out of scope of this document 
    (defined in [MELG]) 

    Core domain path computation and Inter-PCE path computation is out 
    of scope for this document. 

 6. L1VPNs 

    [RFC4208] implies that multiple independent sets of clients, located 
    in the same or different layer networks, could be connected to the 
    same network domain, providing the connectivity between the clients 
    within each set, while blocking the connectivity between the clients 
    from different sets (i.e. allows for the L1VPNs application).  
    This document suggests: 

    - New sub-TLV - VPN IDs sub-TLV - to be added to the top level TE 
      Link TLV. Exact format of the VPN IDs sub-TLV is described in 
      [GMPLS UNI RTG]  
    - Configuring on the network end of each access TE link zero, one or 
      more network unique VPN IDs and adding the configured information 
      as VPN IDs sub-TLV to the TE link advertisement; 
    - Configuring zero, one or more network unique VPN IDs for each 
      Virtual TE Link and adding the configured information as VPN IDs 
      sub-TLV to the TE link advertisement; 
    - Making the network responsible for proper filtering of the TE Link 
      advertisements, so that the information pertinent to VPN X is 
      leaked only to the clients that are members of the said VPN X 

    This approach would achieve the following: 

    - Automatic VPN member auto-discovery; 
    - Providing to the clients VPN specific view of the network ; 
    - Partitioning network resources between VPNs; 
    - Ensuring successful path computations (and therefore connectivity) 
      only between members of the same VPN  

    [RFC4208] implies that access TE Links could be named from a single 
    or a separate (per-VPN) name space. This draft takes the former 
    approach, that is, regardless of the associated VPNs, all access and 
    Virtual TE Links MUST be named from the same (specifically, network) 
    name space. Apart from simplicity, one reason for such choice is the 
    following consideration: a GMPLS LSP established between a pair of 
      
      
      
 Beeram, et al         Expires September 10, 2012              [Page 12] 
         




 Internet-Draft              GMPLS-UNI BCP                    March 2012 
         

    clients is likely to be advertised as a TE Link into the client's 
    layer TE domain. For example, a GMPLS LSP established between a pair 
    of IP routers is likely to be advertised as a TE Link into IP/MPLS 
    layer TE domain. This means that neither access nor Virtual TE Links 
    belong to the "real" client layer network. Hence assigning addresses 
    for access and Virtual TE links from the network name space would 
    not cause address collisions/re-configurations in the client layer. 

                         [TBD: L1VPN Figure/Example] 

         

 7. Use cases 

 7.1. Service optimization and restoration in Multi-Layer Networks 

        
    Multi-layer networks, as described in this document, are a reality 
    today and they are operated by different groups following different 
    operational procedures. 

    This requires an independent optimization of the client and server 
    layer networks, and this could lead to the situation where the re-
    routing of a client layer LSP fails because some of the resources on 
    the selected alternate path share fate with some of the resources on 
    the LSP's failed path.  This would happen due to lack of knowledge 
    of the server layer network when the client layer path computation 
    function selects the alternative path. 

    The high percentage of IP traffic in operator networks today makes 
    it necessary that client and server layer share sufficient 
    information to enable an optimized transport for IP/MPLS services 
    and address existing inefficiencies. One important point from the 
    carrier perspective is that the usage of server-layer SRLG 
    information by the client layer path computation is essential to 
    address these issues. 

    In a typical multi-layer network, in which the IP/MPLS network is 
    the client network and the WDM/OTN network is the server network, it 
    is the client layer network that is responsible for the protection 
    of the IP/MPLS traffic using mechanisms such as FRR and/or LFA.  
    Regardless of the mechanism that is used, SRLG information from the 
    server layer network helps to optimize the client layer network with 
    respect to reduced link utilization and reliable and efficient 
    protection of the client traffic. 

      
      
      
 Beeram, et al         Expires September 10, 2012              [Page 13] 
         





 Internet-Draft              GMPLS-UNI BCP                    March 2012 
         

    Today server layer network SRLGs are used mainly to calculate 
    diverse alternative paths for the IP/MPLS client layer network. 
    Therefore the following procedure MUST be periodically performed: 

    - Build traffic matrix for the server layer network  
      (based on IP links) 
    - Solve traffic engineering problems in the server layer network 
    - Calculate new SRLGs for the client layer network 
    - Simulate failure scenarios 
         

    GMPLS UNI reduces the OPEX costs of doing these procedures manually 
    by providing: 

    - the advertisement of server layer network SRLG information into 
      client layer network via common routing protocol 
    - the client layer network path computation function uses this SRLG 
      information in selecting maximally diverse paths.  
         
 7.2. IP/MPLS Offloading with UNI automation 

    A typical application in multi-layer (IP/MPLS over optical) networks 
    is termed 'IP Offloading', in which the network responds to the 
    increase in traffic of a particular service or across a network 
    segment in the IP network by placing IP traffic into GMPLS LSPs in 
    the server layer network in order to reduce the load on intermediate 
    IP routers. The increase in traffic is typically caused by an 
    elevated number of high traffic flows/services traversing an IP 
    network segment, which requires core routers to forward large IP 
    traffic volumes.   

    The decision process driving IP offloading is complex and is 
    constrained by a set of rules that reduce the cost of running the 
    multi-layer network while ensuring that it remains stable.  

    Automation of IP Offloading poses a number of challenges. It must 
    establish GMPLS LSPs in the server layer (e.g. optical) network and 
    automatically assign them identifiers, either numbered or 
    unnumbered, in the client layer network.  This information can be 
    automatically exchanged using the procedures from [RFC 4203]. 
    However, such procedures are not always implemented in commercial 
    equipment. Consequently, this information may need to be configured 
    manually as part of the initial set-up/installation of these LSPs. 


      
      
      
 Beeram, et al         Expires September 10, 2012              [Page 14] 
         




 Internet-Draft              GMPLS-UNI BCP                    March 2012 
         

    Later, when the GMPLS LSP tunnel needs to be established, the 
    hierarchical TE Link addresses MUST be included in the UNI path 
    request.  

 7.3. Use of PCE and VNTM in Multilayer Network Operation 

    Two key elements have been proposed to help in the management and 
    coordination of multi-layer networks: the Path Computation Element 
    (PCE) and the Virtual Network Topology Manager (VNTM). PCE is 
    responsible for the calculation of paths between endpoints, 
    particularly in complex scenarios involving, for example, WDM layer 
    physical impairments.  VNTM is in charge of maintaining the topology 
    of the client layer network by instantiating GMPLS LSPs, in the 
    server layer network.  I.e., in can be used to provide TE links to 
    the client layer network in real time. 

    Several cooperation modes between PCE, VNTM and the NMS have been 
    proposed in [RFC 5623]. For instance, the operator can request a new 
    MPLS path via the NMS, which consults a PCE with information of the 
    multi-layer network. The PCE, in case that there are enough 
    resources in the MPLS layer, returns a path made of real TE links. 
    On the other hand, if there is a lack of resources at the MPLS 
    layer, the response may contain a path with one or more Virtual TE-
    Links. In this case, the NMS can cooperate with the VNTM to suggest 
    the set-up of a GMPLS LSP(s) in the server layer network. The VNTM, 
    based on the local policies, can accept the suggestion and cause the 
    set-up of the GMPLS LSPs in the server layer network. 

    In order for the computation to be effective, the PCE needs 
    knowledge of the augmented topology (SRLGs, MELGs, TE metrics of the 
    Virtual TE-Links), which can be provided via GMPLS-UNI.  

 8. Security Considerations 

    TBD 

 9. IANA Considerations 

    This document has no actions for IANA. 

 10. References 

 10.1. Normative References 

    [RFC2119]        Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate 
                     Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997. 
      
      
      
 Beeram, et al         Expires September 10, 2012              [Page 15] 
         




 Internet-Draft              GMPLS-UNI BCP                    March 2012 
         

         
    [G.8080]         Architecture for the automatically switched optical 
                     network (ASON) 
         
    [RFC4208]        G. Swallow, J.Drake, H. Ishimatsu, and Y. Rekhter, 
                     "GMPLS UNI: RSVP-TE Support for the Overlay Model",  
                     RFC 4208, October 2005. 
         
    [MELG]           Mutually Exclusive Link Group,  
                     [draft-<tbd>-melg-00.txt]  
         
    [GEN CNSTR]      G.Bernstein, Y.Lee, D.Li, W.Imajuku, "General  
                     Network Element Constraint Encoding for GMPLS  
                     Controlled Networks"  
                     [draft-ietf-ccamp-general-constraint-encode-07.txt] 
         
    [GMPLS UNI RTG]  GMPLS UNI Routing Extensions  
                     [draft-<tbd>-gmpls-uni-routing-00.txt]  
         
 10.2. Informative References 

    [RFC4847]        T. Takeda, "Framework and Requirements for Layer 1  
                     VPNs", RFC 4847, April 2007. 
         

 11. Acknowledgments 

    TBD 

 Authors' Addresses 

    Vishnu Pavan Beeram 
    ADVA Optical Networking 
         
    Email: vbeeram@advaoptical.com 

         

    Igor Bryskin 
    ADVA Optical Networking 
         
    Email: ibryskin@advaoptical.com 

         

    Wes Doonan 
      
      
      
 Beeram, et al         Expires September 10, 2012              [Page 16] 
         




 Internet-Draft              GMPLS-UNI BCP                    March 2012 
         

    ADVA Optical Networking 
         
    Email: wdoonan@advaoptical.com 

         

    John Drake 
    Juniper Networks 
         
    Email: jdrake@juniper.net 

         

    Gert Grammel 
    Juniper Networks 
         
    Email: ggrammel@juniper.net 

         
    Manuel Paul 
    Deutsche Telekom 
         
    Email: Manuel.Paul@telekom.de 

       
    Ruediger Kunze 
    Deutsche Telekom 
         
    Email: Ruediger.Kunze@telekom.de 

         
         
    Oscar Gonzalez de Dios  
    Telefonica 
         
    Email: ogondio@tid.es 

         

    Cyril Margaria 
    Nokia Siemens Networks 
         
    Email: cyril.margaria@nsn.com 

            

      
      
      
 Beeram, et al         Expires September 10, 2012              [Page 17] 
         




 Internet-Draft              GMPLS-UNI BCP                    March 2012 
         

    Friedrich Armbruster 
    Nokia Siemens Networks 
         
    Email: friedrich.armbruster@nsn.com 

      








































      
      
      
 Beeram, et al         Expires September 10, 2012              [Page 18] 
         
