






      
      
     CCAMP Working Group                                            V.Beeram 
     Internet Draft                                                I.Bryskin 
     Intended status: Standards Track                               W.Doonan 
                                                     ADVA Optical Networking 
                                                                     J.Drake 
                                                                   G.Grammel 
                                                            Juniper Networks 
                                                                 Manuel Paul 
                                                              Ruediger Kunze 
                                                            Deutsche Telekom         
     Expires: April 21, 2012                                October 21, 2011 
                                         
      
                                           
                                    GMPLS-UNI BCP 
                       draft-beeram-ccamp-gmpls-uni-bcp-00.txt 


     Status of this Memo 

        This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the 
        provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.  

        Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
        Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
        other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
        Drafts. 

        Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
        months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents 
        at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as 
        reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 

        The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 

        The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html 

        This Internet-Draft will expire on April 21, 2012. 

     Copyright Notice 

        Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the 
        document authors. All rights reserved.  

         
      
      
      
      
     Beeram, et al           Expires April 21, 2012                 [Page 1] 
      






     Internet-Draft                      
     GMPLS-UNI BCP                October 2011 
         

        This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal 
        Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-
        info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.  Please 
        review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights and 
        restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components 
        extracted from this document must include Simplified BSD License 
        text as described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and 
        are provided without warranty as described in the Simplified BSD 
        License.  

     Abstract 

        This document pools together the best current practices that are 
        being used to apply the GMPLS Overlay model at the User-Network 
        Interface (UNI) reference point (as defined in [G.8080])  

     Table of Contents 

         
        1. Introduction...................................................2 
        2. Multi-Layered Approach.........................................3 
        3. Traffic Engineering............................................4 
           3.1. Augmenting the Client-Layer Topology......................6 
              3.1.1. Virtual TE Links.....................................7 
           3.2. Macro SRLGs...............................................7 
           3.3. Switching Constraints.....................................8 
        4. Connection Setup...............................................9 
        5. Security Considerations........................................9 
        6. Normative References...........................................9 
        7. Acknowledgments...............................................10 
         
     1. Introduction 

        Generalized Multiprotocol Label Switching (GMPLS) provides tools to 
        create end-to-end services in various transport technologies. These 
        tools can be used to support service management in different types 
        of deployment models. RFC 4208 discusses how GMPLS can be applied to 
        the overlay model. There are a good number of implementations that 
        have built on the basic concepts discussed in RFC 4208 and have 
        successfully  demonstrated  interoperability.  This  document  is  an 
        attempt to pool together the best current practices that are being 
        used to apply the GMPLS Overlay model at the User-Network Interface 
        (UNI) reference point (as defined in [G.8080]).  

      
      
      
     Beeram, et al 
                             Expires April 21, 2012                 [Page 2] 
         






     Internet-Draft                      
     GMPLS-UNI BCP                October 2011 
         

        RFC 4208 recommends the use of hierarchical service activation when 
        GMPLS is used for the core network - this document takes this 
        concept further, discusses the notion of "augmenting the client-
        layer  TE  topology"  and  explains  how  this  augmentation  enables 
        client-layer networking in an overlay model. The concepts discussed 
        in this document are based primarily on experiences drawn from 
        interoperating  GMPLS-enabled  IP  routers  with  Optical  Transport 
        elements. 

      

         

     2. Multi-Layered Approach 

        When an end-to-end service crosses a boundary between two regions of 
        dissimilar transport technology, it is necessary to execute distinct 
        forms of service activation within each region.  

         

                            Fig 1: Sample Hybrid Topology 
                                  (See PDF version) 
                                           
         

        For  example,  in  the  hybrid  network  illustrated  in  Fig  1, 
        provisioning  a  transport  service  between  two  GMPLS-enabled  IP 
        routers  on  either  side  of  the  optical  WDM  transport  topology 
        requires operations in two distinct layer networks; the client-layer 
        network interconnecting the routers themselves, and the server-layer 
        network interconnecting the optical transport elements in between 
        the routers.  

        Activation  of  the  end-to-end  service  begins  with  a  path 
        determination process, followed by the initiation of a signaling 
        process from the ingress along the determined path, per the set of 
        figures shown in Fig2. 

         

                         Fig 2: Hierarchical Service Action 
                                  (See PDF version) 
      
      
      
     Beeram, et al 
                             Expires April 21, 2012                 [Page 3] 
         






     Internet-Draft                      
     GMPLS-UNI BCP                October 2011 
         

         

     3. Traffic Engineering 

        The previous section outlines the basic method for activating end-
        to-end services across a multi-layer network.  As a necessary part 
        of that process an initial path selection process was performed, 
        whereby  an  appropriate  path  between  the  desired  endpoints  was 
        determined  through  some  means.    Further,  per  expectations  set 
        through current practices with regard to service provisioning in 
        homogeneous networks, operators expect that the underlying control 
        plane system will provide automated mechanisms for computing the 
        desired path or paths between network endpoints.   

        In particular, operators do not expect under normal circumstances to 
        be required to explicitly specify the end-to-end path; rather, 
        operators expect to be able to specify just the endpoints of the 
        path and rely on an automated computational process to identify and 
        qualify all the elements and links on the path between them.  Hence 
        when operating a hybrid network such as that described in Fig 1, it 
        is  necessary  to  extend  existing  traffic  engineering  and  path 
        computation mechanisms to operate in a similar manner. 

        Path computation and qualification operations occur at the path 
        computation element (PCE) selected by ingress element of an end-to-
        end service.  In order to be able to compute and qualify paths, the 
        PCE  must  be  provided  with  information  regarding  the  traffic 
        engineering  capabilities  of  the  layer  network  to  which  it  is 
        associated with, in particular what the topology of the layer 
        network is and what layer-specific  transport capabilities exist at 
        the various nodes and links in that topology. 

        It is important to note that topology information is layer-specific; 
        e.g. path computation and qualification operations occur within a 
        given layer, and hence information about topology and resource 
        availability are required for the specific layer to which the 
        connection  belongs  to.  The  topology  and  resource  availability 
        information  required  by  elements  in  the  client-layer  is  quite 
        distinct from that required by the elements in the server-layer 
        network. Hence, the server-layer traffic engineering links are of no 
        importance  for  the  client-layer  network,  and  it  is  actually 
        desirable to block their advertisements into the client TE domain by 
        the server-layer border nodes. 

      
      
      
     Beeram, et al 
                             Expires April 21, 2012                 [Page 4] 
         






     Internet-Draft                      
     GMPLS-UNI BCP                October 2011 
         

        In the sample hybrid network (Fig 1) there are multiple optical 
        transport elements supporting the connection between the GMPLS-
        enabled IP routers, and hence the physical topology between them 
        includes several nodes and links.  However, the optical elements 
        between the IP routers are not able to switch traffic within the 
        client-layer network of routers (e.g. IP/MPLS), as the optical 
        elements are lambda switches, not IP/MPLS switches.  Hence while the 
        intervening optical elements may physically exist along the path, 
        they are not a part of the topology available to the IP/MPLS routers 
        for the purposes of traffic engineering in the client-layer network. 

        An example of what the client-layer Traffic Engineering topology 
        would look like for the sample hybrid network is shown in the top 
        half of Fig 3. 

                  Fig 3: Traffic Engineering - ERO with "loose hop" 
                                  (See PDF version) 
                                           
                                           
        In this example, the TE topology associated with the client-layer 
        network is indicated by nodes [A, B, C, D, E, F, I, J] and links [A-
        F, E-B, J-C, I-D], whereas the TE topology associated with the 
        server-layer network is indicated by nodes [E, F, G, H, I, J] and 
        links [E-G, F-G, F-H, G-H, G-J, H-I, H-J, I-J].  The border nodes 
        [E, F, I, J] at the core are visible in both the topologies.  

        In this example, if the "B" router attempts to determine a path to 
        the "D" router it will be unable to do so, as the client-layer 
        topology to which the B and D routers is connected does not include 
        a full client-layer path between them. The only way to setup an end-
        to-end path in this case is to use an ERO with a "loose hop" across 
        the server-layer domain as illustrated in Fig 3. This would cause 
        the server-layer to create the necessary segment of the client-layer 
        topology on the fly. However, this approach has a few drawbacks - 
        [a] the necessity for the operator to specify the ERO with the 
        "loose" hop; [b] potential sub-optimal usage of server-layer network 
        resources; and [c] unpredictability with regard to the fate-sharing 
        of the new segment (that is created on the fly) with other links of 
        the client-layer topology.  

        In order to be able to compute a full path between the two client-
        layer endpoints, the client-layer topology must be sufficiently 
        augmented to indicate where there are paths through the server-layer 
        topology which can provide transport to services in the client-layer 
      
      
      
     Beeram, et al 
                             Expires April 21, 2012                 [Page 5] 
         






     Internet-Draft                      
     GMPLS-UNI BCP                October 2011 
         

        topology. In other words, in order for a client to compute path(s) 
        across the server-layer domain to other clients, the segment of the 
        client-layer topology over the server-layer domain should be pre-
        planned and made available (in terms of TE links and nodes that 
        exist in the client-layer) to all the clients. This is discussed in 
        detail in the next section. 

     3.1. Augmenting the Client-Layer Topology 

        In the example hybrid network, consider a scenario where each GMPLS-
        enabled IP router is connected to the optical WDM transport network 
        via  a  transponder.    Further  consider  the  situation  where  the 
        transponder at node F can be connected to the transponder in node J 
        via the optical pathway F-G-H-J. A WDM connection can be provisioned 
        in the server-layer along this path, and then advertised as a TE 
        link in the client-layer. With the availability of this link, the 
        path computation function at node A is able to compute an end-to-end 
        path from A to C. 

         

              Fig 4: Traffic Engineering - End to End Path Computation 
                                  (See PDF version) 
         

        In this case, in order for the TE link to be made available in the 
        client-layer topology, the network resources corresponding to the 
        underlying  server-layer  connection  must  be  fully  provisioned 
        beforehand.  

        As another example, consider a network configuration where the 
        transponders at nodes E, F, J and I are connected to each other via 
        directionless  ROADM  components.    It  is  physically  possible  to 
        connect any transponder to any other transponder in the network. As 
        there  are  transport  capabilities  available  in  the  server-layer 
        network between every element containing an adaptation function to 
        the client-layer network, the operator in this case would not wish 
        to reserve any network resources in the server-layer until the setup 
        of  the  client-layer  connection  is  initiated.  The  next  section 
        proposes  a  method  to  cater  to  this  particular  operational 
        requirement.   



      
      
      
     Beeram, et al 
                             Expires April 21, 2012                 [Page 6] 
         






     Internet-Draft                      
     GMPLS-UNI BCP                October 2011 
         

     3.1.1. Virtual TE Links 

        A "Virtual TE Link" is defined as a TE link that is advertised into 
        the client-layer, with available but unreserved resources in the 
        server-layer necessary to bring up the connection that supports that 
        TE link.  In other words, "Virtual TE Links" represent specific 
        transport capabilities available in the server-layer network which 
        can  support  services  in  the  client-layer  network.  The  two 
        fundamental  properties  of  a  Virtual  TE  Link  are:  [a]  It  is 
        advertised just like a real TE link and thus contributes to the 
        buildup of the client-layer topology (and thus client-layer elements 
        see no difference between virtual and real links); and [b] It does 
        not require allocation of resources at the server-layer until used, 
        thus allowing the sharing of server-layer resources with other 
        virtual TE links. 

            Fig 5: Traffic Engineering - End to End Path Computation (w/ 
                                 "Virtual TE Links" 
                                  (See PDF version) 
                                           
                                           
        In the example shown in Fig 5, the availability of a lambda channel 
        along the path F-G-H-J results in there being a virtual traffic 
        engineering link between F and J within the client-layer topology.  
        With the availability of this link, the path computation function at 
        node A is able to compute an end-to-end path from A to C. 

        When a virtual TE link gets selected and signaled in the ERO of the 
        client-layer connection, it ceases to be "Virtual" and transforms 
        into a regular TE-link. When this transformation takes place, the 
        clients will notice the change in the advertised available bandwidth 
        of this TE-link. Also, all other Virtual TE links that share 
        resources with the TE-link in question start advertising "zero" 
        available bandwidth. Likewise, the TE network image reverts back to 
        the original form as soon as the last client-layer connection, going 
        through the TE link in question, is released. 

     3.2. Macro SRLGs 

        The TE links that are added to the client-layer topology cannot be 
        assumed to be totally independent. It is quite possible for a given 
        TE link to share the same fate with one or more other TE link(s). 
        This is because the underlying server-layer connections (real or 
        potential) can traverse the same server-layer link and/or node, and 
      
      
      
     Beeram, et al 
                             Expires April 21, 2012                 [Page 7] 
         






     Internet-Draft                      
     GMPLS-UNI BCP                October 2011 
         

        failure of any such shared link/node would make all such connections 
        inoperable  (along  with  the  client-layer  links  they  serve).  If 
        diverse end-to-end client-layer connections are to be computed, the 
        fate-sharing information of the TE links needs to be accounted for. 
        The standard way of addressing this problem is to use SRLGs as a 
        part of TE link advertisements.  

        A traditional SRLG represents a shared physical network resource 
        upon which normal function of a link depends. Such SRLGs can also be 
        referred to as physical SRLGs.  Zero, one or more physical SRLGs 
        could be identified and advertised for every TE link in a given 
        layer network. However, there is a scalability issue with physical 
        SRLGs in multi-layer environments. For example, if a WDM layer 
        connection  serves  an  IP  layer  link,  every  WDM  link  and  node 
        traversed by the connection must be considered as a separate SRLG. 
        The number of SRLGs to be advertised to client (e.g. IP) layer per 
        link would be directly proportional to the number of hops traversed 
        by the underlying server-layer connection. 

        The notion of Macro SRLGs addresses this scaling problem. Macro 
        SRLGs have the same protocol format as that of their physical 
        counterpart and can be assigned automatically for each TE link that 
        is advertised into the client-layer as a result of the existence of 
        an underlying server-layer connection (instantiated or otherwise). A 
        Macro SRLG represents a set of shared path segments that are 
        traversed by two or more of the underlying server-layer connections. 
        Each shared path segment can be viewed as a sequence of shared 
        resources  where  each  individual  resource  has  a  physical  SRLG 
        associated with it (example depicted in Fig 6). The actual procedure 
        for deriving these Macro SRLGs is beyond the scope of this document. 

                                 Fig 6: Macro SRLGs 
                                  (See PDF version) 
                                           
                                           
     3.3. Switching Constraints 

        Certain types of optical network configurations necessitate the 
        specification of connectivity constraints in the TE advertisements. 
        If the switching constraints associated with the binding between the 
        TE link served by the server domain and its associated access TE 
        link do not get advertised, there is a risk of an invalid path being 
        picked (Fig 7). This document recommends the use of the extensions 
        specified in [GEN_CNSTR] to address this. 
      
      
      
     Beeram, et al 
                             Expires April 21, 2012                 [Page 8] 
         






     Internet-Draft                      
     GMPLS-UNI BCP                October 2011 
         

                            Fig 7: Switching Constraints 
                                  (See PDF version) 
         

     4. Connection Setup 

        Experience with control plane operations in multi-layer networks 
        indicates  there  are  benefits  to  coordinating  certain  signaling 
        operations, in the following manner. Consider the scenario where the 
        core is a WDM network comprising of ROADMs. The set-up time for a 
        service at the optical layer can be fairly long, as it can involve 
        time-consuming power-equalization procedures, amongst other layer-
        specific operations. This means that at very least, the setup timers 
        for the client-layer service would need to be somehow coordinated 
        with that of the server-layer service. To avoid this operationally 
        awkward issue, a phased connection setup process as depicted in Fig 
        8 is proposed. 

         

                           Fig 8: Phased Connection Setup 
                                  (See PDF version) 
                                           
                                           
        As long as the server-layer connection is not completely "UP" (for 
        example: Fully Power Equalized), the nodes at the edge of the core 
        would  signal  the  client-layer  PATH/RESV  messages  with  the  T 
        (Testing) bit set in the ADMIN_STATUS. The T bit would be cleared in 
        these messages only after the underlying server-layer connection is 
        deemed fully operable.   

     5. Security Considerations 

        TBD 

     6. Normative References 

        [RFC2119]    Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate 
                     Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997. 
         
        [RFC4208]    G. Swallow, J.Drake, H. Ishimatsu, and Y. Rekhter, 
                     "GMPLS UNI: RSVP-TE Support for the Overlay Model",  
                     RFC 4208, October 2005. 

      
      
      
     Beeram, et al 
                             Expires April 21, 2012                 [Page 9] 
         






     Internet-Draft                      
     GMPLS-UNI BCP                October 2011 
         

      

     7. Acknowledgments 

        TBD 

     Authors' Addresses 

        Vishnu Pavan Beeram 
        ADVA Optical Networking 
         
        Email: vbeeram@advaoptical.com 

         

        Igor Bryskin 
        ADVA Optical Networking 
         
        Email: ibryskin@advaoptical.com 

         

        Wes Doonan 
        ADVA Optical Networking 
         
        Email: wdoonan@advaoptical.com 

         

        John Drake 
        Juniper Networks 
         
        Email: jdrake@juniper.net 

         

        Gert Grammel 
        Juniper Networks 
         
        Email: ggrammel@juniper.net 

         
        Manuel Paul 
        Deutsche Telekom 
      
      
      
     Beeram, et al 
                             Expires April 21, 2012                [Page 10] 
         






     Internet-Draft                      
     GMPLS-UNI BCP                October 2011 
         

         
        Email: Manuel.Paul@telekom.de 

         

        Ruediger Kunze 
        Deutsche Telekom 
         
        Email: Ruediger.Kunze@telekom.de 



































      
      
      
     Beeram, et al 
                             Expires April 21, 2012                [Page 11] 
         
