Network Working Group                                         S. Jiang
Internet Draft                                                  B. Liu
Intended status: Best Current Practice    Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd
Expires: August 5, 2011                               January 26, 2011

           IPv6 Site Renumbering Guidelines and Further Works
              draft-jiang-ipv6-site-renum-guideline-00.txt


Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF). Note that other groups may also distribute working
   documents as Internet-Drafts. The list of current Internet-Drafts is
   at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 5, 2011.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors. All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document. Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document. Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.



Abstract

   This document analyzes the existing issues for IPv6 site renumbering.
   It also analyzes the possible directions to solve these issues and
   gives recommendations. This document only takes the perspective of
   network and network protocols. Renumbering in IPv4 networks, in the




Jiang & Liu            Expires August 5, 2011                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draftdraft-jiang-ipv6-site-renum-guideline-00.txt January 2011


   dual-stack network or in the IPv4/IPv6 transition networks are out of
   scope.

   This document only takes the perspective of network and network
   protocols. According to the different stages, these issues are
   described in three categories: considerations during network design,
   considerations for routine network management, and considerations
   during renumbering operation. Recommended solutions or strategies are
   also described. Issues that still remain unsolvable are listed as the
   fourth category.

   Although we list a few non-network issues in this document, we
   consider them as issues that ISPs or network providers cannot affect.
   So, these issues are considered to be unsolvable and not explore
   further in these document, though they may be solved by OS
   implementations or application implementations.

   We summary the requests that need to extend current protocols as
   further works at the end of this document.

Table of Contents

   1. Introduction ................................................. 3
   2. Network Renumbering Considerations and Solutions/Strategies... 3
      2.1. Considerations/issues during network design ............. 4
      2.2. Considerations/issues for the routine network management. 5
      2.3. Considerations/issues during renumbering operation....... 6
      2.4. Issues that still remain unsolvable ..................... 8
      2.5. Issues that need further analysis ....................... 9
   3. Non-network issues ........................................... 9
   4. Requests to extend current protocol ......................... 10
   5. Security Considerations ..................................... 11
   6. IANA Considerations ......................................... 11
   7. Acknowledgements ............................................ 11
   8. Change Log [RFC Editor please remove] ....................... 11
   9. References .................................................. 11
      9.1. Normative References ................................... 11
      9.2. Informative References ................................. 12
   Author's Addresses ............................................. 13









Jiang & Liu            Expires August 5, 2011                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draftdraft-jiang-ipv6-site-renum-guideline-00.txt January 2011



1. Introduction

   [RFC5887] has reviewed the existing mechanisms for site renumbering
   for both IPv4 and IPv6, and identified operational issues with those
   mechanisms. However, the discussion and analysis were too wide. It
   exposure many issues, but not give enough analysis on whether these
   issues are solvable and how. Even the document itself indicates more
   fractionized and detailed analysis is needed. On another side, the
   mechanisms analyzed in the document are still not in used.

   This document focuses on IPv6 network renumbering only, by leaving
   IPv4 out of scope. Renumbering in IPv4 networks, in the dual-stack
   network or in the IPv4/IPv6 transition networks are out of scope.
   This is also consistent preference from IETF renumber mail list by
   the time of writing up.

   This document is mainly concerned with issues affecting medium to
   large sites, which is taken as the conclusion from [RFC5887]. It
   takes the analysis conclusions from [RFC5887] and other relevant
   documents as the primary input.

   This document only takes the perspective of network and network
   protocols. According to the different stages, these issues are
   described in three categories: considerations during network design,
   considerations for routine network management, and considerations
   during renumbering operation. Recommended solutions or strategies are
   also described. Issues that still remain unsolvable are listed as the
   fourth category.

   Issues that need further analysis are temporarily listed for now.
   They should all be relocated into abovementioned four categories.

   Although we list a few non-network issues in this document, we
   consider them as issues that ISPs or network providers cannot affect.
   So, these issues are considered to be unsolvable and not explore
   further in these document, though they may be solved by OS
   implementations or application implementations.

   At the end of this document, we summary the requests that need to
   extend current protocols.

2. Network Renumbering Considerations and Solutions/Strategies

   The purpose of this section is not to describe the renumbering
   operation or event completely or entirely, but to expose the existing
   issues and give the recommended solutions or strategies.


Jiang & Liu            Expires August 5, 2011                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draftdraft-jiang-ipv6-site-renum-guideline-00.txt January 2011


2.1. Considerations/issues during network design

   This section describes the renumbering relevant considerations or
   issues that a network architect should carefully plan when he builds
   or designs a new network.

      - Address configuration models

      In IPv6 networks, there are two auto-configuration models for
      address assignment: the Stateless Address Auto-Configuration
      (SLAAC) by Neighbor Discovery (ND, [RFC4861, RFC4862]) and the
      stateful address configuration by Dynamic Host Configuration
      Protocol for IPv6 (DHCPv6, [RFC3315]). (Manual address
      configuration is not scalable in medium to large sites, hence be
      out of scope.)

      SLAAC is considered easier to renumbering by broadcasting a Router
      Advertisement message with a new prefix. DHCPv6 can also trigger
      the renumbering process by sending unicast RECONFIGURE messages
      though it may cause large number of interactions between hosts and
      DHCPv6 server. However, DHCPv6 reconfiguration "doesn't appear to
      be widely used for bulk renumbering purposes" [RFC5887].

      In principle, a network should choice only one address
      configuration model and employs either ND or DHCPv6. However,
      since DHCPv6 is also used to configure many other network
      parameters, there are ND and DHCPv6 co-existing scenarios. The
      current protocols do not effectively prevent that both SLAAC and
      DHCPv6 address assignment are used in the same network (see M bit
      analysis in section 5.1.1 [RFC5887]. It is network architects' job
      to make sure only one configuration model is employed. Even in a
      large network that contains several subnet works, it is
      recommended not to mixture the two address configuration models
      though isolately using them in different subnet works may reduce
      the risk partly.

      On another side, new protocol extension may help to diagnose the
      fault situation. This diagnose function could be particularly
      useful in the scenario where a multihomed network uses SLAAC for
      one address prefix and DHCPv6 for another.

      - DNS

      It is recommended that the site have an automatic and systematic
      procedure for updating/synchronising its DNS records, including
      both forward and reverse mapping. Manually on-demand updating



Jiang & Liu            Expires August 5, 2011                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draftdraft-jiang-ipv6-site-renum-guideline-00.txt January 2011


      model is considered as a harmful problem creator in renumbering
      event.

      In order to simplify the operation procedure, the network
      architect should combine the forward and reverse DNS updates in a
      single procedure.

      If a small site depends on its ISP's DNS system rather than
      maintains its own one. When renumbering, it requires
      administrative coordination between the site and its ISP.
      Alternatively, the DNS synchronizing may be completed through the
      Secure Dynamic DNS Update.

      - Security

      Any automatic renumbering scheme has a potential exposure to
      hijacking at the moment that a new address is announced. Proper
      network security mechanisms should be employed. Secure Neighbour
      Discovery (SEND, [RFC3971]), which does not widely deployed, is
      recommended to replace ND. Alternatively, certain lightweight
      renumbering specific security mechanism may be developed in the
      future. DHCPv6 build-in secure mechanisms, like Secure DHCPv6
      [I-D.ietf-dhc-secure-dhcpv6] or authentication of DHCPv6 messages
      [RFC3315] are recommended.

      - Miscellaneous

      Addresses should not be used to configure network connectivity,
      such as tunnels. A site or network should also avoid to embed
      addresses from other sites or networks in its own configuration
      data. Instead, the Fully-Qualified Domain Names should be used.
      Thusness, these connectivities can survive after renumbering
      events. This also applies to host-based connectivities.

      Service Location Protocol and multicast DNS with SRV records for
      service discovery can reduce the number of places that IP
      addresses need to be configured.

2.2. Considerations/issues for the routine network management

   This session describes several recommendations for the routine
   network management. To adopt these recommendations, a site could be
   renumbered easier. However, these recommendations are not cost free.
   They are possible to increase the daily burden of networks.
   Therefore, only these networks that are expected to be renumbered
   soon or very frequent should adopt these recommendations with the
   balance consideration between daily cost and renumbering cost.


Jiang & Liu            Expires August 5, 2011                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draftdraft-jiang-ipv6-site-renum-guideline-00.txt January 2011


      - Reduce the address preferred time or valid time or both.

      Long-lifetime addresses may cause issues for renumbering events.
      Particularly, some offline hosts may reconnect back using these
      addresses after renumbering events. Shorter preferred lifetime
      with relevant long valid lifetime may get short transition period
      for renumbering event and avoid address renew too frequent.

      - Reduce the DNS record TTL.

      The DNS record TTL on the local DNS server should be manipulated
      to ensure that stale addresses are not cached.

      - Reduce the DNS configuration lifetime on the hosts.

      Since the DNS server could be renumbered as well, the DNS
      configuration lifetime on the hosts should also be reduced if
      renumbering events are expected. The DNS configuration can be done
      through either ND [RFC6106] or DHCPv6 [RFC3646]. However, DHCPv6
      DNS option does not include associated lifetime. It should be
      updated.

      - Reduce the NAT mapping session keepalive time.

      Idle NAT mapping session may be keep alive for a long period if
      the external network addresses space is plenteous and the internal
      network address architecture is stable. However, renumbering
      events mean to restructure the internal network address
      architecture fully or partly. Reducing the NAT mapping session
      keepalive time may help to tear down the idle TCP connectivities.
      This will reduce the TCP surviving issue during the renumbering
      event.

2.3. Considerations/issues during renumbering operation

   Renumbering events are not instantaneous events. Normally, there is a
   transition period, in which both the old prefix and the new prefix
   are used in the site. Better network design and management, better
   pre-preparation and longer transition period are helpful to reduce
   the issues during renumbering operation.

      -  Transition period

      If renumbering transition period is longer than all addresses
      life, after which the addresses lease expire, each host will
      automatically pick up its new IP address. In this case, it would



Jiang & Liu            Expires August 5, 2011                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draftdraft-jiang-ipv6-site-renum-guideline-00.txt January 2011


      be the DHCP server or Router Advertisement itself that
      automatically accomplishes client renumbering.

      - Network initiative enforced renumbering

      If the network has to enforce renumbering before addresses lease
      expire, the network should initiate enforcement messages, either
      in Router Advertisement messages or DHCPv6 RECONFIGURE messages.

      - DNS record update and DNS configuration on hosts

      DNS records should be updated if hosts are renumbered. If the site
      depends on ISP's DNS system, it should report the new host's DNS
      records to its ISP. During the transition period, both old and new
      DNS records are valid. If the TTL of DNS records is shorter than
      the transition period, administrative operation may not be
      necessary.

      DNS configuration on hosts should be updated if local recursive
      DNS servers are renumbered. During the transition period, both old
      and new DNS addresses may co-exist on the hosts. If the lifetime
      of DNS configuration is shorter than the transition period, name
      resolving failure may not be reduced to minimum. A notification
      mechanism may be needed to indicate the hosts that a renumbering
      event of local re DNS happen or is going to take place recursive.

      - Router awareness

      In a site with multiple border routers, portion renumbering should
      be aware by all border routers in order to correctly handle
      inbound packets. Internal forwarding tables need to be updated.

      - Border filtering

      In a multihomed site, an egress router to ISP A could normally
      filter packets with source addresses from other ISPs. The egress
      router connecting to ISP A should be notified if the egress router
      connecting to ISP B initiates a renumbering event in order to
      properly act filter function.

      - NAT or tunnel concentrator renumbering

      NAT or tunnel concentrator itself might be renumbered. This change
      should be reconfigured to relevant hosts or router.





Jiang & Liu            Expires August 5, 2011                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draftdraft-jiang-ipv6-site-renum-guideline-00.txt January 2011


2.4. Issues that still remain unsolvable

   This section lists a few issues that still remain unsolvable. Some of
   them may be inherently unsolvable.

      -  It is not possible to reduce a prefix's lifetime to below two
         hours. So, renumbering should not be an unplanned sudden event.
         This issue could only be avoided by early planning.

      -  Manual or script-driven procedures will break the completely
         automatic host renumbering.

      -  Some environments like embedded systems might not use DHCP or
         SLAAC and even configuration scripts might not be an option.
         This creates special problems that no general-purpose solution
         is likely to address.

      -  TCP and UDP flows can't survive at renumbering event at either
         end.

      -  Some address configuration data might be widely dispersed and
         much harder to find, even will inevitably be found only after
         the renumbering event.

      -  The embedding of IPv6 unicast addresses into multicast
         addresses and the embedded-RP (Rendezvous Point) will cause
         issues when renumbering.

      -  Changing the unicast source address of a multicast sender might
         also be an issue for receivers.

      -  When a renumbering event takes place, entries in the state
         table of NAT or tunnel concentrator that happen to contain the
         affected addresses will become invalid and will eventually time
         out. However, this can be considered as harmless though it
         takes sources on these devices for a while.

      -  A site that is listed in a black list can escape that list by
         renumbering itself. The site itself of course will not
         initiatively to report its renumbering and the black list may
         not be able to monitor or discover the renumbering event.

   Some of these issues can be considered as harmless or have minimum
   impacts.





Jiang & Liu            Expires August 5, 2011                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draftdraft-jiang-ipv6-site-renum-guideline-00.txt January 2011


2.5. Issues that need further analysis

   This section lists a few issues that still need further analysis.
   Some of them may be addressed in later version of this document and
   relocated into other sections. Some of them may be worthy separated
   document. (Editor note: if all issues addressed, this section should
   be removed.)

      -  "Some routers cache IP addresses in some situations.  So
         routers might need to be restarted as a result of site
         renumbering" [RFC2072]. It seems this caused by individual
         implementation and only happen on the old type of routers.
         (Author note: to be removed, if confirmed)

      -  Multihomed site, using SLAAC for one address prefix and DHCPv6
         for another, would clearly create a risk of inconsistent host
         behaviour and operational confusion.

      -  It seems so far the renumbering studies only focusing on the
         individual network using a single prefix. In a large network, a
         short prefix may be used. The prefix is assigned to be longer
         and prefixes and delegated to several sub-networks. To make the
         scenario even more complicated, it may be some sub-networks
         employ SLAAS while some others are managed by DHCPv6. How to
         coordinate among these sub-networks to be renumbered together
         may be worth of analyzing.

      -  The impact of portion renumbering may need to be analyzed
         further.

3. Non-network issues

   Although we focus on network side, in this section, we also list a
   few non-network issues. They are out of network providers/operators
   reach. Therefore, from network perspective, these issues are
   considered to be unsolvable though they may be solved by OS
   implementations or application/service implementations. It is out of
   scope to explore these issues further.

      -  Any implementation is at risk from renumbering if it does not
         check that an address is valid each time it opens a new
         communications session

      -  Socket API encourages applications to be aware of and to store
         IP address. And the API relative functions do not return an
         address lifetime so that applications have no way to know the
         address is no longer valid.


Jiang & Liu            Expires August 5, 2011                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draftdraft-jiang-ipv6-site-renum-guideline-00.txt January 2011


      -  "DNS Pining": limits acceptance of server IP address changes
         for JavaScript security considerations and it may directly
         damage the ability of applications to deal with renumbering.

      -  Server applications might need to be restarted when the host
         they contain is renumbered. In an IPv6 multi-addressed host,
         server applications need to be able to listen on more than one
         address simultaneously. Name-based APIs or implementations are
         recommended.

      -  When a nameserver is renumbered, the host may not be aware or
         notified immediately; or even the host is notified, but it
         still considers the old nameserver is available. The host will
         at some point find it unavailable. This will cause name
         resolving failure though these failure may be recoverable.

      -  Renumbering may cause issues for ACLs or group login services.

4. Requests to extend current protocol

   As mentioned in section 2, the following request to extend the
   current protocols.

      - A diagnose function to detect and report the confliction of
         SLAAC and DHCPv6 address assignment.

      - The current protocol needs to be extended if it does not
         support to combine the forward and reverse DNS updates in a
         single procedure. (Author note: it seems possible. If so,
         remove this item.)

      - DHCPv6 should be extended to indicate hosts the associated DNS
         lifetimes when making DNS configuration.

      - A lightweight renumbering specific security mechanism may be
         developed if SEND is too weight to be widely deployed.

      - If the issues of coordination among these sub-networks to be
         renumbered together are confirmed, new interaction may need to
         be defined to achieve the cooperation.

      - A notification mechanism may be needed to indicate the hosts
         that a renumbering event of local recursive DNS happen or is
         going to take place recursive.





Jiang & Liu            Expires August 5, 2011                [Page 10]

Internet-Draftdraft-jiang-ipv6-site-renum-guideline-00.txt January 2011


      - NAT or tunnel concentrator configuration procedure may need to
         be extended to be able to notify the host the renumbering of
         NAT or tunnel concentrator.

5. Security Considerations

   A site that is listed in a black list can escape that list by
   renumbering itself.

   Any automatic renumbering scheme has a potential exposure to
   hijacking at the moment that a new address is announced. Proper
   network security mechanisms should be employed. SEND is recommended
   to replace ND. Alternatively, certain lightweight renumbering
   specific security mechanism may be developed in the future. DHCPv6
   build-in secure mechanisms, like Secure DHCPv6
   [I-D.ietf-dhc-secure-dhcpv6] or authentication of DHCPv6 messages
   [RFC3315] are recommended.

   The security updates will need to be made in two stages (immediately
   before and immediately after the event).

   [Editor note: this section needs further work.]

6. IANA Considerations

   This draft does not request any IANA action.

7. Acknowledgements

   This work is illumined by RFC5887, so thank for RFC 5887 authors,
   Brian Carpeter, Randall Atkinson and Hannu Flinck. Useful ideas were
   also illumined by documents from Tim Chown and Fred Bark.

8. Change Log [RFC Editor please remove]

   draft-jiang-ipv6-site-renumbering-ps-00, original version, 2011-01-28



9. References

9.1. Normative References

   [RFC3315] R. Droms, Bound, J., Volz, B., Lemon, T., Perkins, C., and
             M. Carney, "Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol for IPv6
             (DHCPv6)", RFC 3315, July 2003.



Jiang & Liu            Expires August 5, 2011                [Page 11]

Internet-Draftdraft-jiang-ipv6-site-renum-guideline-00.txt January 2011


   [RFC3646] R. Droms, "DNS Configuration options for Dynamic Host
             Configuration Protocol for IPv6 (DHCPv6) ", RFC3646,
             December 2003.

   [RFC3736] R. Droms, "Stateless Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol
             (DHCP) Service for IPv6", RFC 3736, April 2004.

   [RFC3971] J. Arkko, Ed., J. Kempf, B. Zill, and P. Nikander "SEcure
             Neighbor Discovery (SEND)", RFC 3971, March 2005

   [RFC4861] Narten, T., Nordmark, E., Simpson, W., and H. Soliman,
             "Neighbor Discovery for IP version 6 (IPv6)", RFC 4861,
             September 2007.

   [RFC4862] Thomson, S., Narten, T., and T. Jinmei, "IPv6 Stateless
             Address Autoconfiguration", RFC 4862, September 2007.

   [RFC6106] J. Jeong, Ed., S. Park, L. Beloeil, and S. Madanapalli
             "IPv6 Router Advertisement Option for DNS Configuration",
             RFC 6106, November 2011.

9.2. Informative References

   [RFC4076] Chown, T., Venaas, S., and A. Vijayabhaskar, "Renumbering
             Requirements for Stateless Dynamic Host Configuration
             Protocol for IPv6 (DHCPv6)", RFC 4076, May 2005.

   [RFC4192] Baker, F., Lear, E., and R. Droms, "Procedures for
             Renumbering an IPv6 Network without a Flag Day", RFC 4192,
             September 2005.

   [RFC5887] Carpenter, B., Atkinson, R., and H. Flinck, "Renumbering
             Still Needs Work", RFC 5887, May 2010.

   [I-D.ietf-dhc-secure-dhcpv6]
             Jiang, S., and Shen S., "Secure DHCPv6 Using CGAs", working
             in progress.











Jiang & Liu            Expires August 5, 2011                [Page 12]

Internet-Draftdraft-jiang-ipv6-site-renum-guideline-00.txt January 2011


Author's Addresses

   Sheng Jiang
   Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd
   Huawei Building, No.3 Xinxi Rd.,
   Shang-Di Information Industry Base, Hai-Dian District, Beijing 100085
   P.R. China
   Email: shengjiang@huawei.com

   Bing Liu
   Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd
   Huawei Building, No.3 Xinxi Rd.,
   Shang-Di Information Industry Base, Hai-Dian District, Beijing 100085
   P.R. China
   Email: leo.liubing@huawei.com

































Jiang & Liu            Expires August 5, 2011                [Page 13]