


IETF MANET Working Group                                      A. Baryun
Internet-Draft                                            July 30, 2012
Expires: January 31, 2013
Intended status: Best Current Practice
Intended to update RFC2119


       Key Words of Conditional Language of Requirements Levels
                draft-baryun-rfc2119-update-00.txt


Abstract

   In many standards track documents conditional words are used to
   signify the requirements in the specification. These words are
   prefered to be capitalized. This document defines these conditional
   words as they should be interpreted in IETF documents. Authors who
   follow these guidelines should incorporate this phrase near the
   beginning of their document. The additional key words to words
   described in RFC2119 are; "IF, THEN", "ELSE IF", "ELSE".

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF). Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts. The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."
   
   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 31, 2013.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2012 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors. All rights reserved.
   
   








Baryun                   Expires January 31, 2013              [Page 1]

Internet-Draft           Conditional Requirement              July 2012


   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document. Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with
   respect to this document. Code Components extracted from this
   document must include Simplified BSD License text as described in
   Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without
   warranty as described in the Simplified BSD License.

   This document may contain material from IETF Documents or IETF  
   Contributions published or made publicly available before November
   10, 2008. The person(s) controlling the copyright in some of this
   material may not have granted the IETF Trust the right to allow
   modifications of such material outside the IETF Standards Process.
   Without obtaining an adequate license from the person(s) controlling
   the copyright in such materials, this document may not be modified
   outside the IETF Standards Process, and derivative works of it may
   not be created outside the IETF Standards Process, except to format
   it for publication as an RFC or to translate it into languages other
   than English.

1. Introduction
   
   Many IETF RFCs have specified conditional language without
   significant requirement level as used in the RFC2119 key words.
   This document describe key words that will help and facilitate
   to the readers, users and designers in understanding conditions, 
   and consequences of conditions of specifications.

2. The Conditional Key words

   Note that the force of these words is modified by the requirement
   level of the document in which they are used.

   IF x THEN y:
     
	 the possibility that the condition of x occur, but when it does
	 the function y MUST occur.

   ELSE IF v THEN w: 

     the condition v is tested only when x does not occur, but when v
	 occurs, the function w MUST occur. 

   ELSE z:

     the function(s) MUST occur only when all the conditions above,
	 e.g. as x and v conditions do not occur



Baryun                   Expires January 31, 2013              [Page 2]

Internet-Draft           Conditional Requirement              July 2012



   IF NOT x THEN y:

     the possibility that the condition of x MUST NOT occur, but when
	 it does not occur the function y MUST occur.


3. Guidance in the use of these Imperatives (TBD)

   Imperatives of the type defined in this document must be used
   with care and sparingly. In particular, they MUST only be used
   where it is actually required for specifying conditional behavior
   which has interoperability potential. For incetance, they must not
   be used to try to impose a particular conditional method on
   implementors where the method is not required for interoperability.


4. Security Considerations (TBD)

   These additional conditional terms are frequently used to specify
   conditional behavior with security implications. The effects on
   security of not implementing as "IF, THEN", "ELSE" or "ELSE IF",
   or doing something the specification says MUST do under conditions
   may be very subtle. I-D or RFC Document author(s) should take the
   time to elaborate the security implications of not following
   conditional requirements as most implementors will not have
   had the benefit of the experience and discussion that produced the
   specification.

5. Acknowledgments (TBD)


6. References

   [RFC2119] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
             Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.





Author's Address

   Abdussalam Nuri Baryun
   Email: abdussalambaryun@gmail.com







Baryun                   Expires January 31, 2013              [Page 3]

