


IETF MANET Working Group                                      A. Baryun
Internet-Draft                                            July 30, 2012
Expires: January 31, 2013
Intended status: Standard


                The Node Ability of Participation (NAP)
                     draft-baryun-roll-nap-00.txt


Abstract

   Some Wireless Ad hoc Networks (WANETs) like LLNs often have
   different devices capabilities, with large scale deployment at
   different regions or environment conditions. In that network
   context, nodes may not be able to participate in certain time
   periods because of determined conditions. The Node Ability of
   Participation (NAP) protocol enhances the network use of its
   activities and capabilities. Routers and actuators in such
   networks can be adaptive and efficient for different unpredicted
   situations.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF). Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts. The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."
   
   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 31, 2013.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2012 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors. All rights reserved.
   
   







Baryun                   Expires January 31, 2013              [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                      NAP                       July 2012



   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document. Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with
   respect to this document. Code Components extracted from this
   document must include Simplified BSD License text as described in
   Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without
   warranty as described in the Simplified BSD License.

   This document may contain material from IETF Documents or IETF  
   Contributions published or made publicly available before November
   10, 2008. The person(s) controlling the copyright in some of this
   material may not have granted the IETF Trust the right to allow
   modifications of such material outside the IETF Standards Process.
   Without obtaining an adequate license from the person(s) controlling
   the copyright in such materials, this document may not be modified
   outside the IETF Standards Process, and derivative works of it may
   not be created outside the IETF Standards Process, except to format
   it for publication as an RFC or to translate it into languages other
   than English.


1. Introduction

   Wireless Ad hoc NETwork (WANET) has advantages and flexibility to be
   used in many applications [RFC5548][RFC5673],but also because of its
   constraints they need more requirements than infrastructure networks.
   The Low power and Lossy Network (LLN) has three main node elements;
   sensor, router, and actuator. LLN node can have sleep mode operation
   periods for energy conservation, or trickle communication algorithm,
   but in the same time LLN has a high possibility of node loss. The
   routers should be able to accommodate such node sleep periods with
   adaptability to devices constraints and consideration of such loss
   situations. Therefore, LLN is a network with limited capabilities
   and high possibility of link/node failure.

   However, in some unpredicted situations (i.e. events or conditions
   at some/all regions) the network nodes MAY become able/unable to:
   (a) transmit or receive messages, (b) discover or maintain routes,
   (c) forward or schedule, (d) store information or energy,
   (e) survive, (f) secure transmitted information, (g) manage, and
   (h) other constraint activity. The Node Ability of Participation
   (NAP) can be used in LLN to enable adaptable, stable, and scalable
   routing and/or actuating activities.






Baryun                   Expires January 31, 2013              [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                      NAP                       July 2012



2. Terminology

   This section provides definitions for the terminology used
   throughout this document.

2.1 Requirement Level Language

   This specification uses capitalized words defined in [RFC2119] to
   signify requirements. In this document these words are printed in
   small if not related to requirement level language. The document
   uses some defined terms from other RFCs which will be noted with
   each used term.

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL", in
   this document are to be interpreted as described in the RFC 2119.
   In addition, this document describes other key words:

   IF x THEN y:
     the possibility that the condition of x occur, but when it does the
     function y MUST occur.

   ELSE IF v THEN w: 
     the condition v is tested only when x does not occur, but when v
	 occurs, the function w MUST occur. 

   ELSE z:
     the function(s) MUST occur only when all the conditions above,
	 e.g. as x and v conditions do not occur


2.2 The Specification Terminology

   Additionally, this document uses terminology from [ROLL], [RFC6550],
   and [RFC5548]. This specification also defines the following
   terminology:

 Node Capability:

   a technique/facility of accomplishment of function(s) without
   considering node's function(s) conditions.

 Node Ability:

   a capability of completing function(s) at determined condition(s),
   and with the consideration of node or/and network constraints.





Baryun                   Expires January 31, 2013              [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                      NAP                       July 2012



 Capacity:

   a measure of ability of functioning per unit of time or/and per unit
   of distance/area/volume.

 Node Participation:

   the node service or information reply to neighbors/nodes and/or the
   network. Participating in network functions it is able of performing.

 Node Inability:

   a node not able to participate for certain condition(s). It may be
   capable to participate.   

 Group Ability: (TBD)

   Some cooperating nodes in functions/activities that forms the group
   ability of participating for the group or for the network.

 LLN Functions:

   sensing, communicating, routing, actuating, storing, securing, or 
   managing, etc. Functions can be total or partialy operating.

 Partial Function:

   a function that has been optimized or minimized in its common
   activities. This function type is useful within devices of limited
   capabilities or abilities.

 NAP Metric: (TBD)

   a measure of the node's ability capacity. It can be a route metric.


3. Applicability and use case

   In networks neighbor discovery protocols focuses on the neighbor
   existence and the route metrics that is related to the neighbor. NAP
   is a technique that discovers node ability to participate in 
   determined function(s), or discovering the ability to participate in
   some situations.

   NAP protocol is intended to be used in LLN and WANET scenarios.
   Nodes in regions with low probability to continue participation,
   to survive, or to be secure, SHOULD be in a status to decide which




Baryun                   Expires January 31, 2013              [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                      NAP                       July 2012


   activity that it is able/unable to participate with the network.
   If a node is able to move (mobile) in the network, it SHOULD be
   in status to advertise its participation time so the network
   adapts. Routers in LLN SHOULD be able to dynamically adapt to
   changes in conditions of communication, SHOULD be able to
   dynamically compute, select, and possibly optimize the
   single/multiple path(s) that will be used by the participating nodes
   (i.e. devices), and SHOULD be able to detect neighbor's function
   failures and neighbor's NAP change. If the DODAG root is not able to 
   forward the packet using connectivity to the outside of the DODAG
   then the DODAG root has to drop it as specified in [RFC6550], but in
   some conditions it is recommended to advertise its NAP change
   information to the DAG root or neighbors.

   Any change in node ability will affect its capacity of the 
   participate in the network activities and functions. Within LLNs,
   devices MAY have different criticality. Therefore, some routers and
   actuators SHOULD be able to adapt to important changes that affect
   their network domain performance and report NAP to the LBR.

4. NAP Considerations for LLNs (TBD)

   The NAP protocol considers two types of node abilities: functioning 
   constraint (FC) and resource constraint (RC). The FCs are related to 
   activities as; communicating, sensing, actuating, routing (e.g.
   source or/and hop-by-hop), scheduling, data-aggregation, 
   node-mobile, etc. On the other hand the RCs are related to resources
   issues as; energy  consumption, battery capacity, link range and
   connectivity, processing, memory, environment-event issue, etc.
   Furthermore as FCs of communication (one way or two ways) the LLN
   nodes may be able to support one or some of packet transceivers;
   unicast, multicast, anycast, or broadcast.

   It was stated in RFC5548 the following RCs that influence some FCs:
   a) some batteries consumption in some nodes is higher than in
      others (i.e. battery is a RC that affects many FCs).  
   b) the location of one node to function a path routing maintenance
      may not be as important as of another node.
   c) the energy-scavenging methods may recharge the battery at regular
      or irregular intervals.
   d) some nodes may have a constant power source.
   e) some nodes may have a larger memory and are hence be able to
      store more neighborhood information.
   f) some nodes may have a stronger CPU and are hence able to perform
      more sophisticated data aggregation methods.
   g) other consraints etc. 

   The above resource or capability constraints differ in terms of 
   constraints and describe devices' capabilities and functions'
   capacities. In [RFC5548] U-LLN requirements and routing


Baryun                   Expires January 31, 2013              [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                      NAP                       July 2012


   capabilities recommendations were described. However, the knowledge
   of node-ability can be useful if we have different devices'
   capabilities/capacities or/and different region conditions.
   This knowledge discovered can be useful to nodes in its routing,
   actuating or sensing activity. The NAP general idea is that each
   node may get to a situation that it needs to advertise its *ability*
   limits for the network benefit, on the other hand, one node in some
   situation may request information about such nodes' *ability* for
   its benefit.

5. NAP Protocol Operation and Messages (TBD)

   The NAP enhances the node's functions and participation activity.
   In particular in routing, the RPL Objective Function (OF) [RFC5660]
   defines rules of using routing metrics, optimization objectives, and
   related functions that can be used to compute Rank and select paths.
   The OF also rules how parents in the DODAG are selected and their
   DODAG formation. RPL requires that all routings in a network use a
   common OF. However, [RFC5661] specifies a set of supported link/node
   constraints and metrics, so that RPL support the set of route
   metrics and resource constraints, then nodes by using OF can select
   their parents in the DODAG according to the route metrics and
   constraints advertised in the DIO messages. The RFC5661 specifies
   for routing functions and does not account for node ability
   conditions and capacity, which may be an advantage for its approach
   in some scenarios, and an advantage of using NAP in similar or other
   situations. It may be recommended to include some NAP information in
   DIO or DIS messages depending on routings request.

   The NAP protocol approach discovers/advertises the ability
   information for one or some/all network's elements' (i.e. sensor,
   router, actuator, host, etc) function(s) related to capability and
   ability constraints, including the NAP metric. The NAP protocol
   can be used for one/some network element(s') functions depending
   on the application scenarios and requirements. NAP is designed with
   the objective to meet the requirements in all LLNs, and to meet the
   highest network's functions performance and expectations. The NAP
   protocol provides nodes with the NAP metrics to assist in neighbor
   or/and remote node decisions.

5.1. NAP Message Types (TBD)

   NAP messages are either used as an ICMPv6 information message
   [RFC4443] or as a RPL control message [RFC6550]. If for routers it
   is preferred to use RPL control message structure (but actuators and
   sensors can use either messages). The NAP messages types are as
   follows:

   a) Node Ability of Participation Request Message (NPRQ).
   b) Node Ability of Participation Reply Message (NPRP).


Baryun                   Expires January 31, 2013              [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                      NAP                       July 2012


   c) Node Ability of Participation Advertise Message (NPAD).

   d) Node Participation Error (NPER).
   The above messages TLVs will be specified in next version.

5.2. NAP Metric TLV (TBD)

   A NAP Metric object TLV can be represented in DAG metric container
   with same common header and structure similar to Routing
   Metric/Constraint specified in RFC6551: a) Type: 1 byte,
   b) Length: 1 byte, c) Value: variable (0-255). 

5.3. NAP Information Base (TBD)

   In some nodes that are able to store information related to
   destinations' ability functions and NAP metrics, can use the
   NAP Information Base.

5.4. NAP Protocol Operation (TBD)

   - NAP protocol initiates discovery only IF a known and determined
     condition occurs. NAP metric can be based in the information
     carried within the DAG container as route metrics are. In other
     cases ability metric is based in the NAP Information Base.

   - Nodes MAY advertise their ability functions and metrics by
     sending NPAD messages for when it is not able to continue
     participation for the benefit neighbors or of the network domain.

   - Nodes may send a request to a node or group of nodes to discover
     ability status or ability metric by sending NPRQ message.

   - Nodes listen to NPRP and NPAD messages only when they initiate
     discovery or when participation with DAG nodes. Nodes listen to
     NPRQ when they participate in a DODAG.

   - The Routing metric/constraints and NAP metric can be together
     or separately used to determine the "best" path by an OF.

6. Security Considerations (TBD)

   Most LLN nodes MUST not participate with any node that
   has not been authenticated to DODAG root or the LLN. An intruder
   or attacker SHOULD be prevented from manipulating or disabling
   the routing functions (partial function or total). IF a node was
   able to detect an attacker which it cannot prevent, THEN it can
   compromise use of control information with integrity or may
   disable some participations. The node under attack SHOULD be able
   of limiting its participation in support of an external network
   so it will not be vulnerable to DoS.


Baryun                   Expires January 31, 2013              [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                      NAP                       July 2012


7. IANA Considerations (TBD)

   NAP messages and TLV to be considered.

8. Acknowledgments (TBD)


9. References

9.1. Normative References

   [RFC2119] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
             Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC4443] Conta, A., Deering, S., and M. Gupta, "Internet Control
             Message Protocol (ICMPv6) for the Internet Protocol
             Version 6 (IPv6) Specification", RFC 4443, March 2006.

   [RFC6550] Winter, T., Ed., Thubert, P., Ed., Brandt, A.,
             Hui, J., Kelsey, R., Levis, P., Pister, K.,
             Struik, R., Vasseur, JP., and R. Alexander,
             "RPL: IPv6 Routing Protocol for Low-Power and Lossy
             Networks", RFC 6550, March 2012.

   [RFC6551] Vasseur, J., et al.,"Routing Metrics Used for Path
             Calculation in Low-Power and Lossy Networks", RFC6551,
             March 2012.

9.2. Informative References

   [ROLL]    Vasseur, J., "Terminology in Low power And Lossy
             Networks", Work in Progress, September 2011.

   [RFC4944] Montenegro, G., Kushalnagar, N., Hui, J., Culler, D.,
             Transmission of IPv6 Packets over IEEE 802.15.4 Networks,
             RFC4944, Sep. 2007.

   [RFC5548] Dohler, M., et al., Routing Requirements for Urban Low-Power
             and Lossy Networks, RFC5548, May, 2008.

   [RFC5673] Pister, K., et al. "Industrial Routing Requirements in 
             Low-Power and Lossy Networks", RFC5673, October, 2009.



Author's Address

   Abdussalam Nuri Baryun
   Email: abdussalambaryun@gmail.com



Baryun                   Expires January 31, 2013              [Page 8]


