INTERNET-DRAFT                               Danny McPherson
                                              Verisign, Inc.
                                                   Dave Oran
                                               Cisco Systems
Expires: April 2012                         October 26, 2011
Intended Status: Informational

               Architectural Considerations of IP Anycast
              <draft-iab-anycast-arch-implications-04.txt>



Status of this Memo


   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the document
   authors. All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal Provisions
   Relating to IETF Documents (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info)
   in effect on the date of publication of this document.  Please
   review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights and
   restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Simplified BSD License
   text as described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and
   are provided without warranty as described in the Simplified BSD
   License.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering Task
   Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other groups
   may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference material
   or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at



McPherson, Oran                                                 [Page 1]

INTERNET-DRAFT             Expires: April 2012              October 2011


   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html



Copyright Notice

   Copyright (C) (2011) The IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

                                Abstract


   This memo discusses architectural implications of IP anycast, and
   provides some historical analysis of anycast use by various IETF
   protocols.




































McPherson, Oran                                                 [Page 2]

INTERNET-DRAFT             Expires: April 2012              October 2011



Table of Contents


   1. Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   2. Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
    2.1. Anycast History . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
    2.2. Use of Anycast in RFCs. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
    2.3. Anycast in IPv6 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
    2.4. DNS Anycast . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
    2.5. BCP 126 on Operation of Anycast Services. . . . . . . . . .   9
   3. Principles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
    3.1. Layering and Resiliency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
    3.2. Anycast Addresses as Destinations . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
    3.3. Anycast Addresses as Sources. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
    3.4. Service Discovery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   4. Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
    4.1. Regarding Widespread Anycast Use. . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
    4.2. Transport Implications. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
    4.3. Stateful Firewalls, Middleboxes and Anycast . . . . . . . .  13
    4.4. Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
    4.5. Deployment Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
   5. IANA Considerations. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
   6. Conclusions. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
   7. Acknowledgments. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17
   8. References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  18
    8.1. Normative References. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  18
    8.2. Informative References. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  18
   9. Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  21
   10. Appendix A: IAB Members . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  21





















McPherson, Oran                                                 [Page 3]

INTERNET-DRAFT             Expires: April 2012              October 2011


1.  Overview


   IP anycast is used for at least one critical Internet service, that
   of the Domain Name System [RFC 1035] root servers.  As of early 2009,
   at least 10 of the 13 root name servers were using IP anycast
   [RSSAC29].  Use of IP anycast is growing for other applications as
   well.  It has been deployed for over a decade for DNS resolution
   services and is currently used by several DNS Top Level Domain (TLD)
   operators.  IP anycast is also used for other services in operational
   environments, including Network Time Protocol (NTP) [RFC 1305].

   Anycast addresses are syntactically indistinguishable from unicast
   addresses.  Allocation of anycast addresses typically follows a model
   similar to that of unicast allocation policies.  Anycast addressing
   is largely equivalent to that of unicast in multiple locations, and
   leverages unicast's destination-based routing to deliver a packet to
   either zero or one interface among the set of interfaces asserting
   the reachability for the address.  The expectation of delivery is to
   the "closest" instance as determined by unicast routing topology
   metric(s), and there is also a possibility that various load-
   balancing techniques (e.g., per-packet, per-microflow) may be used
   among multiple equal cost routes to distribute load for an anycasted
   prefix.

   Unlike IP unicast, it is not considered an error to assert the same
   anycast address on multiple interfaces within the same or multiple
   systems.

   Some consider anycast a "deceptively simple idea".  That is, many
   pitfalls and subtleties exist with applications and transports, as
   well as for routing configuration and operation, when IP anycast is
   employed.  In this document, we aim to capture many of the
   architectural implications of IP anycast.

   [BCP 126] discusses several different deployment models with IP
   anycast.  Two additional distinctions beyond that document involve
   "off-link anycast" and "on-link anycast".  "Off-link anycast" takes
   advantage of routing protocol preferences and IP's hop-by-hop
   destination-based forwarding paradigm in order to direct packets to
   the "closest" destination.  This is the traditional method of anycast
   largely considered in [BCP 126] and can be used for IPv4 and IPv6.
   "On-link anycast" is the formal support of anycast in the address
   resolution protocol (ARP) and is only supported under IPv6, with the
   introduction of designated anycast addresses on the anycasted hosts,
   and the Override flag in Neighbor Discovery (ND) Neighbor
   Advertisements (NAs) [RFC 4861]. This method is generally not
   supported under IPv4.



McPherson, Oran                                     Section 1.  [Page 4]

INTERNET-DRAFT             Expires: April 2012              October 2011


2.  Background


   As of this writing, the term "anycast" appears in 176 RFCs and 144
   active Internet-Drafts.  The following sections capture some of the
   key appearances and discussion of anycasting within the IETF over the
   years.



2.1.  Anycast History


   The first formal specification of anycast was provided in "Host
   Anycasting Service" [RFC 1546].  The authors of this document did a
   good job of capturing most of the issues that exist with IP anycast
   today.

   One of the first documented uses of anycast was in 1994 for a "Video
   Registry" experiment [IMR 9401].  In the experiment a UDP query was
   transmitted to an anycasted address to locate the topologically
   closest "supposedly equivalent network resource":

     "A video resource (for example, a catalog server that lists
      available video clips) sends an anycast UDP datagram to locate
      the nearest video registry.  At most one registry responds with
      a unicast UDP datagram containing the registry's IP address.
      Said resource then opens a TCP connection to that [the received
      registry address] address and sends a request to register itself.
      Every 5 minutes or so, each registry multicasts to all other
      registries all of the resources it knows from local registration
      requests.  It also immediately announces newly registered
      resources.  Remotely registered resources not heard about for
      20 minutes are dropped."

   There is also discussion that ISPs began using anycast for DNS
   resolution services around the same time, although no public
   references to support this are available.

   In 1997 the IAB clarified that IPv4 anycast addresses were pure
   "locators", and could never serve as an "identifier" (of a host, an
   interface, or anything else) [RFC 2101].

   In 1998 the IAB conducted a routing workshop [RFC 2902].  Of the
   conclusions and output action items from the report, an Anycast
   section is contained in Section 2.10.3.  Specifically called out in
   the is the need to describe the advantages and disadvantages of
   anycast, and the belief that local-scoped well-known anycast



McPherson, Oran                                   Section 2.1.  [Page 5]

INTERNET-DRAFT             Expires: April 2012              October 2011


   addresses will be useful to some applications.  In the subsequent
   section, an action item was outlined that suggested a BOF should be
   held to plan work on progress, and if a working group forms, a paper
   on the advantages and the disadvantages of anycast should be included
   as part of the charter.

   As a result of the recommendation in [RFC 2902], in November of 1999
   an Anycast BOF [ANYCAST BOF] was held at IETF 46.  A number of uses
   for anycast were discussed.  No firm conclusion was reached regarding
   use of TCP with anycasted services, but it was observed that
   anycasting was useful for DNS, although it did introduce some new
   complexities.  The use of global anycast was not expected to scale
   and hence was expected to be limited to a small number of key uses.

   In 2001, the Multicast and Anycast Group Membership [MAGMA] WG was
   chartered to address the initial authentication and access control
   issues associated with anycast group membership, but other aspects of
   anycast, including architecture and routing, were outside the group's
   scope.

   Additional work is provided in many of the references below.



2.2.  Use of Anycast in RFCs


   SNTPv4 [RFC 2030] defined how to use anycast for server discovery.
   This was extended in [RFC 4330] as an NTP-specific "manycast"
   service, in which anycast was used for the discovery part.

   IPv6 defined some reserved subnet anycast addresses [RFC 2526] and
   assigned one to "Mobile IPv6 Home-Agents" [RFC 3775].

   The original IPv6 transition mechanism [RFC 2893] made use of IPv4
   anycast addresses as tunnel endpoints for IPv6 encapsulated in IPv4,
   but this was later removed [RFC 4213].  Carpenter's Relay Router [RFC
   3056] scheme was augmented by a 6to4 relay anycast prefix [RFC 3068]
   aiming to simplify the configuration of 6to4 routers.  Incidentally,
   6to4 deployment has shown a fair number of operational and security
   issues [RFC 3964] that result from using anycast as a discovery
   mechanism.  Specifically, one inference is that operational
   consideration is needed to ensure that anycast addresses get
   advertised and/or filtered in a way that produces intended scope
   (e.g., only advertise a route for your 6to4 relay to ASes that
   conform to your own acceptable usage policy), an attribute that can
   easily become quite operationally expensive.




McPherson, Oran                                   Section 2.2.  [Page 6]

INTERNET-DRAFT             Expires: April 2012              October 2011


   DNS use of anycast was first specified in "Distributing Authoritative
   Name Servers via Shared Unicast Addresses" [RFC 3258].  It is notable
   that it used the term "shared unicast address" rather than "anycast
   address" for the service.

   Anycast was used for routing to rendezvous points (RPs) for MSDP and
   PIM [RFC 4610].

   "Operation of Anycast Services" [BCP 126] deals with how the routing
   system interacts with anycast services, and the operation of anycast
   services.

   "Requirements for a Mechanism Identifying a Name Server Instance"
   [RFC 4892] cites the use of anycast with DNS as a motivation to
   identify individual name server instances, and the NSID option was
   defined for this purpose [RFC 5001].

   "Reflections on Internet Transparency" [RFC 4924] briefly mentions
   how violating transparency can also damage global services that use
   anycast.




2.3.  Anycast in IPv6


   Originally, the IPv6 addressing architecture [RFC 1884] [RFC 2373]
   [RFC 3513] severely restricted the use of anycast addresses.  In
   particular, they provided that anycast addresses MUST NOT be used as
   a source address, and must not be assigned to an IPv6 host (i.e.,
   only routers).  These restrictions were later lifted in 2006 [RFC
   4291].

   In fact, the recent "IPv6 Transition/Co-existence Security
   Considerations" [RFC 4942] overview now recommends:

     "To avoid exposing knowledge about the internal structure of
     the network, it is recommended that anycast servers now take
     advantage of the ability to return responses with the anycast
     address as the source address if possible."

   As discussed in the Overview, "on-link anycast" is employed expressly
   in IPv6 via ND NAs, see Section 7.2.7 of [RFC 4861] for additional
   information.






McPherson, Oran                                   Section 2.3.  [Page 7]

INTERNET-DRAFT             Expires: April 2012              October 2011


2.4.  DNS Anycast


   "Distributed Authoritative Name Servers via Shared Unicast Addresses"
   [RFC 3258] described how to reach authoritative name servers using
   anycast.  It made some interesting points, for example this text from
   Section 2.3:

     "This document presumes that the usual DNS failover methods are the
     only ones used to ensure reachability of the data for clients.  It
     does not advise that the routes be withdrawn in the case of
     failure; it advises instead that the DNS process shutdown so that
     servers on other addresses are queried.  This recommendation
     reflects a choice between performance and operational complexity.
     While it would be possible to have some process withdraw the route
     for a specific server instance when it is not available, there is
     considerable operational complexity involved in ensuring that this
     occurs reliably.  Given the existing DNS failover methods, the
     marginal improvement in performance will not be sufficient to
     justify the additional complexity for most uses."

   Other assertions included:

     o it asserted (as an advantage) that no routing changes were needed

     o it recommended stopping DNS processes, rather than withdrawing
       routes, to deal with failures, data synchronization issues, and
       fail-over, as provided in the quoted text above.

     o it argued that failure modes involving state were not serious,
       because:

       - the vast majority of DNS queries are UDP
       - large routing metric disparity among authoritative server
         instances would localize queries to a single instance for
         most clients
       - when the resolver tries TCP and it breaks, the resolver
         will move to a different server instance (where presumably
         it doesn't break), just as it does with normal unicast
         failover.


   "Unique Per-Node Origin ASNs for Globally Anycasted Services" [RFC
   6382] makes recommendations regarding the use of per-node unique
   origin ASNs for globally anycasted critical infrastructure services
   in order to provide routing system discriminators for a given
   anycasted prefix.  The object was to allow network management and
   monitoring techniques, or other operational mechanisms to employ this



McPherson, Oran                                   Section 2.4.  [Page 8]

INTERNET-DRAFT             Expires: April 2012              October 2011


   new origin AS as a discriminator in whatever manner fits their
   operating environment, either for detection or policy associated with
   a given anycasted node.



2.5.  BCP 126 on Operation of Anycast Services


   "Operation of Anycast Services" [BCP 126]was a product of the IETF's
   GROW working group.  The primary design constraint considered was
   that routing "be stable" for significantly longer than a "transaction
   time", where "transaction time" is loosely defined as "a single
   interaction between a single client and a single server".  It takes
   no position on what applications are suitable candidates for anycast
   usage.

   Furthermore, it views anycast service disruptions as an operational
   problem, "Operators should be aware that, especially for long running
   flows, there are potential failure modes using anycast that are more
   complex than a simple 'destination unreachable' failure using
   unicast."

   The document primary deals with global Internet-wide services
   provided by anycast.  Where internal topology issues are discussed
   they're mostly regarding routing implications, rather than
   application design implications.  BCP 126 also views networks
   employing per-packet load balancing on equal cost paths as
   "pathological".



3.  Principles




3.1.  Layering and Resiliency


   Preserving the integrity of a modular layered design for IP protocols
   on the Internet is critical to its continued success and flexibility.
   One such consideration is that of whether an application should have
   to adapt to changes in the routing system.

   Higher layer protocols should make minimal assumptions about lower
   layer protocols.  E.g., applications should make minimal assumptions
   about routing stability, just as they should make minimal assumptions



McPherson, Oran                                   Section 3.1.  [Page 9]

INTERNET-DRAFT             Expires: April 2012              October 2011


   about congestion and packet loss.  When designing applications, it
   would perhaps be safe to assume that the routing system may deliver
   each packet to a different service instance, in any pattern, with
   temporal re-ordering being a not-so-rare phenomenon.

   Stateful transport protocols (e.g., TCP), without modification, do
   not understand the properties of anycast and hence will fail
   probabilistically, but possibly catastrophically, when using anycast
   addresses in the presence of "normal" routing dynamics.
   Specifically, if datagrams associated with a given active transaction
   are routed to a new anycasted end system and that end system lacks
   state data associated with the active transaction, the session will
   be reset need to be reinitiated.



3.2.  Anycast Addresses as Destinations


   Anycast addresses are "safe" to use as destination addresses for an
   application if:

     o A request message or "one shot" message is self-contained in a
       single transport packet

     o A stateless transport (e.g., UDP) is used for the above

     o Replies are always sent to a unicast address; these can be
       multi-packet since the unicast destination is presumed to be
       associated with a single "stable" end system and not an
       anycasted source address. Note that this constrains the use of
       anycast as source addresses in request messages, since reply
       messages sent back to that address may reach a device that was
       not the source that initially triggered it.

     o The server side of the application keeps no hard state across
       requests.

     o Retries are idempotent; in addition to not assuming server state,
       they do not encode any assumptions about loss of requests versus
       loss of replies.



3.3.  Anycast Addresses as Sources


   Anycast addresses are "safe" to use as source addresses for an



McPherson, Oran                                  Section 3.3.  [Page 10]

INTERNET-DRAFT             Expires: April 2012              October 2011


   application if:

     o No reflexive (response) message is generated by the receiver
       with the anycast source used as a destination unless the
       application has some private state synchronization that allows
       for the response message arriving at a different instance

     o The source anycast address is reachable via the interface address
       if unicast reverse path forwarding (RPF) [RFC 4778] checking is
       on, or the service address is explicitly provisioned to bypass
       RPF checks. In addition to the application defined in [RFC 4778],
       Section 4.4.5 of [BCP 126] gives explicit consideration to RPF
       checks in anycasting operations.




3.4.  Service Discovery


   Applications able to tolerate an extra round trip time (RTT) to learn
   a unicast destination address for multi-packet exchanges might safely
   use anycast destination addresses for service instance discovery. For
   example, "instance discovery" messages are sent to an anycast
   destination address, and a reply is subsequently sent from the unique
   unicast source address of the interface that received the discovery
   message, or a reply is sent from the anycast source address of the
   interface that received the message, containing the unicast address
   to be used to invoke the service.  Only the latter of these  will
   avoid potential NAT binding and stateful firewall issues.

   Section 3.3 of Informational [RFC 4339] proposes a "Well-known
   Anycast Address" for recursive DNS service configuration in clients
   to ease configuration and allow those systems to ship with these
   well-known addresses configured "from the beginning, as, say, factory
   default".  During publication the IESG requested that the following
   "IESG Note" be contained in the document:

      "This document describes three different approaches for the
      configuration of DNS name resolution server information in IPv6
      hosts.

      There is not an IETF consensus on which approach is preferred.
      The analysis in this document was developed by the proponents
      for each approach and does not represent an IETF consensus.

      The 'RA option' and 'Well-known anycast' approaches described in
      this document are not standardized.  Consequently the analysis



McPherson, Oran                                  Section 3.4.  [Page 11]

INTERNET-DRAFT             Expires: April 2012              October 2011


      for these approaches might not be completely applicable to any
      specific proposal that might be proposed in the future."




4.  Analysis





4.1.  Regarding Widespread Anycast Use


   Widespread use of anycast for global Internet-wide services or inter-
   domain services has some scaling challenges.  Similar in ways to
   multicast, each service generates at least one unique route in the
   global BGP routing system.  As a result, additional anycast instances
   result in additional paths for a given prefix, which scales super-
   linearly as a function of denseness of inter-domain interconnection
   within the routing system (i.e., more paths result in more resources,
   more network interconnections result in more paths).

   This is why the Anycast BOF concluded that "the use of global anycast
   addresses was not expected to scale and hence was expected to be
   limited to a small number of key uses."



4.2.  Transport Implications


   UDP is the "lingua franca" for anycast today.  Stateful transports
   could be enhanced to be more anycast friendly.  This was anticipated
   in Host Anycasting Services [RFC 1546], specifically:

     "The solution to this problem is to only permit anycast
      addresses as the remote address of a TCP SYN segment
      (without the ACK bit set).  A TCP can then initiate a
      connection to an anycast address.  When the SYN-ACK is
      sent back by the host that received the anycast segment,
      the initiating TCP should replace the anycast address of
      its peer, with the address of the host returning the
      SYN-ACK.  (The initiating TCP can recognize the connection
      for which the SYN-ACK is destined by treating the anycast
      address as a wildcard address, which matches any incoming
      SYN-ACK segment with the correct destination port and



McPherson, Oran                                  Section 4.2.  [Page 12]

INTERNET-DRAFT             Expires: April 2012              October 2011


      address and source port, provided the SYN-ACK's full
      address, including source address, does not match another
      connection and the sequence numbers in the SYN-ACK are
      correct.)  This approach ensures that a TCP, after
      receiving the SYN-ACK is always communicating with only
      one host."

   Multi-address transports (e.g., SCTP) might be more amenable to such
   extensions than TCP.

   Some similarities exist between what is needed for anycast and what
   is needed for address discovery when doing multi-homing in the
   transport layer.



4.3.  Stateful Firewalls, Middleboxes and Anycast


   Middleboxes (e.g., NATs) and stateful firewalls may cause problems
   when used in conjunction with anycast.  In particular, a server-side
   transition from an anycast source IP address to a unique unicast
   address may require new or additional session state , and this may
   not exist in the middlebox, as discussed previously in the "Service
   Discovery" section.



4.4.  Security Considerations


   Anycast is often deployed to mitigate or at least localize the
   effects of distributed denial of service (DDOS) attacks.  For
   example, with the Netgear NTP fiasco [RFC 4085] anycast was used in a
   distributed sinkhole model [RFC 3882] to mitigate the effects of
   embedded globally-routed Internet addresses in network elements.

   "Internet Denial-of-Service Considerations" [RFC 4732] notes: that "A
   number of the root nameservers have since been replicated using
   anycast to further improve their resistance to DoS".

   "Operation of Anycast Services" [RFC 4786] cites DoS mitigation,
   constraining DoS to localized regions, and identifying attack sources
   using spoofed addresses as some motivations to deploy services using
   anycast.  Multiple anycast service instances such as those used by
   the root name servers also add resiliency when network partitioning
   occurs (e.g., as the result of transoceanic fiber cuts or natural
   disasters).



McPherson, Oran                                  Section 4.4.  [Page 13]

INTERNET-DRAFT             Expires: April 2012              October 2011


   It should be noted that there is a significant man in the middle
   (MITM) exposure in either variant of anycast discovery (see Section
   12: "Service Discovery") that in many applications may necessitate
   the need for end to end security models [RFC 2402] [RFC 2406] that
   enable end systems to authenticate one another.

   Furthermore, as discussed earlier in this document, operational
   consideration needs to be given to ensure that anycast addresses get
   advertised and/or filtered in a way that produces intended scope (for
   example, only advertise a route to your 6to4 relay to ASes that
   conform to your own AUP). This seems to be operationally expensive,
   and is often vulnerable to errors outside of the local routing
   domain, in particular when anycasted services are deployed with the
   intent to scope associated announcements within some local or
   regional boundary.

   As previously discussed, [RFC 6382] makes recommendations regarding
   the use of per-node unique origin ASNs for globally anycasted
   critical infrastructure services in order to provide routing system
   discriminators for a given anycasted prefix.  Network management and
   monitoring techniques, or other operational mechanisms may then
   employ this new discriminator in whatever manner fits their operating
   environment, either for detection or policy associated with a given
   anycasted node.

   Unlike multicast (but like unicast), anycast allows traffic stealing.
   That is, with multicast, joining a multicast group doesn't prevent
   anyone else who was receiving the traffic from continuing to receive
   the traffic.  With anycast, adding an anycasted node to the routing
   system can prevent a previous recipient from continuing to receive
   traffic because it may now be delivered to the new node instead.  As
   such, if one allows unauthorized anycast nodes onto the network,
   traffic can be diverted thereby triggering DoS or other attacks.
   Section 6.3 of [BCP 126] provides expanded discussion on "Service
   Hijacking" and "traffic stealing".

   Unlike unicast (but like multicast), the desire is to allow
   applications to cause route injection (either directly or as a side
   effect of doing something else).  This combination is unique to
   anycast and presents new security concerns which are why [MAGMA] only
   got so far.  The security concerns include:

   1) Allowing route injection can cause DOS to a legitimate address
      owner.

   2) Allowing route injection consumes routing resources and can
      hence cause DOS to the routing system and impact legitimate
      communications as a result.



McPherson, Oran                                  Section 4.4.  [Page 14]

INTERNET-DRAFT             Expires: April 2012              October 2011


   These are two of the core issues that were part of the discussion
   during [RFC 1884], the [ANYCAST BOF], and the [MAGMA] chartering.

   Additional security considerations are scattered throughout the list
   of references provided herein.



4.5.  Deployment Considerations


   [BCP 126] provides some very solid guidance related to operations of
   anycasted services, and in particular DNS.

   This document covers issues associated with the architectural
   implications of anycast.  This document does not treat in any depth
   the fact that there are deployed services with TCP transport using
   anycast today. While we believe that such practice is not "safe" in
   the traditional and architectural sense, these things are indeed
   relative, and we recognize it is not always the case that
   unpredictability in the routing system beyond the local
   administrative domain is unmanageable.  That is, despite the inherent
   architectural problems in the use of anycast with stateful transport
   and connection- oriented protocols, there is expanding deployment
   (e.g., for content distribution networks) and exist situations where
   it may makes sense (e.g., such as with services discovery, short-
   lived transactions, or generally where a service is provided via an
   anycasted address in order to minimize client or subscriber
   configuration variances and topologically localize which servers may
   be contacted by a given client).  In general, operators should
   consider the content and references provided herein, and evaluate the
   benefits and implications of anycast in their specific environments
   and applications.



5.  IANA Considerations


   No IANA actions are required.



6.  Conclusions


   In summary, operators and application vendors alike should consider
   the benefits and implications of anycast in their specific



McPherson, Oran                                    Section 6.  [Page 15]

INTERNET-DRAFT             Expires: April 2012              October 2011


   environments and applications, and also give forward consideration to
   how new network protocols and application functions may take
   advantage of anycast, or how they may be negatively impacted if
   anycasting is employed.















































McPherson, Oran                                    Section 6.  [Page 16]

INTERNET-DRAFT             Expires: April 2012              October 2011


7.  Acknowledgments

   Many thanks to Dave Thaler and Kurtis Lindqvist for their early
   review and feedback on this document.  Thanks to Brian Carpenter,
   Alfred Hoenes, and Joe Abley for their usual careful review and
   feedback as well as Mark Smith for his detailed review.













































McPherson, Oran                                    Section 7.  [Page 17]

INTERNET-DRAFT             Expires: April 2012              October 2011


8.  References




8.1.  Normative References





8.2.  Informative References


   [ANYCAST BOF] Deering, S., "IAB Anycast BOF Announcement", October
   1999,
    http://www.ietf.org/mail-archive/web/ietf/current/msg11182.html

   [BCP 126] Abley, J., Lindqvist, K., "Operation of Anycast
              Services", BCP 126 (RFC 4786), December 2006.

   [IMR 9401] "INTERNET MONTHLY REPORT", January 1994,
    http://mirror.facebook.com/rfc/museum/imr/imr9401.txt

   [MAGMA] Multicast and Anycast Group Membership (MAGMA), concluded
   IETF
     Working Group, April 2006, http://www.ietf.org/wg/concluded/magma.

   [RSSAC 29] "RSSAC 29 Meeting Minutes", December 2, 2007,
    http://www.rssac.org/meetings/04-08/rssac29.pdf

   [RFC 1035] Mockapetris, P., "DOMAIN NAMES - IMPLEMENTATION
              AND SPECIFICATION", RFC 1035, November 1987.

   [RFC 1305] Mills, D., "Network Time Protocol (Version 3)
              Specification, Implementation and Analysis", RFC
              1305, March 1992.

   [RFC 1546] Partridge, C., Mendez, T., Milliken, W., "Host
              Anycasting Service", RFC 1546, November 1993.

   [RFC 1884] Hinden, R., Deering, S., "IP Version 6 Addressing
              Architecture", RFC 1884, December 1995.

   [RFC 2030] Mills, D., "Simple Network Time Protocol (SNTP)
              Version 4 for IPv4, IPv6 and OSI", RFC 2030,
              October 1996.




McPherson, Oran                                  Section 8.2.  [Page 18]

INTERNET-DRAFT             Expires: April 2012              October 2011


   [RFC 2101] Carpenter, B., Crowcroft, J., Rekhter, Y., "IPv4
              Address Behaviour Today", RFC 2101, February 1997.

   [RFC 2119] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC 2373] Hinden, R., Deering, S., "IP Version 6 Addressing
              Architecture", RFC 2373, July 1998.

   [RFC 2402] Kent, S., and R. Atkinson, "IP Authentication Header",
              RFC 2402, November 1998.

   [RFC 2406] Kent, S., and R. Atkinson, "IP Encapsulating Security
              Payload (ESP)", RFC 2406, November 1998.

   [RFC 2526] Johnson, D., Deering, S., "Reserved IPv6 Subnet
              Anycast Addresses", RFC 2526, March 1999.

   [RFC 2893] Gilligan, R., Nordmark, E., "Transition Mechanisms
              for IPv6 Hosts and Routers", RFC 2893, August 2000.

   [RFC 2902] Deering, S., Hares, S., Perkins, C., Perlman, R.,
              "Overview of the 1998 IAB Routing Workshop", RFC
              2902, August 2000.

   [RFC 3056] Carpenter, B., "Connection of IPv6 Domains via IPv4
              Clouds", RFC 3056, February 2001.

   [RFC 3068] Huitema, C., "An Anycast Prefix for 6to4 Relay
              Routers", RFC 3068, June 2001.

   [RFC 3258] Hardie, R., "Distributing Authoritative Name Servers
              via Shared Unicast Addresses", RFC 3258, April 2002.

   [RFC 3513] Hinden, R., Deering, S., "Internet Protocol Version
              6 (IPv6) Addressing Architecture", RFC 3513, April
              2003.

   [RFC 3775] Johnson, D., Perkins, C., Arkko, J., "Mobility
              Support in IPv6", RFC 3775, June 2004.

   [RFC 3882] Turk, D., "Configuring BGP to Block Denial-of-Service
              Attacks", RFC 3882, September 2004.

   [RFC 3964] Savola, P., "Security Considerations for 6to4", RFC
              3964, December 2004.

   [RFC 4085] Plonka, D., "Embedding Globally-Routable Internet



McPherson, Oran                                  Section 8.2.  [Page 19]

INTERNET-DRAFT             Expires: April 2012              October 2011


              Addresses Considered Harmful", RFC 4085, June 2005.

   [RFC 4213] Normark, E., Gilligan, R., "Basic Transition
              Mechanisms for IPv6 Hosts and Routers", RFC 4213,
              October 2005.

   [RFC 4291] Hinden, R., Deering, S., "IP Version 6 Addressing
              Architecture", RFC 4291, February 2006.

   [RFC 4330] Mills, D., "Simple Network Time Protocol (SNTP)
              Version 4 for IPv4, IPv6 and OSI", RFC 4330,
              January 2006.

   [RFC 4339] Jeong, J., "IPv6 Host Configuration of DNS Server
              Information Approaches", RFC 4339, February 2006.

   [RFC 4610] Farinacci, D., Cai, Y., "Anycast-RP Using Protocol
              Independent Multicast (PIM)", RFC 4610, August 2006.

   [RFC 4732] Handley, M., Rescorla, E., IAB, "Internet Denial-of-
              Service Considerations", RFC 4732, November 2006.

   [RFC 4778] Kaeo, M., "Current Operational Security Practices in
              Internet Service Provider Environments", RFC 4778,
              January 2007.

   [RFC 4861] Narten, T., et al., "Neighbor Discovery for IP version
              6 (IPv6)", RFC 4861, September 2007.

   [RFC 4892] Woolf, S., Conrad, D., "Requirements for a Mechanism
              Identifying a Name Server Instance", RFC 4892, June
              2007.

   [RFC 4924] Aboba, B., Davies, E., " Reflections on Internet
              Transparency", RFC 4924, July 2007.

   [RFC 4942] Davies, E., Krishnan, S., Savola, P., "IPv6
              Transition/Coexistence Security Considerations",
              RFC 4942, September 2007.

   [RFC 5001] Austein, R., "DNS Name Server Identifier (NSID)
              Option", RFC 5001, August 2007.

   [RFC 6382] McPherson, D., et al., "Unique Origin Autonomous
              System Numbers (ASNs) per Node for Globally Anycasted
              Services", RFC 6382, BCP 169, October 2011.





McPherson, Oran                                  Section 8.2.  [Page 20]

INTERNET-DRAFT             Expires: April 2012              October 2011


9.  Authors' Addresses



   Danny McPherson
   Verisign, Inc.
   Email: dmcpherson@verisign.com

   Dave Oran
   Cisco Systems
   Email: oran@cisco.com





10.  Appendix A: IAB Members


   Internet Architecture Board Members at the time this document was
   published were:

   [TO BE INSERTED]




   Copyright Statement

      Copyright (C) (2011) The IETF Trust and the persons
      identified as the document authors.  All rights reserved.

      This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
      Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
      (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
      publication of this document. Please review these documents
      carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with
      respect to this document.













McPherson, Oran                                   Section 10.  [Page 21]
