Internet Architecture Board (IAB)                    S. Trowbridge, Ed.
Internet Draft                                           Alcatel-Lucent
Obsoletes: 3356                                            E. Lear, Ed.
Intended status: Informational                            Cisco Systems
Expires: October 9, 2012                                  April 5, 2012


          Internet Engineering Task Force and International
     Telecommunication Union - Telecommunications Standardization
                   Sector Collaboration Guidelines


                       draft-iab-rfc3356bis-00


Abstract

   This document provides guidance to aid in the understanding of
   collaboration on standards development between the International
   Telecommunication Union -- Telecommunication Standardization
   Sector (ITU-T) and the Internet Society (ISOC) / Internet
   Engineering Task Force (IETF).  It is an update of and obsoletes
   RFC 3356.  The updates reflect changes in the IETF and ITU-T
   since RFC 3356 was written.  The bulk of this document is common
   text with ITU-T Supplement 3 to the ITU-T A-Series
   Recommendations.

   Note:  This was approved by ITU-T TSAG on xx July 2012 as a
   Supplement to the ITU-T A-Series of Recommendations (will be
   numbered as A-Series Supplement 3).

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance
   with the provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet
   Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working
   groups. Note that other groups may also distribute working
   documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other
   documents at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-
   Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than as "work
   in progress".





Trowbridge, et. al.      Expires June 6, 2012                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft IETF and ITU-T Collaboration Guidelines     January 2012


   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on July 9, 2012.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2012 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors. All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document. Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with
   respect to this document. Code Components extracted from this
   document must include Simplified BSD License text as described
   in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided
   without warranty as described in the Simplified BSD License.




























S. Trowbridge          Expires October 5, 2012                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft IETF and ITU-T Collaboration Guidelines     January 2012


Table of Contents

   1. Scope..........................................................4
   2. Introduction...................................................4
   3. Guidance on Collaboration......................................5
      3.1. How to Interact on ITU-T or IETF Work Items...............5
         3.1.1. How the ITU-T is informed about Existing IETF Work Items
         ............................................................5
         3.1.2. How the ITU-T is informed about proposed new IETF work
         items.......................................................6
         3.1.3. How the IETF is informed about ITU-T Work Items......6
      3.2. Representation............................................7
         3.2.1. IETF Recognition at ITU-T............................7
         3.2.2. ITU-T Recognition at ISOC/IETF.......................7
         3.2.3. Communication Contacts...............................7
         3.2.4. Communication........................................8
         3.2.5. Mailing Lists........................................8
      3.3. Document Sharing..........................................9
         3.3.1. IETF to ITU-T........................................9
         3.3.2. ITU-T to IETF.......................................10
         3.3.3. ITU-T & IETF........................................10
      3.4. Simple Cross Referencing.................................11
      3.5. Preliminary Work Efforts.................................11
      3.6. Additional Items.........................................11
         3.6.1. Useful Information to ITU-T participations on the IETF11
         3.6.2. Current ITU-T information can be found on the ITU
         website: (includes contacts, organization, Recommendations for
         purchase, mailing list info, etc.).........................12
   4. Security Considerations.......................................13
   5. IANA Considerations...........................................13
   6. References....................................................13
      6.1. Normative References.....................................13
      6.2. Non-normative References.................................14
   7. Acknowledgements..............................................14
   8. Changes since RFC3356.........................................14
   9. Authors' Addresses............................................15














S. Trowbridge          Expires October 5, 2012                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft IETF and ITU-T Collaboration Guidelines     January 2012


[The following note to be removed upon publication as an RFC]

Editors' Note:

   This Informational Internet-Draft is intended for publication as an
   RFC with the IAB stream, and is subject to the publication process
   described in RFC 4845.

1. Scope

   This document provides guidance to aid in the understanding of
   collaboration on standards development between the ITU-T and the
   Internet Society (ISOC) / Internet Engineering Task Force
   (IETF).

   In the IETF, work is done in Working Groups (WG), mostly through
   open, public mailing lists rather than face-to-face meetings.
   WGs are organized into Areas, each Area being managed by two co-
   Area Directors.  Collectively, the Area Directors comprise the
   Internet Engineering Steering Group (IESG).

   In the ITU-T, work is defined by study Questions which are
   worked on mostly through meetings led by Rapporteurs.  Questions
   are generally grouped within Working Parties (WPs) led by a WP
   Chairman.  Working Parties report to a parent Study Group led by
   a SG Chairman. Work may also be conducted in ITU-T focus groups
   (see 3.5. )

2. Introduction

   The telecommunication industry is faced with an explosion in growth
   of the Internet and other IP (Internet Protocol) based networks.
   Operators, manufacturers and software/application providers alike are
   reconsidering their business directions and Standards Development
   Organizations and Forums and Consortia are facing an immense
   challenge to address this situation.

   These challenges were considered by TSAG in September 1998 and IETF
   shortly thereafter, when it was initially recognized that the ITU-T
   and ISOC/IETF were already collaborating in a number of areas, and
   that this collaboration must be strengthened within the context of
   changes in work emphasis and direction within the ITU-T on studies
   related to IP based networks.

   For example, many Study Groups already address aspects of IP
   based networks.  There are many topics of interest to ITU-T
   Study Groups in the IP area that should be investigated (e.g.,
   signaling, routing, security, numbering & addressing, integrated


S. Trowbridge          Expires October 5, 2012                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft IETF and ITU-T Collaboration Guidelines     January 2012


   management, performance, IP - telecom interworking, access).
   Since many of these topics are also being investigated by the
   IETF, there is a requirement for close collaboration.

   The current level of cooperation between the ITU-T and the IETF
   should be built upon to ensure that the competence and experience of
   each organization is brought to bear in the most effective manner and
   in collaboration with the other.  This document provides guidelines
   for collaboration between the ITU-T and the IETF.

3. Guidance on Collaboration

   This section builds on existing collaborative processes and details
   some of the more important guidance points that each organization
   should be aware of for effective collaboration.

3.1. How to Interact on ITU-T or IETF Work Items

   Study Groups that have identified work topics that are IP-
   related should evaluate the relationship with topics defined in
   the IETF. Current IETF Working Groups and their charters (IETF
   definition of the scope of work) are listed in the IETF archives
   (see section 3.5).

   A Study Group may decide that development of a Recommendation on
   a particular topic may benefit from collaboration with the IETF.
   The Study Group should identify this collaboration in its work
   plan (specifically in that of each Question involved),
   describing the goal of the collaboration and its expected
   outcome.

   An IETF Working Group should also evaluate and identify areas of
   relationship with the ITU-T and document the collaboration with
   the ITU-T Study Group in its charter.  The following sections
   outline a process that can be used to enable each group to be
   informed about the other's new work items.

3.1.1. How the ITU-T is informed about Existing IETF Work Items

   The responsibility is on individual Study Groups to review the
   current IETF Working Groups to determine if there are any topics of
   mutual interest.  Should a Study Group believe that there is an
   opportunity for collaboration on a topic of mutual interest, it
   should contact both the IETF Working Group Chair and the Area
   Director(s) responsible. This may be accompanied by a formal liaison
   statement (see 3.2.4. ).




S. Trowbridge          Expires October 5, 2012                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft IETF and ITU-T Collaboration Guidelines     January 2012


3.1.2. How the ITU-T is informed about proposed new IETF work items

   The IETF maintains a mailing list for the distribution of proposed
   new work items among standards development organizations.  Many such
   items can be identified in proposed Birds of a Feather (BoF)
   sessions, as well as draft charters for working groups.  The IETF
   forwards all such draft charters for all new and revised Working
   Groups and Birds Of a Feather session announcements to the IETF
   NewWork mailing list.  An ITU-T mail mailing list is subscribed to
   this list. Leadership of Study Groups may subscribe to this ITU-T
   mailing list, which is maintained by the TSB.  Members of the SG-
   specific listname may include the SG Chairman, SG Vice Chairmen,
   Working Party Chairmen, concerned Rapporteurs, other experts
   designated by the SG and the SG Counselor.  This will enable the SGs
   to monitor the new work items for possible overlap or interest to
   their Study Group.  It is expected that this mailing list will see a
   few messages per month.

   Each SG Chairman, or designated representative, may provide comments
   on these charters by responding to the IESG mailing list at
   iesg@ietf.org clearly indicating their ITU-T position and the nature
   of their concern.  Plain-text email is preferred on the IESG mailing
   list.

   It should be noted that the IETF turnaround time for new Working
   Group charters is two weeks.  As a result, the mailing list
   should be consistently monitored.



3.1.3. How the IETF is informed about ITU-T Work Items

   The ITU-T accepts new areas of work through the creation or update of
   Questions.  In addition, the ITU-T work programme is documented in
   the Questions of each Study Group.  These can be found on the ITU-T
   web site.

   Study Groups should send updates to the IETF NewWork mailing list as
   new Questions are created, terms of reference for Questions are
   updated, or otherwise when there is reason to believe that a
   particular effort might be of interest to the IETF.  Area Directors
   or WG Chairs should provide comments through liaison statements or
   direct email to the relevant SG Chairman in cases of possible overlap
   or interest.






S. Trowbridge          Expires October 5, 2012                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft IETF and ITU-T Collaboration Guidelines     January 2012


3.2. Representation

   ISOC, including its standards body IETF, is a Sector Member of the
   ITU-T.  As a result, ISOC delegates are therefore afforded the same
   rights as other ITU-T Sector Members (see 3.2.1).  Conversely, ITU-T
   delegates may participate in the work of the IETF as representatives
   of the ITU-T (see 3.2.2).  To promote collaboration it is useful to
   facilitate communication between the organizations as further
   described below.

3.2.1. IETF Recognition at ITU-T

   Experts and representatives from the IETF that are chosen by IETF
   leadership may participate in ITU-T meetings as ISOC delegates. The
   ISOC focal point will facilitate registration and verification of
   these people, as appropriate.

3.2.2. ITU-T Recognition at ISOC/IETF

   ITU-T Study Group Chairmen can authorize one or more members to
   attend an IETF meeting as an official ITU-T delegate speaking
   authoritatively on behalf of the activities of the Study Group (or a
   particular Rapporteur Group).  The Study Group Chairman sends the
   ITU-T list of delegates by email to the Working Group chair, with a
   copy to the Area Directors, and also to the Study Group.  Note that,
   according to IETF process, opinions expressed by any such delegate
   are given equal weight with opinions expressed by other working group
   participants.

3.2.3. Communication Contacts

   To foster ongoing communication between the ITU-T and IETF, it is
   important to identify and establish contact points within each
   organization.  Contact points may include:

  1. ITU-T Study Group Chairman and IETF Area Director

     An IETF Area Director is the individual responsible for
     overseeing a major focus of activity with a scope similar to
     that of an ITU-T Study Group Chairman.  These positions are
     both relatively long-term (of several years) and offer the
     stability of contact points between the two organizations for
     a given topic.

  2. ITU-T Rapporteur and IETF Working Group Chair

     An IETF Working Group Chair is an individual who is assigned
     to lead the work on a specific task within one particular Area


S. Trowbridge          Expires October 5, 2012                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft IETF and ITU-T Collaboration Guidelines     January 2012


     with a scope similar to that of an ITU-T Rapporteur.  These
     positions are working positions (of a year or more) that
     typically end when the work on a specific topic ends.
     Collaboration here is very beneficial to ensure the actual
     work gets done.

  3. Other Contact Points

     It may be beneficial to establish additional contact points
     for specific topics of mutual interest.  These contact points
     should be established early in the work effort, and in some
     cases the contact point identified by each organization may be
     the same individual.

   Note that the current IETF Area Directors and Working Group
   Chairs can be found in the IETF Working Group charters.  The
   current ITU-T Study Group Chairmen and Rapporteurs are listed on
   the ITU-T web page.

3.2.4. Communication

   Informal communication between contact points and experts of both
   organizations is encouraged.  However, note that formal communication
   from an ITU-T Study Group, Working Party or Rapporteur to an
   associated IETF contact point must be explicitly approved and
   identified as coming from the Study Group, Working Party or
   Rapporteur Group, respectively.  Formal liaison statements from the
   ITU-T to the IETF are transmitted according to the procedures
   described in [2].  These liaison statements are placed by the IETF
   onto a liaison statements web page at
   https://datatracker.ietf.org/liaison/.  An individual at the IETF is
   assigned responsibility for dealing with each liaison statement that
   is received.  The name and contact information of the responsible
   person and any applicable deadline is listed with the links to the
   liaison statement on this web page.

   Formal liaison statements from the IAB, the IETF, an IETF Working
   Group or or  Area to the ITU-T are generated, approved, and
   transmitted according to the procedures described in [2].  Formal
   communication is intended to allow the sharing of positions between
   the IETF and the ITU-T outside of actual documents (as described in
   3.3).  This covers such things as comments on documents and requests
   for input.

3.2.5. Mailing Lists

   All IETF Working Groups and all ITU-T Study Group Questions have
   associated mailing lists.


S. Trowbridge          Expires October 5, 2012                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft IETF and ITU-T Collaboration Guidelines     January 2012


   In the IETF, the mailing list is the primary vehicle for discussion
   and decision-making.  It is recommended that the ITU-T experts
   interested in particular IETF Working Group topics subscribe to and
   participate in these lists.  IETF WG mailing lists are open to all
   subscribers.  The IETF Working Group mailing list subscription and
   archive information are noted in each Working Group's charter.  In
   the ITU-T, the TSB has set up formal mailing lists for Questions,
   Working Parties and other topics within Study Groups (more detail can
   be found on the ITU website).  These mailing lists are typically used
   for ITU-T correspondence, including technical discussion, meeting
   logistics, reports, etc.  Note that individual subscribers to this
   list must be affiliated with an ITU-T member or associate (at this
   time, there is no blanket inclusion of all IETF participants as
   members, however, as a member, the ISOC focal point can facilitate
   access by IETF technical experts, liaison representatives, or liaison
   managers).  Any IETF participant may subscribe to ITU-T focus group
   email lists.

3.3. Document Sharing

   During the course of ITU-T and IETF collaboration it is important to
   share working drafts and documents among the technical working
   groups.  Initially proposed concepts and specifications typically can
   be circulated by email (often just repeating the concept and not
   including the details of the specification) on both the IETF and ITU-
   T mailing lists.  In addition, working texts (or URLs) of draft
   Recommendations, Internet Drafts or RFCs may also be sent between the
   organizations as described below.

   Internet-Drafts are available on the IETF web site.  The ITU-T can
   make selected ITU-T documents at any stage of development available
   to IETF by attaching them to a formal liaison statement. Although a
   communication can point to a URL where a non-ASCII document (e.g.,
   Word) can be downloaded, attachments in proprietary formats to an
   IETF mailing list are discouraged.  It should also be recognized that
   the official version of all IETF documents are in ASCII.

3.3.1. IETF to ITU-T

   IETF documents (e.g., Internet-Drafts) or URLs of those documents are
   most commonly transmitted to ITU-T Study Groups as liaison statements
   (see [2]), but exceptionally can be submitted to a Study Group as a
   Contribution from ISOC.  In order to ensure that the IETF has
   properly authorized this, the IETF Working Group must agree that the
   specific drafts are of mutual interest, that there is a benefit in
   forwarding them to the ITU-T for review, comment and potential use
   and that the document status is accurately represented in the cover
   letter.  Once agreed, the appropriate Area Directors would review the


S. Trowbridge          Expires October 5, 2012                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft IETF and ITU-T Collaboration Guidelines     January 2012


   Working Group request and give approval.  The contributions would
   then be forwarded (with the noted approval) to the TSB for
   circulation as a Study Group Contribution (see 3.2.4).  The rules of
   the IETF Trust are followed in these circumstances[RFC5378].

3.3.2. ITU-T to IETF

   A Study Group or Working Party may send texts of draft new or revised
   Recommendations, clearly indicating their status, to the IETF as
   contributions in the form of liaison statements or Internet Drafts.
   Internet Drafts are IETF temporary documents that expire six months
   after being published.  The Study Group or Working Party must decide
   that there is a benefit in forwarding them to the IETF for review,
   comment and potential use.  Terms of reference for Rapporteur Group
   meetings may authorize Rapporteur Groups to send working documents,
   in the form of Internet Drafts, to the IETF.

   If the Study Group or Working Party elects to transmit the text as an
   Internet-Draft, the document editor would be instructed to prepare
   the contribution in Internet Draft format (in ASCII and optionally
   postscript format as per [RFC2223]) and upload it via
   https://datatracker.ietf.org/idst/upload.cgi.  Alternatively, the
   Study Group, Working Party or Rapporteur Group could attach the text
   to a formal liaison statement.

   Both the Rapporteur and the Document Editor should be identified as
   contacts in the contribution.  The document should also clearly
   indicate the state of development in a particular ITU-T Study Group.
   Note that liaison statements are made publicly available on the IETF
   web site.

3.3.3. ITU-T & IETF

   It is envisaged that the processes of 3.3.1 & 3.3.2 will often be
   used simultaneously by both an IETF Working Group and an ITU-T Study
   Group to collaborate on a topic of mutual interest.

   It is also envisaged that the outcome of the collaboration will be
   the documentation in full by one body and its referencing by the
   other (see section 3.4 for details).  That is, common or joint text
   is discouraged because of the current differences in procedures for
   document approval and revision.  Where complementary work is being
   undertaken in both organizations that will result in Recommendations
   or RFCs, due allowance should be given to the differing perspectives,
   working methods, and procedures of the two organizations.  That is,
   each organization should understand the other organization's
   procedures and strive to respect them in the collaboration.



S. Trowbridge          Expires October 5, 2012                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft IETF and ITU-T Collaboration Guidelines     January 2012


3.4. Simple Cross Referencing

   ITU-T Recommendation A.5 describes the process for including
   references to documents of other organizations in ITU-T
   Recommendations.  Information specific to referencing IETF RFCs is
   found at http://www.itu.int/dms_pub/itu-
   t/oth/3E/01/T3E010000010001MSWE.doc.

   IETF RFC2026, specifically section 7.1.1, describes the process for
   referencing other open standards (like ITU-T Recommendations) in IETF
   RFCs.

3.5. Preliminary Work Efforts

   Both ITU-T and IETF provide mechanisms for early discussion of
   potential new work areas prior to the official start of work in a
   Study Group or creation of an IETF working group.

   Objectives, methods and procedures for the creation and operation of
   ITU-T focus groups are described in ITU-T Recommendation A.7. Focus
   groups are frequently created in new work areas where the division of
   work across various ITU-T Study Groups and other standards
   development organizations is not yet clear. IETF participants who are
   not members or associates of ITU-T may participate fully in the work
   of ITU-T focus groups.

   In the IETF, guidance for Birds Of a Feather (BoF) sessions is
   provided in RFC5434.  Efforts that have not yet reached the working
   group stage may be discussed in BOF sessions. These sessions
   typically gauge interest in pursuing creation of working groups. In
   some cases, these discussions continue on mailing lists.

3.6. Additional Items

3.6.1. Useful Information to ITU-T participations on the IETF

   Information on IETF procedures may be found in the documents and URLs
   below.  Note that RFCs do not change after they are published.
   Rather they are either obsoleted or updated by other RFCs.  Such
   updates are tracked in the rfc-index.txt file indicated below.

   RFC 2028 - The Organizations involved in the IETF Standards Process,
   October 1996.

   The Tao of the IETF - A Novice's Guide to the Internet Engineering
   Task Force, http://www.ietf.org/tao.html.

   RFC 3935 - A Mission Statement for the IETF, October 2004


S. Trowbridge          Expires October 5, 2012                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft IETF and ITU-T Collaboration Guidelines     January 2012


   RFC2026 - The Internet Standards Process Revision 3, October 1996
      http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2026.txt

   RFC2418 - IETF Working Group Guidelines and Procedures, September
   1998
      http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2418.txt

   RFC5434 - Considerations for Having a Successful Birds-of-a-Feather
   (BOF) Session, February 2009
      http://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc5434.txt

   Current list and status of all IETF RFCs:
      ftp://ftp.ietf.org/rfc/rfc-index.txt

   Current list and description of all IETF Internet Drafts:
      ftp://ftp.ietf.org/internet-drafts/1id-abstracts.txt

   Current list of IETF Working Groups and their Charters: (includes
   Area Directors and Chair contacts, Mailing list information, etc.)
      http://www.ietf.org/dyn/wg/charter.html

   Current list of registered BOFs
      http://trac.tools.ietf.org/bof/trac/

   RFC Editor pages about publishing RFCs, including available tools and
   lots of guidance:
      http://www.rfc-editor.org/pubprocess.html

   Current list of liaison statements:
      https://datatracker.ietf.org/liaison/

   IETF Intellectual Property Rights Policy and Notices:
      http://www.ietf.org/ipr/

3.6.2. Current ITU-T information can be found on the ITU website:
   (includes contacts, organization, Recommendations for purchase,
   mailing list info, etc.)

   ITU-T Main page: http://www.itu.int/ITU-T

   List of all ITU-T Recommendations:
      http://www.itu.int/itu-t/recommendations/index.aspx

   ITU-T Study Group main page for Study Group NN (where NN is the 2-
   digit SG number):
      http://www.itu.int/ITU-T/studygroups/comNN/index.asp




S. Trowbridge          Expires October 5, 2012                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft IETF and ITU-T Collaboration Guidelines     January 2012


   Intellectual Property policies, forms and databases:
      http://www.itu.int/en/ITU-T/ipr/Pages/default.aspx

   Current list of active ITU-T focus Groups
      http://www.itu.int/en/ITU-T/focusgroups/Pages/default.aspx

   ITU-T operational matters including:
      Recommendation A.1 - Study Group work methods
      Recommendation A.2 - Preparation of written contributions
      Recommendation A.4 - Communication process between ITU-T and
         forums and consortia
      Recommendation A.5 - Include reference to documents of other
         organizations in ITU-T Recs
      Recommendation A.7 - Focus groups: Working methods and procedures

   Recommendation A.8 - Alternative Approval Process for
         Recommendations
      http://www.itu.int/itu-t/recommendations/index.aspx?ser=A

   ITU T Procedures including:
      Resolution 1 - Rules of Procedure for ITU-T
      Resolution 2 - Study Group responsibility and mandates
      http://www.itu.int/publ/T-RES/en

   Authors Guide for drafting ITU-T Recommendations:
      http://www.itu.int/dms_pub/itu-
   t/oth/0A/0F/T0A0F0000040003MSWE.docxh

   Templates for contributions and liaison statements:
      http://www.itu.int/ITU-T/studygroups/templates/index.html

4. Security Considerations

   Documents that describe cooperation procedures, like this one
   does, have no direct Internet security implications.

5. IANA Considerations

   No new IANA considerations.

6. References

6.1. Normative References

   [1]   Daigle, L, Ed. "IAB Processes for Management of IETF Liaison
         Relationships", RFC 4052, BCP 102, April 2005.




S. Trowbridge          Expires October 5, 2012                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft IETF and ITU-T Collaboration Guidelines     January 2012


   [2]   Trowbridge, S, Bradner, S, and Baker, F, "Procedures for
         Handling Liaison Statements to and from the IETF", RFC4053, BCP
         103, April 2005.

6.2. Informative References

   [3]   Bradner. S, "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision 3", BCP
         9, RFC 2026, October 1996.

   [4]   Postel, J. and J. Reynolds, "Instructions to RFC Authors", RFC
         2223, October 1997.

   [5]   Brett, R., Bradner, S. and G. Parsons, "Collaboration between
         ISOC/IETF and ITU-T", RFC 2436, October 1998.

   [6]   Fishman, G and Bradner, S, "Internet Engineering Task Force and
         International Telecommunication Union - Telecommunications
         Standardization Sector Collaboration Guidelines", RFC 3356,
         August 2002.

7. Acknowledgements

   This document is based on the text from RFCs 2436 and 3356 and
   benefited greatly from discussions during the January 2012 ITU-T TSAG
   meeting.

8. Changes since RFC3356

   Authorization of liaison managers and liaison representatives from
   IETF to ITU-T are updated per current IETF procedures documented in
   [1].

   Transmission of formal liaison statements between ITU-T and IETF are
   updated per current IETF procedures documented in [2].

   Description is added of preliminary efforts including ITU-T focus
   groups and IETF BOFs. ITU-T focus group participation is not limited
   to ITU-T members.

   Obsolete URLs in RFC3356 from both the ITU-T and IETF web sites are
   updated.









S. Trowbridge          Expires October 5, 2012                [Page 14]

Internet-Draft IETF and ITU-T Collaboration Guidelines     January 2012


9. Authors' Addresses

   Steve Trowbridge
   Alcatel-Lucent

   Email: steve.trowbridge@alcatel-lucent.com


   Eliot Lear
   Cisco Systems GmbH
   Richtistrasse 7
   8304 Wallisellen
   Switzerland

   Phone: +41 44 878 9200
   Email: lear@cisco.com


































S. Trowbridge          Expires October 5, 2012                [Page 15]

