

SIMPLE Working Group                                         C. Holmberg
Internet-Draft                                                   S. Blau
Intended status: Standards Track                                Ericsson
Expires: December 11, 2011                                  June 9, 2011


Alternative Connection Establishment (ACE) for the Message Session Relay
                            Protocol (MSRP)
                draft-ietf-simple-msrp-sessmatch-12.txt

Abstract

   This document defines an MSRP extension, Alternative Connection
   Establishment (ACE).  Support of the extension is optional.  MSRP
   endpoints can implement the extension in order to allow MSRP
   communication in networks where SIP Application Layer Gateways (ALGs)
   anchor the MSRP connection, without the need for the ALGs to enable
   MSRP B2BUA functionality.  The document also defines a Session
   Description Protocol (SDP) [RFC4566] attribute, a=msrp-ace, that can
   be used by MSRP endpoints to indicate support of the ACE extension.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 11, 2011.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect



Holmberg & Blau         Expires December 11, 2011               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                    MRSP                         June 2011


   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Conventions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Applicability statement  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   4.  Alternative Connection Establishment Mechanism . . . . . . . .  4
     4.1.  General  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     4.2.  MSRP Offerer Procedures  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     4.3.  MSRP Answerer Procedures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     4.4.  Usage With The Alternative Connection Model  . . . . . . .  7
   5.  ALG assumptions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     5.1.  General  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     5.2.  MSRP awareness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     5.3.  TCP connection reuse . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     5.4.  SDP integrity  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     5.5.  TLS  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   6.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     6.1.  Man in the middle  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     6.2.  TLS  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   7.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     7.1.  IANA Registration of the SDP a=msrp-ace attribute  . . . . 10
   8.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   9.  Change Log . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   10. References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     10.1. Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     10.2. Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13


















Holmberg & Blau         Expires December 11, 2011               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                    MRSP                         June 2011


1.  Introduction

   The Message Session Relay Protocol (MSRP) [RFC4975] is designed to
   use MSRP relays [RFC4976] as a means for Network Address Translation
   (NAT) traversal and policy enforcement.

   However, many Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) [RFC3261] networks,
   in which MSRP usage is emerging, also contain SIP Application Layer
   Gateways (ALGs), that anchor and controls media, perform tasks such
   as NAT traversal, performance monitoring, lawful intercept, address
   domain bridging, interconnect Service Layer Agreement (SLA) policy
   enforcement, etc.  An example is the Interconnection Border Control
   Function (IBCF) [3GPP.23.228], defined by the 3rd Generation
   Partnership Project (3GPP).  The IBCF controls a media relay that
   handles all types of SIP session media (voice, video, MSRP, etc).

   MSRP, as defined in RFC 4975 [RFC4975] and RFC 4976 [RFC4976], does
   not work when an MSRP endpoints communicate with such ALGs, unless
   the ALGs implement MSRP Back-To-Back User Agent (B2BUA)
   functionality.  The reason is that ALGs modify the address:port
   information in SDP c/m-line in order to anchor media, and since the
   active MSRP UA establishes the MSRP TCP connection based on the MSRP
   URI of the SDP a=path attribute, this means that the MSRP connection
   will not, unless the ALG also modifies the MSRP URI of the topmost
   SDP a=path attribute be routed through the ALG, which in many
   scenarios will prevent the MSRP connection from being established.
   However, if the ALG modifies the MSRP URI of the SDP a=path
   attribute, then the MSRP URI comparison procedure [RFC4975], which
   requires consistency between the address information in the MSRP
   messages and the address information carried in the MSRP URI of the
   SDP a=path attribute, will fail.  The matching will fail if ALGs
   modify the address information in the MSRP URI of the SDP a=path
   attribute, but do not enable MSRP B2BUA functionality and perform the
   corresponding modification in the associated MSRP messages.  However,
   the enabling of MSRP B2BUA functionality requires substantially more
   resource usage in the ALG, that normally result in negative
   performance impact.

   This specification defines an MSRP extension, Alternative Connection
   Establishment (ACE), that in certain cases allows MSRP endpoints to
   communicate with ALGs without a need for the ALGs to enable MSRP
   B2BUA functionality.  In such cases, ALGs that anchor the MSRP
   connection simply modify the SDP c/m-line address information
   (similar to what it does for non-MSRP media types), and MSRP
   endpoints that support the ACE extension can use the SDP c/m-line
   address information for establishing the TCP (or TLS) connection to
   be used for sending and receiving of MSRP messages.




Holmberg & Blau         Expires December 11, 2011               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                    MRSP                         June 2011


   The ACE extension is fully backward compatible.  In scenarios where
   MSRP endpoints that do not support the ACE extension are able to
   establish MSRP connectivity, an MSRP endpoint that supports the ACE
   extension behaves in the same way as an MSRP endpoint that does not
   support it.  The ACE extension only provides an alternative mechanism
   for negotiating and providing the address information for the MSRP
   TCP connection.  Once the MSRP TCP connection has been created, an
   MSRP endpoint that supports the ACE extension MUST act according to
   the procedures (e.g. for creating MSRP messages, performing checks
   when receiving MSRP messages etc) defined in RFC 4975 (and RFC 4976,
   when it is using a relay for MSRP communication).


2.  Conventions

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in BCP 14, RFC 2119
   [RFC2119].

   In this specification the terminology "fingerprint based TLS
   authentication" and "name based TLS authentication" are used to refer
   to the two cases where:

   1.  An MSRP endpoint uses a self-signed TLS certificate and sends a
   certificate fingerprint in SDP (fingerprint based TLS
   authentication).

   2.  An MSRP endpoint uses a certificate from a well known certificate
   authority and the other endpoint matches the hostname in the received
   TLS communication SubjectAltName parameter towards the hostname
   received in the MSRP URI in SDP (name based TLS authentication).


3.  Applicability statement

   This document defines an MSRP extension, Alternative Connection
   Establishment (ACE).  Support of the extension is optional.  MSRP
   endpoints can implement the extension in order to allow MSRP
   communication in networks where SIP Application Layer Gateways (ALGs)
   anchor the MSRP connection, without the need for the ALGs to enable
   MSRP B2BUA functionality.


4.  Alternative Connection Establishment Mechanism






Holmberg & Blau         Expires December 11, 2011               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                    MRSP                         June 2011


4.1.  General

   This section defines how an MSRP endpoint that supports the ACE
   extension generates SDP offers and answers for MSRP, and what SDP
   information elements the MSRP endpoint uses when creating the TCP
   connection for the MSRP messages.

4.2.  MSRP Offerer Procedures

   When an MSRP endpoint sends an SDP offer for MSRP, it generates the
   SDP offer according to the procedures in RFC 4975 (and RFC 4976, if
   it is using a relay for MSRP communication), with the following
   additions and modifications:

   1) The MSRP endpoint MUST include an SDP a=msrp-ace attribute in the
   MSRP media description of the SDP offer.

   2) If the MSRP endpoint is not using a relay for MSRP communication,
   it MUST include an SDP a=setup attribute in the MSRP media
   description of the SDP offer, according to the procedures in RFC
   6135.

   3) If the MSRP endpoint is using a relay for MSRP communication, it
   MUST include the address information on the relay (the MSRP URI of
   the topmost SDP a=path attribute), rather than the address
   information of itself, in the SDP c/m-line associated with the MSRP
   media description.  In addition, it MUST include an SDP a=setup:
   passive attribute in the MSRP media description of the SDP offer.

   When the MSRP endpoint receives the first SDP answer to the SDP offer
   above, and the SDP answer indicates that the offered MSRP media has
   been accepted by the remote MSRP endpoint (i.e. the port number of
   the MSRP media description is not set to zero), if the MSRP media
   description of the SDP answer does not contain an SDP a=msrp-ace
   attribute, the MSRP endpoint MUST check whether any of the following
   criteria is fulfilled:

   1) The SDP c/m-line address information associated with the MSRP
   media description does not match the information in the MSRP URI of
   the topmost SDP a=path attribute, and the MSRP media description
   contains an SDP a=setup:active attribute (indicating that the remote
   MSRP endpoint is "active").

   2) The MSRP media description contains multiple SDP a=path attributes
   (indicating that MSRP relays are used).

   If any, or both, of the criteria above is fulfilled, the MSRP
   endpoint MUST fallback to RFC 4975 behavior, by sending a new SDP



Holmberg & Blau         Expires December 11, 2011               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                    MRSP                         June 2011


   offer according to the procedures in RFC 4975 and RFC 4976.  The new
   offer MUST NOT contain an SDP a=msrp-ace attribute.

   NOTE: In the absence of the SDP a=msrp-ace attribute in the new
   offer, the ALG will in all cases have to, in order to be able to
   anchor MSRP media, enable MSRP B2BUA functionality.

   NOTE: The MSRP endpoint can send the new offer within the existing
   early dialog [RFC3261], or it can terminate the early dialog and
   establish a new dialog by sending the new offer in a new initial
   INVITE request.

   In all other cases, where the MSRP endpoint becomes "active", it MUST
   use the SDP c/m-line for establishing the MSRP TCP connection.  If
   the MSRP endpoint becomes "passive", it will wait for the remote MSRP
   endpoint to establish the TCP connection, according to the procedures
   in RFC 4975.

4.3.  MSRP Answerer Procedures

   When an MSRP endpoint receives an SDP offer for MSRP, if the MSRP
   media description does not contain an SDP a=msrp-ace attribute, the
   MSRP endpoint MUST check whether any of the following criteria is
   fulfilled:

   1) The SDP c/m-line address information associated with the MSRP
   media description does not match the information in the MSRP URI of
   the topmost SDP a=path attribute, and the remote MSRP endpoint will
   become "active" (either by default, or by negotiation using the
   procedures in RFC 6135).

   2) The MSRP media description contains multiple SDP a=path attributes
   (indicating that MSRP relays are used).

   3) The MSRP endpoint uses a relay for MSRP communication, and is not
   able to become "passive" (the MSRP media description of the offer
   contains an SDP a=setup:passive attribute).

   If any, or all, of the criteria above is fulfilled, the MSRP endpoint
   MUST fallback to RFC 4975 behavior, and generate the associated SDP
   answer according to the procedures in RFC 4975 and RFC 4976.  The
   MSRP endpoint MUST NOT insert an SDP a=msrp-ace attribute in the MSRP
   media description of the SDP answer.

   In all other cases, the MSRP endpoint generates the associated SDP
   answer according to the procedures in RFC 4975 and RFC 4976, with the
   following additions and modifications:




Holmberg & Blau         Expires December 11, 2011               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                    MRSP                         June 2011


   1) The MSRP endpoint MUST include an SDP a=msrp-ace attribute in the
   MSRP media description of the SDP answer.

   2) If the MSRP endpoint is not using a relay for MSRP communication,
   it MUST include an SDP a=setup attribute in the MSRP media
   description of the answer, according to the procedures in RFC 6135.

   3) If the MSRP endpoint is using a relay for MSRP communication, it
   MUST include the address information on the relay (the MSRP URI of
   the topmost SDP a=path attribute), rather than the address
   information of itself, in the SDP c/m-line associated with the MSRP
   media description.  In addition, it MUST include an SDP a=setup:
   passive attribute in the MSRP media description of the SDP offer.

   If the MSRP endpoint included an SDP a=msrp-ace attribute in the MSRP
   media description of the SDP answer, and if the MSRP endpoint becomes
   "active", it MUST use the received SDP c/m-line for establishing the
   MSRP TCP connection.  If the MSRP endpoint becomes "passive", it will
   wait for the remote MSRP endpoint to establish the TCP connection,
   according to the procedures in RFC 4975.

4.4.  Usage With The Alternative Connection Model

   An MSRP endpoint that supports the ACE extension MUST in addition
   also support the mechanism defined in RFC 6135, as it extends the
   number of scenarios where the ACE extension can be used, and ALGs do
   not need to enable MSRP B2BUA functionality.  An example is where a
   MSRP endpoint is using a relay for MSRP communication, and it needs
   to be "passive" in order to use the ACE extension (instead of doing a
   fallback to RFC 4975 behavior.


5.  ALG assumptions

5.1.  General

   This document does not specify explicit ALG behavior, eventhough some
   of the procedures will be enabled by ALGs.  However, as the main
   reason behind the ACE extension is to allow MSRP endpoints to
   communicate in networks where ALGs are present, this document makes
   certain assumptions regarding to how such ALGs behave.

5.2.  MSRP awareness

   This document assumes that an ALG, in order to support
   interoperability between UAs that support the ACE extension and UAs
   that do not support the extension, is MSRP aware, meaning that it
   implements MSRP B2BUA functionality, and that it enables that



Holmberg & Blau         Expires December 11, 2011               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                    MRSP                         June 2011


   functionality in cases where support of the ACE extension is not
   indicated.  In cases where support of the ACE extension is indicated
   by at least one MSRP endpoint, the ALG can simply modifies the SDP
   c/m-line address information for the MSRP connection.  However, MSRP
   communication will work if the ALG enables MSRP B2BUA functionality
   also in such cases.

5.3.  TCP connection reuse

   When the ACE extension is used, in cases where ALGs do not need to
   enable MSRP B2BUA functionality, the ALGs are not required to parse
   and modify the MSRP payload.  An ALG that does not parse the MSRP
   payload might not enable re-usage of TCP connections for multiple
   MSRP sessions.  Instead, in order to associate an MSRP message with a
   specific session, the ALG often assigns a unique local address:port
   combination for each MSRP session.

5.4.  SDP integrity

   This document assumes that ALGs are able to modify the SDP address
   information associated with the MSRP media, and therefore can not be
   deployed in environments that require SIP identity [RFC4916] based
   peer-to-peer SDP protection.

5.5.  TLS

   This document considers two approaches how an ALG handles TLS
   protected MSRP connections.

   In the first approach, the ALG relays the MSRP media packets at the
   transport layer.  The TLS handshake and resulting security
   association (SA) are established peer-to-peer between the MSRP
   endpoints.  The ALG will see encrypted MSRP media packets, but is
   unable to inspect the cleartext content.

   In the second approach, the ALG acts as a TLS B2BUA, meaning that
   separate SAs are established between the ALG and each MSRP endpoint.
   The ALG decrypts MSRP media packets received from one MSRP endpoint,
   and then re-encrypts them before sending them toward the other MSRP
   endpoint.  With this approach, the ALG can inspect and modify the
   MSRP message content.


6.  Security Considerations







Holmberg & Blau         Expires December 11, 2011               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                    MRSP                         June 2011


6.1.  Man in the middle

   In some cases, where MSRP B2BUA functionality does not need to be
   enabled, the ACE extension makes it easier for a man in the middle
   (MiTM) to transparently insert itself in the communication between
   MSRP endpoints in order to monitor or record unprotected MSRP
   communication.  It does not however make it easier for a MiTM to
   monitor TLS protected MSRP, or in any significant way modify TLS
   protected MSRP content or even find out that the packets contain MSRP
   messages, since that would require the MiTM to implement MSRP B2BUA
   functionality, no matter if UAs support the ACE extension or not.  It
   would thus require the MiTM to terminate the TCP/TLS/MSRP connection
   in both directions.

6.2.  TLS

   The ACE extension supports the usage of name based authentication for
   TLS, also in the presence of ALGs.

   NOTE: If an ALG acts as a TLS B2BUA, MSRP endpoints will also be able
   to use fingerprint based authentication for TLS, no matter if they
   support the ACE extension or not.  In such cases, as the ALG acts as
   a TLS endpoints, MSRP endpoints might be given an incorrect
   impression that there is an end-to-end SA between the MSRP endpoints.

   If an ALG does not act as a TLS B2BUA, fingerprint based
   authentication will not work, as the "SIP Identity" based integrity
   protection of SDP will break.  Therefore, in addition to the
   authentication mechanisms defined in RFC 4975, an MSRP endpoint
   supporting the ACE extension SHOULD also support an authentication
   mechanism that does not rely on peer-to-peer SDP integrity.

   It is RECOMMENDED that an MSRP endpoint supports one of the following
   authentication mechanisms:

   1) TLS certificates together with support of interacting with a
   Certificate Management Service [ref to draft-ietf-sip-certs], to
   which it publishes the public version of its own self-signed
   certificate and from which it fetches on need the public certificates
   of other endpoints.

   2) TLS-PSK managed e.g by MIKEY-TICKET based Key Management and Key
   Management Service [RFC6043].

   NOTE: 3GPP has specified usage of the MIKEY-TICKET based Key
   Management and Key Management Service authentication mechanism for
   the IP Multimedia Subsystem (IMS).




Holmberg & Blau         Expires December 11, 2011               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft                    MRSP                         June 2011


   When an MSRP endpoint generates an SDP offer for MSRPS it MUST, in
   addition to the SDP attributes associated with the TLS authentication
   mechanisms described in RFC 4975, it MUST include any information
   elements associated with the other authentication mechanisms that it
   supports.

   Unless the MSRP endpoints are able to use name based authentication,
   and they support a common authentication mechanism, they MUST use
   that mechanism.  If the MSRP endpoints do not support such common
   authentication mechanism, they MUST try fingerprint based
   authentication, which will succeed if there are no ALGs present.  If
   that also fails, the MSRP endpoints MUST either:

   1) Consider the TLS authentication as failed, in accordance with RFC
   4975; or

   2) If the SIP signalling between the MSRP endpoints is protected
   through e.g.  SIPS, use fingerprint based authentication without
   requiring peer-to-peer SDP integrity, and thus trust the network
   endpoints in the signaling path for SDP integrity.

   NOTE: As defined in RFC 4975, if TLS authentication fails, the user
   need to be able to decide whether to try to anyway establish an MSRP
   connection.


7.  IANA Considerations

7.1.  IANA Registration of the SDP a=msrp-ace attribute

   This section registers a new SDP attribute, a=msrp-ace.  The required
   information for this registration, as specified in RFC 4566, is:



















Holmberg & Blau         Expires December 11, 2011              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft                    MRSP                         June 2011


       Contact name: Christer Holmberg

           Contact e-mail: christer.holmberg@ericsson.com

           Attribute name: a=msrp-ace

       Type of attribute: media level

       Purpose: This attribute is used to indicate support of the MSRP
                    Alternative Connection Establishment (ACE) extension
                defined in RFC XXXX. When present in an MSRP media
                description of an SDP body, it indicates that
                the sending UA supports the ACE the mechanism.

       Values: The attribute does not carry a value

           Charset dependency: no


8.  Acknowledgements

   Thanks to Ben Campbell, Remi Denis-Courmont, Nancy Greene, Hadriel
   Kaplan, Adam Roach, Robert Sparks, Salvatore Loreto, Shida Schubert,
   Ted Hardie, Richard L Barnes, Inaki Baz Castillo and Saul Ibarra
   Corretge for their guidance and input in order to produce this
   document.


9.  Change Log

   [RFC EDITOR NOTE: Please remove this section when publishing]

   Changes from draft-ietf-simple-msrp-sessmatch-11
   o  Modification of the sessmatch mechanism.
   o  - Extension name changed to Alternative Connection Establishment
      (ACE)
   o  - Session matching procedure no longer updated.
   o  - SDP c/m-line used for MSRP TCP connection.
   o  - sessmatch option-tag removed.
   o  - a=msrp-ace attribute defined.
   o  - Support of RFC 6135 mandatory.

   Changes from draft-ietf-simple-msrp-sessmatch-10
   o  Sessmatch option-tag added, based on WG discussions and concensus.

   Changes from draft-ietf-simple-msrp-sessmatch-08





Holmberg & Blau         Expires December 11, 2011              [Page 11]

Internet-Draft                    MRSP                         June 2011


   o  OPEN ISSUE regarding the need for a sessmatch option-tag removed.

   Changes from draft-ietf-simple-msrp-sessmatch-07
   o  Sessmatch defined as an MSRP extension, rather than MSRP update
   o  Additional security considerations text added


10.  References

10.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC3261]  Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., Camarillo, G., Johnston,
              A., Peterson, J., Sparks, R., Handley, M., and E.
              Schooler, "SIP: Session Initiation Protocol", RFC 3261,
              June 2002.

   [RFC4566]  Handley, M., Jacobson, V., and C. Perkins, "SDP: Session
              Description Protocol", RFC 4566, July 2006.

   [RFC4975]  Campbell, B., Mahy, R., and C. Jennings, "The Message
              Session Relay Protocol (MSRP)", RFC 4975, September 2007.

   [RFC4976]  Jennings, C., Mahy, R., and A. Roach, "Relay Extensions
              for the Message Sessions Relay Protocol (MSRP)", RFC 4976,
              September 2007.

   [RFC6135]  Holmberg, C. and S. Blau, "An Alternative Connection Model
              for the Message Session Relay Protocol (MSRP)", RFC 6135,
              February 2011.

10.2.  Informative References

   [RFC4916]  Elwell, J., "Connected Identity in the Session Initiation
              Protocol (SIP)", RFC 4916, June 2007.

   [RFC6043]  Mattsson, J. and T. Tian, "MIKEY-TICKET: Ticket-Based
              Modes of Key Distribution in Multimedia Internet KEYing
              (MIKEY)", RFC 6043, March 2011.

   [3GPP.23.228]
              3GPP, "IP Multimedia Subsystem (IMS); Stage 2", 3GPP
              TS 23.228 5.15.0, June 2006.






Holmberg & Blau         Expires December 11, 2011              [Page 12]

Internet-Draft                    MRSP                         June 2011


Authors' Addresses

   Christer Holmberg
   Ericsson
   Hirsalantie 11
   Jorvas  02420
   Finland

   Email: christer.holmberg@ericsson.com


   Staffan Blau
   Ericsson
   Stockholm  12637
   Sweden

   Email: staffan.blau@ericsson.com


































Holmberg & Blau         Expires December 11, 2011              [Page 13]

