


SIMPLE Working Group                                         C. Holmberg
Internet-Draft                                                   S. Blau
Intended status: Standards Track                                Ericsson
Expires: February 27, 2012                                E. Burger, Ed.
                                                   Georgetown University
                                                         August 26, 2011


  Connection Establishment for Media Anchoring (CEMA) for the Message
                     Session Relay Protocol (MSRP)
                   draft-ietf-simple-msrp-cema-00.txt

Abstract

   This document defines an Message Session Relay Protocol (MSRP)
   extension, Connection Establishment for Media Anchoring (CEMA).  MSRP
   endpoints implement this extension to enable secure, end-to-end MSRP
   communication in networks where Middleboxes anchor the MSRP
   connection.  CEMA eliminates the need for Middleboxes to modify MSRP
   messages.  Modifying MSRP messages requires the Middlebox to read the
   message in plain text, exposing the message to attack.  The document
   also defines a Session Description Protocol (SDP) attribute, a=msrp-
   cema, that MSRP endpoints use to indicate support of the CEMA
   extension.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on February 27, 2012.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal



Holmberg, et al.        Expires February 27, 2012               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                    CEMA                       August 2011


   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Conventions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Applicability Statement  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   4.  Connection Establishment for Media Anchoring Mechanism . . . .  5
     4.1.  General  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     4.2.  MSRP Offer Procedures  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     4.3.  MSRP Answer Procedures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     4.4.  Usage With the Alternative Connection Model  . . . . . . .  8
   5.  Middlebox Assumptions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     5.1.  General  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     5.2.  MSRP Awareness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     5.3.  TCP Connection Reuse . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     5.4.  SDP Integrity  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     5.5.  TLS  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   6.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     6.1.  Man in the Middle  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     6.2.  TLS Usage  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     6.3.  TLS and Insecure Signaling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     6.4.  Downgrade Attacks  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   7.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     7.1.  IANA Registration of the SDP a=msrp-cema Attribute . . . . 13
   8.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   9.  Change Log . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   10. References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
     10.1. Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
     10.2. Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17












Holmberg, et al.        Expires February 27, 2012               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                    CEMA                       August 2011


1.  Introduction

   The Message Session Relay Protocol (MSRP) [RFC4975] expects to use
   MSRP relays [RFC4976] as a means for Network Address Translation
   (NAT) traversal and policy enforcement.  However, many Session
   Initiation Protocol (SIP) [RFC3261] networks, which deploy MSRP,
   contain Middleboxes.  These Middleboxes anchor and control media,
   perform tasks such as NAT traversal, performance monitoring, lawful
   intercept, address domain bridging, interconnect Service Layer
   Agreement (SLA) policy enforcement, and so on.  One example is the
   Interconnection Border Control Function (IBCF) [GPP23228], defined by
   the 3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP).  The IBCF controls a
   media relay that handles all types of SIP session media such as
   voice, video, MSRP, etc.

   MSRP, as defined in RFC 4975 [RFC4975] and RFC 4976 [RFC4976], cannot
   anchor through Middleboxes.  The reason is that MSRP messages have
   routing information embedded in the message.  Without an extension
   such as CEMA, Middleboxes must read the message to change the routing
   information.  This occurs because Middleboxes modify the address:port
   information in the Session Description Protocol (SDP) [RFC4566] c/m-
   line in order to anchor media.  Since the active MSRP UA establishes
   the MSRP TCP connection based on the MSRP URI of the SDP a=path
   attribute, this means that the MSRP connection will not, unless the
   Middlebox also modifies the MSRP URI of the topmost SDP a=path
   attribute, be routed through the Middlebox.  In many scenarios this
   will prevent the MSRP connection from being established.  In
   addition, if the Middlebox modifies the MSRP URI of the SDP a=path
   attribute, then the MSRP URI comparison procedure [RFC4975], which
   requires consistency between the address information in the MSRP
   messages and the address information carried in the MSRP URI of the
   SDP a=path attribute, will fail.  Also the matching will fail if
   Middleboxes modify the address information in the MSRP URI of the SDP
   a=path attribute.

   The only way to achieve interoperability in this situation is for the
   Middlebox to be a MSRP back-to-back User Agent (B2BUA).  Here the
   MSRP B2BUA acts as the endpoint for the MSRP signaling and media,
   performs the corresponding modification in the associated MSRP
   messages, and originates a new MSRP session towards the actual remote
   endpoint.  However, this interoperability comes at the cost of
   exposing the MSRP message in clear text to the MSRP B2BUA.  This is a
   serious violation of the end-to-end principle [RFC3724].

   This specification defines an MSRP extension, Connection
   Establishment for Media Anchoring (CEMA).  CEMA in most cases allows
   MSRP endpoints to communicate through Middleboxes without a need for
   the Middleboxes to be a MSRP B2BUA.  In such cases, Middleboxes that



Holmberg, et al.        Expires February 27, 2012               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                    CEMA                       August 2011


   want to anchor the MSRP connection simply modify the SDP c/m-line
   address information, similar to what it does for non-MSRP media
   types.  MSRP endpoints that support the CEMA extension will use the
   SDP c/m-line address information for establishing the TLS connection
   for sending and receiving MSRP messages.

   The CEMA extension is fully backward compatible.  In scenarios where
   MSRP endpoints do not support the CEMA extension, an MSRP endpoint
   that supports the CEMA extension behaves in the same way as an MSRP
   endpoint that does not support it.  The CEMA extension only provides
   an alternative mechanism for negotiating and providing address
   information for the MSRP TCP connection.  After the creation of the
   MSRP TCP connection, an MSRP endpoint that supports the CEMA
   extension acts according to the procedures for creating MSRP
   messages, performing checks when receiving MSRP messages defined in
   RFC 4975 and, when it is using a relay for MSRP communications, RFC
   4976.


2.  Conventions

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in BCP 14, RFC 2119
   [RFC2119].

   Definitions:

   Fingerprint Based TLS Authentication  An MSRP endpoint that uses a
        self-signed TLS certificate and sends a certificate fingerprint
        in SDP.
   Name Based TLS Authentication  An MSRP endpoint that uses a
        certificate from a well known certificate authority and the
        other endpoint matches the hostname in the received TLS
        communication SubjectAltName parameter towards the hostname
        received in the MSRP URI in SDP.
   B2BUA  This is an abbreviation for back-to-back user agent.
   MSRP B2BUA  A network element that terminates an MSRP stream from a
        first MSRP endpoint and reoriginates that stream towards a
        second MSRP endpoint.  Note the MSRP B2BUA is distinct from a
        SIP B2BUA.  A SIP B2BUA terminates a SIP session and
        reoriginates that session towards the SIP endpoint.  In the
        context of MSRP, a first SIP endpoint initiates a SIP session
        towards the remote SIP endpoint.  However, that INVITE may go
        through, for example, an outbound Proxy or inbound Proxy to
        route to the remote SIP endpoint.  That SIP session negotiates a
        MSRP session that may or may not follow the SIP session path.
        Although often the case, there is no requirement to co-locate



Holmberg, et al.        Expires February 27, 2012               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                    CEMA                       August 2011


        the SIP network elements with the MSRP network elements.
   Middlebox  A SIP network device that modifies SDP media address:port
        information in order to steer or anchor media flows described in
        the SDP, including TLS connections used for MSRP communication,
        through a media proxy function controlled by the SIP endpoint.
        In most cases the media proxy function relays the MSRP messages
        without modification, while in some circumstances it acts as a
        MSRP B2BUA.  Other SIP related functions, such as related to
        routing, modification of SIP information etc., performed by the
        Middlebox, and whether it acts a SIP B2BUA or not, is outside
        the scope of this document.  Section 5 describes additional
        assumptions regarding how the Middlebox handles MSRP in order to
        support the extension defined in this document.


3.  Applicability Statement

   This document defines an MSRP extension, Connection Establishment for
   Media Anchoring (CEMA).  Support of the extension is optional.  MSRP
   endpoints implement the extension in order to allow MSRP
   communication in networks where Middleboxes anchor the MSRP
   connection, without the need for the Middleboxes to decode and
   rewrite MSRP messages and enabling end-to-end security.  The document
   also defines a Session Description Protocol (SDP) [RFC4566]
   attribute, a=msrp-cema, that can be used by MSRP endpoints to
   indicate support of the CEMA extension.

   An important use case for CEMA are Third-Generation Partnership
   Program Internet Multimedia System (3GPP IMS) SIP networks.  These
   networks use Middleboxes for various functions.  Moreover, these
   networks have the capability for all endpoints to use Name-based TLS
   Authentication.

   There is nothing special about 3GPP IMS SIP networks to indicate the
   use of CEMA.  Rather, CEMA is an important update to MSRP that closes
   a number of existing security issues and creates a foundation for
   closing other security issues in the future.  Therefore, CEMA is for
   all MSRP deployments that use Middleboxes.  Moreover, because of the
   presence of secure transport, CEMA is for all MSRP deployments,
   including those without Middleboxes.

   Section 6 describes this further.


4.  Connection Establishment for Media Anchoring Mechanism






Holmberg, et al.        Expires February 27, 2012               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                    CEMA                       August 2011


4.1.  General

   This section defines how an MSRP endpoint that supports the CEMA
   extension generates SDP offers and answers for MSRP, and what SDP
   information elements the MSRP endpoint uses when creating the TLS
   connection for the MSRP messages.

4.2.  MSRP Offer Procedures

   When a CEMA-enabled MSRP endpoint sends an SDP offer for MSRP, it
   generates the SDP offer according to the procedures in RFC 4975.  In
   addition, the endpoint follows RFC 4976 if it is using a relay for
   MSRP communication.  The endpoint also performs the following
   additions and modifications:

   1.  The MSRP endpoint MUST include an SDP a=msrp-cema attribute in
       the MSRP media description of the SDP offer.
   2.  If the MSRP endpoint is not using a relay for MSRP communication,
       it MUST include an SDP a=setup attribute in the MSRP media
       description of the SDP offer, according to the procedures in RFC
       6135 [RFC6135].
   3.  If the MSRP endpoint is using a relay for MSRP communication, it
       MUST include the address information of the relay (the MSRP URI
       of the topmost SDP a=path attribute), rather than the address
       information of itself, in the SDP c/m-line associated with the
       MSRP media description.  In addition, it MUST include an SDP
       a=setup:actpass attribute in the MSRP media description of the
       SDP offer.

   The MSRP endpoint then receives the first SDP answer to the SDP offer
   above.  The SDP answer indicates that the remote MSRP endpoint
   accepted the offered MSRP media if the port number of the MSRP media
   description is not zero.  If the MSRP media description of the SDP
   answer does not contain an SDP a=msrp-cema attribute, the MSRP
   endpoint makes the following checks.  If either or both of these
   checks fails, the MSRP endpoint MUST fallback to RFC 4975 behavior,
   by sending a new SDP offer according to the procedures in RFC 4975
   and RFC 4976.  The new offer MUST NOT contain an SDP a=msrp-cema
   attribute.

   1.  The SDP c/m-line address information associated with the MSRP
       media description does not match the information in the MSRP URI
       of the topmost SDP a=path attribute, and the MSRP media
       description contains an SDP a=setup:active attribute (indicating
       that the remote MSRP endpoint is "active").
   2.  The MSRP media description contains multiple SDP a=path
       attributes, indicating the use of MSRP relays.




Holmberg, et al.        Expires February 27, 2012               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                    CEMA                       August 2011


   In the absence of the SDP a=msrp-cema attribute in the new offer, the
   Middlebox MUST act as an MSRP B2BUA to anchor MSRP media.  Note the
   originating endpoint should reject the session if it can detect the
   MSRP B2BUA is not the desired remote endpoint.

   The MSRP endpoint can send the new offer within the existing early
   dialog [RFC3261], or it can terminate the early dialog and establish
   a new dialog by sending the new offer in a new initial INVITE
   request.

   In all other cases, where the MSRP endpoint becomes "active", it MUST
   use the SDP c/m-line for establishing the MSRP TLS connection.  If
   the MSRP endpoint becomes "passive", it will wait for the remote MSRP
   endpoint to establish the TLS connection, according to the procedures
   in RFC 4975.

4.3.  MSRP Answer Procedures

   If any of the criteria below are met, the MSRP endpoint MUST fallback
   to RFC 4975 behavior and generate the associated SDP answer according
   to the procedures in RFC 4975 and RFC 4976.  The MSRP endpoint MUST
   NOT insert an SDP a=msrp-cema attribute in the MSRP media description
   of the SDP answer.

   1.  Both MSRP endpoints are using relays for MSRP communication.  An
       endpoint can detect the remote MSRP endpoint is using a relay for
       MSRP communication if the MSRP media description of the SDP offer
       contains multiple SDP a=path attributes.
   2.  The remote MSRP endpoint uses a relay for MSRP communication, and
       will become "active" either by default or if the MSRP media
       description of the SDP offer contains an SDP a=setup:active
       attribute.  This case indicates the remote MSRP endpoint does not
       support the CEMA extension.  A CEMA-enabled endpoint would
       include an SDP a=setup:actpass attribute in the SDP offer, as
       described in Section 4.2.
   3.  The MSRP endpoint uses a relay for MSRP communication and is not
       able to become "passive".  The indication for this is the MSRP
       media description of the offer contains an SDP a=setup:passive
       attribute.  This will not occur with a CEMA-enabled endpoint, as
       it cannot include an SDP a=setup:passive attribute in an SDP
       offer, as described in RFC 6135.
   4.  The MSRP media description of the SDP offer does not contain an
       SDP a=msrp-cema attribute, the SDP c/m-line address information
       associated with the MSRP media description does not match the
       information in the MSRP URI of the topmost SDP a=path attribute,
       and the remote MSRP endpoint will become "active", either by
       default, or if the MSRP media description of the SDP offer
       contains an SDP a=setup:active attribute.



Holmberg, et al.        Expires February 27, 2012               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                    CEMA                       August 2011


   In all other cases, the MSRP endpoint generates the associated SDP
   answer according to the procedures in RFC 4975 and RFC 4976, with the
   following additions and modifications:

   1.  The MSRP endpoint MUST include an SDP a=msrp-cema attribute in
       the MSRP media description of the SDP answer.
   2.  If the MSRP endpoint is not using a relay for MSRP communication,
       it MUST include an SDP a=setup attribute in the MSRP media
       description of the answer, according to the procedures in RFC
       6135.
   3.  If the MSRP endpoint is using a relay for MSRP communication, it
       MUST include the address information on the relay (the MSRP URI
       of the topmost SDP a=path attribute), rather than the address
       information of itself, in the SDP c/m-line associated with the
       MSRP media description.  In addition, it MUST include an SDP
       a=setup:passive attribute in the MSRP media description of the
       SDP answer.

   If the MSRP endpoint included an SDP a=msrp-cema attribute in the
   MSRP media description of the SDP answer, and if the MSRP endpoint
   becomes "active", it MUST use the received SDP c/m-line for
   establishing the MSRP TLS connection.  If the MSRP endpoint becomes
   "passive", it will wait for the remote MSRP endpoint to establish the
   TLS connection, according to the procedures in RFC 4975.

4.4.  Usage With the Alternative Connection Model

   An MSRP endpoint that supports the CEMA extension MUST support the
   mechanism defined in RFC 6135, as it extends the number of scenarios
   where one can use the CEMA extension.  An example is where a MSRP
   endpoint is using a relay for MSRP communication, and it needs to be
   "passive" in order to use the CEMA extension, instead of doing a
   fallback to RFC 4975 behavior.


5.  Middlebox Assumptions

5.1.  General

   This document does not specify explicit Middlebox behavior, even
   though Middleboxes enable some of the procedures described here.
   However, as one rationale for the CEMA extension is to allow MSRP
   endpoints to communicate over end-to-end secure paths in networks
   where Middleboxes that want to anchor media are present, this
   document makes certain assumptions regarding to how such Middleboxes
   behave.





Holmberg, et al.        Expires February 27, 2012               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                    CEMA                       August 2011


5.2.  MSRP Awareness

   In order to support interoperability between UAs that support the
   CEMA extension and UAs that do not support the extension, the
   Middlebox is MSRP aware.  This means that it implements MSRP B2BUA
   functionality.  The Middlebox enables that functionality in cases
   where the remote endpoint does not support the CEMA extension.  In
   cases where at least one MSRP endpoint supports the CEMA extension,
   the Middlebox can simply modify the SDP c/m-line address information
   for the MSRP connection.

5.3.  TCP Connection Reuse

   Middleboxes do not need to parse and modify the MSRP payload when
   endpoints use the CEMA extension.  A Middlebox that does not parse
   the MSRP payload probably will not be able to reuse TCP connections
   for multiple MSRP sessions.  Instead, in order to associate an MSRP
   message with a specific session, the Middlebox often assigns a unique
   local address:port combination for each MSRP session.

5.4.  SDP Integrity

   This document assumes that Middleboxes are able to modify the SDP
   address information associated with the MSRP media.  Middleboxes
   cannot be deployed in environments that require end-to-end SDP
   protection using SIP identity [RFC4916].

5.5.  TLS

   The Middlebox relays MSRP media packets at the transport layer.  The
   TLS handshake and resulting security association (SA) are established
   peer-to-peer between the MSRP endpoints.  The Middlebox will see
   encrypted MSRP media packets, but is unable to inspect the clear text
   content.


6.  Security Considerations

6.1.  Man in the Middle

   In some cases, the CEMA extension could make it easier for a man in
   the middle (MiTM) to transparently insert itself in the communication
   between MSRP endpoints in order to monitor or record unprotected MSRP
   communication.  Therefore, endpoints MUST use encrypted channels.
   For base interoperability, a CEMA-enabled MSRP endpoint MUST
   implement TLS.





Holmberg, et al.        Expires February 27, 2012               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft                    CEMA                       August 2011


6.2.  TLS Usage

   The CEMA extension supports the usage of name-based authentication
   for TLS in the presence of Middleboxes.

   If a Middlebox acts as a TLS B2BUA, MSRP endpoints will be able to
   use fingerprint based authentication for TLS, no matter if they
   support the CEMA extension or not.  In such cases, as the Middlebox
   acts as TLS endpoints, MSRP endpoints might be given an incorrect
   impression that there is an end-to-end security association (SA)
   between the MSRP endpoints.

   If a Middlebox does not act as a TLS B2BUA, fingerprint based
   authentication will not work, as the "SIP Identity" based integrity
   protection of SDP will break.  Therefore, in addition to the
   authentication mechanisms defined in RFC 4975, an MSRP endpoint
   supporting the CEMA extension MAY support an authentication mechanism
   that does not rely on peer-to-peer SDP integrity.

   It is RECOMMENDED that an MSRP endpoint support one of the following
   authentication mechanisms:
   1.  TLS certificates together with support of interacting with a
       Certificate Management Service [RFC6072], to which it publishes
       the public version of its own self-signed certificate and from
       which it fetches on demand the public certificates of other
       endpoints.
   2.  TLS-PSK managed by MIKEY-TICKET Based Key Management and Key
       Management Service[RFC6043].  Note that 3GPP has specified the
       MIKEY-TICKET based Key Management and Key Management Service
       authentication mechanism for the IP Multimedia Subsystem (IMS).
       Thus it will be available in that environment.

   When an MSRP endpoint generates an SDP offer for MSRPS, in addition
   to the SDP attributes associated with the TLS authentication
   mechanisms described in RFC 4975, it MUST include any information
   elements associated with the other authentication mechanisms that it
   supports.

   Unless the MSRP endpoints are able to use name-based authentication,
   and they support a common authentication mechanism, they MUST use
   that mechanism.  If the MSRP endpoints do not support such common
   authentication mechanism, they MUST try fingerprint-based
   authentication, which will succeed if there are no Middleboxes
   present.  If that also fails, the MSRP endpoints MUST either:

   1.  Consider the TLS authentication as failed, in accordance with RFC
       4975; or




Holmberg, et al.        Expires February 27, 2012              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft                    CEMA                       August 2011


   2.  If something like SIPS protects the SIP signaling between the
       MSRP endpoints, use fingerprint based authentication without
       requiring peer-to-peer SDP integrity, and thus trust the network
       endpoints in the signaling path for SDP integrity.

   As defined in RFC 4975, if TLS authentication fails, the user needs
   to be able to decide whether to try to establish an MSRP connection
   in the likely scenario of intercepted, altered, or forged connections

6.3.  TLS and Insecure Signaling

   MSRP is the only SIP-based media transport that has a layer
   violation.  MSRP media includes routing information, including from
   and to URIs.  Other SIP-based media can have separate paths for
   signaling and media and can have end-to-end integrity of the media.
   Except for MSRP, SIP-based media can flow through routers, NATs, TURN
   servers [RFC5766], STUN servers [RFC5389], and so on without
   modification.

   CEMA provides an environment necessary for end-to-end integrity of
   MSRP media.  CEMA makes it possible to route MSRP media without
   requiring modification of the media.  This is what enables end-to-
   end, cryptographic integrity assurance.  However, while CEMA is a
   necessary prerequisite for end-to-end integrity, it is not
   sufficient.

   CEMA mandates an integrity-protected media channel.  At the base
   level, all CEMA endpoints MUST support TLS.  Unless the CEMA
   endpoints negotiate a stronger communications mechanism, the
   endpoints MUST use TLS, even if they happen to not use a Middlebox
   for routing.

   One issue with mandating TLS is the availability of a certificate
   infrastructure.  Endpoints can always provide self-signed
   certificates.  However, this is problematic in that any endpoint can
   masquerade as another, by providing a self-signed certificate with
   the victim's information.

   The reason CEMA mandates TLS in light of such an obvious
   vulnerability is three-fold.

   First, one of the target deployments for CEMA is the 3GPP IMS SIP
   network.  In this environment it is trivially easy for the service
   provider to provide signed certificates or manage signed certificates
   on behalf of their subscribers.  This does require trusting the
   service provider, but those issues are beyond the scope of this
   document.




Holmberg, et al.        Expires February 27, 2012              [Page 11]

Internet-Draft                    CEMA                       August 2011


   Second, alternate key distribution mechanisms, such as DANE [DANE],
   PGP [RFC6091], or some other technology may become ubiquitous enough
   to solve the key distribution problem.

   Third, experiences with IETF protocols have been that when security
   is put on as an afterthought or is optional, it rarely gets deployed.
   There is a clear path over time for creating a key distribution
   mechanism.  Thus mandating TLS at this time removes one of the
   recurring excuses to not deploy secure solutions build to Internet
   security norms.  Namely, that one cannot deploy a secure solution
   because legacy endpoints do not have TLS capability.

   Even with seemingly end-to-end media integrity, at the time of the
   publication of this document there are other vulnerabilities in MSRP
   that mean users may not have truly end-to-end security.  These issues
   come from vulnerabilities in the SIP signaling.  If there are no
   integrity protections on the SIP signaling, it is trivially easy for
   a bad actor to surreptitiously insert evil Middleboxes to alter,
   record, or otherwise harm the media.  With insecure signaling, it can
   be very difficult for an endpoint to even be aware the remote
   endpoint has any relationship to the expected endpoint.  Securing the
   SIP signaling does not solve all problems.  For example, in a SIPS
   environment, the endpoints have no cryptographic way of validating
   that one or more SIP Proxies in the proxy chain are not, in fact,
   evil.

   In light of these vulnerabilities, why does CEMA mandate the more
   resource-intensive TLS instead of TCP for MSRP connections, and why
   does CEMA claim it has more security than deploying MSRP B2BUAs?

   From a processing load perspective, the burden of TLS falls entirely
   on the endpoints.  CPU capability and battery life of even low-end
   mobile devices are such that this is no longer a barrier for
   mandating TLS.  Moreover, as an added bonus, CEMA removes the
   requirement for Middleboxes to decode, read, rewrite, and re-
   encrypting MSRP media.  This means that Middleboxes can have much
   more scale and performance with CEMA.

   From a framework perspective, the ubiquitous deployment of TLS, while
   to totally ensuring integrity in all cases, does enable the
   environment for further end-to-end integrity solutions.  For example,
   one could envision mechanisms where the endpoints create security
   associations in the MSRP media stream.  This, coupled with future
   end-to-end integrity protected or assured SIP signaling, will provide
   for true end-to-end MSRP integrity.  By mandating TLS today, we
   eliminate the possibility of future downgrade attacks in light of
   more robust solutions.




Holmberg, et al.        Expires February 27, 2012              [Page 12]

Internet-Draft                    CEMA                       August 2011


   This situation is comparable to DNSSEC [RFC4033].  DNSSEC does not
   solve all DNS integrity issues, but it does create an environment
   that immediately solves some problems and lays the groundwork for
   future, more robust solutions.

6.4.  Downgrade Attacks

   In order to ensure interoperability, CEMA clients can chose to
   conenct to non-CEMA clients.  Whilst CEMA clients must use TLS, the
   CEMA client may connect to a pre-CEMA, RFC 4975 client.  Although RFC
   4975 mandates the implementation of TLS, RFC 4975 does not mandate
   the usage of TLS.  Therefore, a pre-CEMA client may chose to use only
   TCP.  In this case, in the name of interoperability, a CEMA client
   MAY use a standard RFC 4975 TCP connection.

   The security implication is that an evil client or middlebox could
   strip the CEMA information from the negotiation.  In this case, the
   CEMA client would believe the other end when it claims not to
   implement TLS.  CEMA clients SHOULD attempt to validate non-TLS
   requests via mechanisms such as by using secured signaling chanels,
   unless those mechansims are truly unavailable.


7.  IANA Considerations

7.1.  IANA Registration of the SDP a=msrp-cema Attribute

   This section registers a new SDP attribute, a=msrp-cema.  The
   required information for this registration, as specified in RFC 4566,
   is:





















Holmberg, et al.        Expires February 27, 2012              [Page 13]

Internet-Draft                    CEMA                       August 2011


   Contact name: Christer Holmberg

   Contact e-mail: christer.holmberg@ericsson.com

   Attribute name: a=msrp-cema

   Type of attribute: media level

   Purpose: This attribute is used to indicate support of
            the MSRP Connection Establishment for Media
            Anchoring (CEMA) extension defined in
            RFC XXXX. When present in an MSRP media
            description of an SDP body, it indicates
            that the sending UA supports the CEMA
            mechanism.

   Values: The attribute does not carry a value

   Charset dependency: none


8.  Acknowledgements

   Thanks to Ben Campbell, Remi Denis-Courmont, Nancy Greene, Hadriel
   Kaplan, Adam Roach, Robert Sparks, Salvatore Loreto, Shida Schubert,
   Ted Hardie, Richard L Barnes, Inaki Baz Castillo, Saul Ibarra
   Corretge, Cullen Jennings, and Adrian Georgescu for their guidance
   and input in order to produce this document.


9.  Change Log

   [RFC EDITOR NOTE: Please remove this section when publishing]

   Changes from draft-ietf-simple-msrp-sessmatch-13
   o  Changed the draft name, as was suggested by our AD and work group.
   o  Reorient the draft from being about saving resources at a
      Middlebox to being about end-to-end security.
   o  Clean up language use, clarify language, and clean up editorial
      and style issues.
   o  TLS is mandated for all connections.
   o  Describe why, even though not perfect, CEMA mandates TLS in the
      Security Considerations section.
   o  Formally defined a MSRP B2BUA.
   o  Took out all of the TLS B2BUA language, as that is implied by an
      MSRP B2BUA.





Holmberg, et al.        Expires February 27, 2012              [Page 14]

Internet-Draft                    CEMA                       August 2011


   o  Describe signaling attacks in the Security Considerations section.
   o  Provide a roadmap for future work on end-to-end security.
   o  Added normative reference to RFC 6072.
   o  Added informative references to RFC 3724, RFC 4033, RFC 5389, RFC
      5766, and RFC 6091

   Changes from draft-ietf-simple-msrp-sessmatch-12
   o  Extension name changed to Connection Establishment for Media
      Anchoring (CEMA).
   o  Middlebox defintion added.
   o  ALG terminology replaced with Middlebox.
   o  SDP attribute name changed to a=msrp-cema.
   o  Applicability Statement section expanded.
   o  Re-structuring of MSRP Answerer section.
   o  Changes based on comments from Saul Ibarra Corretge (1406111).

   Changes from draft-ietf-simple-msrp-sessmatch-11
   o  Modification of the sessmatch mechanism.
   o  - Extension name changed to Alternative Connection Establishment
      (ACE)
   o  - Session matching procedure no longer updated.
   o  - SDP c/m-line used for MSRP TCP connection.
   o  - sessmatch option-tag removed.
   o  - a=msrp-ace attribute defined.
   o  - Support of RFC 6135 mandatory.

   Changes from draft-ietf-simple-msrp-sessmatch-10
   o  Sessmatch option-tag added, based on WG discussions and concensus.

   Changes from draft-ietf-simple-msrp-sessmatch-08
   o  OPEN ISSUE regarding the need for a sessmatch option-tag removed.

   Changes from draft-ietf-simple-msrp-sessmatch-07
   o  Sessmatch defined as an MSRP extension, rather than MSRP update
   o  Additional security considerations text added


10.  References

10.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC3261]  Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., Camarillo, G., Johnston,
              A., Peterson, J., Sparks, R., Handley, M., and E.
              Schooler, "SIP: Session Initiation Protocol", RFC 3261,
              June 2002.



Holmberg, et al.        Expires February 27, 2012              [Page 15]

Internet-Draft                    CEMA                       August 2011


   [RFC4566]  Handley, M., Jacobson, V., and C. Perkins, "SDP: Session
              Description Protocol", RFC 4566, July 2006.

   [RFC4975]  Campbell, B., Mahy, R., and C. Jennings, "The Message
              Session Relay Protocol (MSRP)", RFC 4975, September 2007.

   [RFC4976]  Jennings, C., Mahy, R., and A. Roach, "Relay Extensions
              for the Message Sessions Relay Protocol (MSRP)", RFC 4976,
              September 2007.

   [RFC6072]  Jennings, C. and J. Fischl, "Certificate Management
              Service for the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)",
              RFC 6072, February 2011.

   [RFC6135]  Holmberg, C. and S. Blau, "An Alternative Connection Model
              for the Message Session Relay Protocol (MSRP)", RFC 6135,
              February 2011.

10.2.  Informative References

   [RFC3724]  Kempf, J., Austein, R., and IAB, "The Rise of the Middle
              and the Future of End-to-End: Reflections on the Evolution
              of the Internet Architecture", RFC 3724, March 2004.

   [RFC4033]  Arends, R., Austein, R., Larson, M., Massey, D., and S.
              Rose, "DNS Security Introduction and Requirements",
              RFC 4033, March 2005.

   [RFC4916]  Elwell, J., "Connected Identity in the Session Initiation
              Protocol (SIP)", RFC 4916, June 2007.

   [RFC5389]  Rosenberg, J., Mahy, R., Matthews, P., and D. Wing,
              "Session Traversal Utilities for NAT (STUN)", RFC 5389,
              October 2008.

   [RFC5766]  Mahy, R., Matthews, P., and J. Rosenberg, "Traversal Using
              Relays around NAT (TURN): Relay Extensions to Session
              Traversal Utilities for NAT (STUN)", RFC 5766, April 2010.

   [RFC6043]  Mattsson, J. and T. Tian, "MIKEY-TICKET: Ticket-Based
              Modes of Key Distribution in Multimedia Internet KEYing
              (MIKEY)", RFC 6043, March 2011.

   [RFC6091]  Mavrogiannopoulos, N. and D. Gillmor, "Using OpenPGP Keys
              for Transport Layer Security (TLS) Authentication",
              RFC 6091, February 2011.

   [DANE]     "DNS-based Authentication of Named Entities Work Group".



Holmberg, et al.        Expires February 27, 2012              [Page 16]

Internet-Draft                    CEMA                       August 2011


   [GPP23228]
              3GPP, "IP Multimedia Subsystem (IMS); Stage 2", 3GPP
              TS 23.228 10.5.0, June 2011.


Authors' Addresses

   Christer Holmberg
   Ericsson
   Hirsalantie 11
   Jorvas  02420
   Finland

   Email: christer.holmberg@ericsson.com


   Staffan Blau
   Ericsson
   Stockholm  12637
   Sweden

   Email: staffan.blau@ericsson.com


   Eric Burger (editor)
   Georgetown University
   Department of Computer Science
   37th and O Streets, NW
   Washington, DC  20057-1232
   United States of America

   Phone:
   Fax:   +1 530 267 7447
   Email: eburger@standardstrack.com
   URI:   http://www.standardstrack.com
















Holmberg, et al.        Expires February 27, 2012              [Page 17]

