

SIMPLE Working Group                                         C. Holmberg
Internet-Draft                                                   S. Blau
Intended status: Standards Track                                Ericsson
Expires: December 18, 2011                                 June 16, 2011


  Connection Establishment for Media Anchoring (CEMA) for the Message
                     Session Relay Protocol (MSRP)
                draft-ietf-simple-msrp-sessmatch-13.txt

Abstract

   This document defines an MSRP extension, Connection Establishment for
   Media Anchoring (CEMA).  Support of the extension is optional.  MSRP
   endpoints can implement the extension in order to allow MSRP
   communication in networks where Middleboxes anchor the MSRP
   connection, without the need for the Middleboxes to enable MSRP B2BUA
   functionality in most cases.  The document also defines a Session
   Description Protocol (SDP) [RFC4566] attribute, a=msrp-cema, that can
   be used by MSRP endpoints to indicate support of the CEMA extension.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 18, 2011.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect



Holmberg & Blau         Expires December 18, 2011               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                    MRSP                         June 2011


   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Conventions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Applicability statement  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   4.  Connection Establishment for Media Anchoring Mechanism . . . .  5
     4.1.  General  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     4.2.  MSRP Offerer Procedures  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     4.3.  MSRP Answerer Procedures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     4.4.  Usage With The Alternative Connection Model  . . . . . . .  8
   5.  Middlebox assumptions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     5.1.  General  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     5.2.  MSRP awareness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     5.3.  TCP connection reuse . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     5.4.  SDP integrity  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     5.5.  TLS  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   6.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     6.1.  Man in the middle  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     6.2.  TLS  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   7.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     7.1.  IANA Registration of the SDP a=msrp-cema attribute . . . . 11
   8.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   9.  Change Log . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   10. References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     10.1. Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     10.2. Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13


















Holmberg & Blau         Expires December 18, 2011               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                    MRSP                         June 2011


1.  Introduction

   The Message Session Relay Protocol (MSRP) [RFC4975] is designed to
   use MSRP relays [RFC4976] as a means for Network Address Translation
   (NAT) traversal and policy enforcement.

   However, many Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) [RFC3261] networks,
   in which MSRP usage is emerging, also contain Middleboxes, that
   anchor and control media, perform tasks such as NAT traversal,
   performance monitoring, lawful intercept, address domain bridging,
   interconnect Service Layer Agreement (SLA) policy enforcement, etc.
   An example is the Interconnection Border Control Function (IBCF)
   [3GPP.23.228], defined by the 3rd Generation Partnership Project
   (3GPP).  The IBCF controls a media relay that handles all types of
   SIP session media (voice, video, MSRP, etc).

   MSRP, as defined in RFC 4975 [RFC4975] and RFC 4976 [RFC4976], cannot
   be anchored when MSRP endpoints communicate with such Middleboxes,
   unless the Middleboxes implement and enable MSRP Back-To-Back User
   Agent (B2BUA) functionality for all calls.  The reason is that
   Middleboxes modify the address:port information in SDP c/m-line in
   order to anchor media, and since the active MSRP UA establishes the
   MSRP TCP connection based on the MSRP URI of the SDP a=path
   attribute, this means that the MSRP connection will not, unless the
   Middlebox also modifies the MSRP URI of the topmost SDP a=path
   attribute be routed through the Middlebox, which in many scenarios
   will prevent the MSRP connection from being established.  However, if
   the Middlebox modifies the MSRP URI of the SDP a=path attribute, then
   the MSRP URI comparison procedure [RFC4975], which requires
   consistency between the address information in the MSRP messages and
   the address information carried in the MSRP URI of the SDP a=path
   attribute, will fail.  The matching will fail if Middleboxes modify
   the address information in the MSRP URI of the SDP a=path attribute,
   but do not enable MSRP B2BUA functionality and perform the
   corresponding modification in the associated MSRP messages.  However,
   the enabling of MSRP B2BUA functionality requires substantially more
   resource usage in the Middlebox, that normally result in negative
   performance impact.

   This specification defines an MSRP extension, Connection
   Establishment for Media Anchoring (CEMA), that in most cases allows
   MSRP endpoints to communicate with Middleboxes without a need for the
   Middleboxes to enable MSRP B2BUA functionality.  In such cases,
   Middleboxes that want to anchor the MSRP connection simply modify the
   SDP c/m-line address information (similar to what it does for non-
   MSRP media types), and MSRP endpoints that support the CEMA extension
   will use the SDP c/m-line address information for establishing the
   TCP (or TLS) connection to be used for sending and receiving of MSRP



Holmberg & Blau         Expires December 18, 2011               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                    MRSP                         June 2011


   messages.

   The CEMA extension is fully backward compatible.  In scenarios where
   MSRP endpoints that do not support the CEMA extension are able to
   establish MSRP connectivity, an MSRP endpoint that supports the CEMA
   extension behaves in the same way as an MSRP endpoint that does not
   support it.  The CEMA extension only provides an alternative
   mechanism for negotiating and providing the address information for
   the MSRP TCP connection.  Once the MSRP TCP connection has been
   created, an MSRP endpoint that supports the CEMA extension acts
   according to the procedures (e.g. for creating MSRP messages,
   performing checks when receiving MSRP messages etc) defined in RFC
   4975 (and RFC 4976, when it is using a relay for MSRP communication).


2.  Conventions

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in BCP 14, RFC 2119
   [RFC2119].

   In this specification the terminology "fingerprint based TLS
   authentication" and "name based TLS authentication" are used to refer
   to the two cases where:

   1.  An MSRP endpoint uses a self-signed TLS certificate and sends a
   certificate fingerprint in SDP (fingerprint based TLS
   authentication).

   2.  An MSRP endpoint uses a certificate from a well known certificate
   authority and the other endpoint matches the hostname in the received
   TLS communication SubjectAltName parameter towards the hostname
   received in the MSRP URI in SDP (name based TLS authentication).

   Middlebox: Within the scope of this document, Middlebox refers to a
   network SIP device that modifies SDP media address:port information
   in order to steer (anchor) media flows described in the SDP,
   including TCP connections used for MSRP communication, through a
   media proxy function controlled by the SIP device.  In most cases the
   media proxy function relays the MSRP messages without modification,
   while in other cases it enables MSRP B2BUA functionality.  Other SIP
   related functions (e.g. related to routing, modification of SIP
   information etc) performed by the SIP device, and whether it acts a
   SIP B2BUA or not, is outside the scope of the definition.  Section 5
   describes additional assumptions regarding how the Middlebox handles
   MSRP in order to support the extension defined in this document.




Holmberg & Blau         Expires December 18, 2011               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                    MRSP                         June 2011


3.  Applicability statement

   This document defines an MSRP extension, Connection Establishment for
   Media Anchoring (CEMA).  Support of the extension is optional.  MSRP
   endpoints can implement the extension in order to allow MSRP
   communication in networks where Middleboxes anchor the MSRP
   connection, without the need for the Middleboxes to enable MSRP B2BUA
   functionality in most cases.  The document also defines a Session
   Description Protocol (SDP) [RFC4566] attribute, a=msrp-cema, that can
   be used by MSRP endpoints to indicate support of the CEMA extension.

   The CEMA extension is primarily intended for MSRP endpoints that
   operate in networks in which Middleboxes that want to anchor media
   connections are deployed, without the need for the Middleboxes to
   enable MSRP B2BUA functionality.  An example of such network is the
   IP Multimedia Subsystem (IMS) defined by the 3rd Generation
   Partnership Project (3GPP).  The extension is also useful for other
   MSRP endpoints operating in other networks, but that communicate with
   MSRP endpoints in networks with such Middleboxes, unless there is a
   gateway between the networks that by default always enable MSRP B2BUA
   functionality.


4.  Connection Establishment for Media Anchoring Mechanism

4.1.  General

   This section defines how an MSRP endpoint that supports the CEMA
   extension generates SDP offers and answers for MSRP, and what SDP
   information elements the MSRP endpoint uses when creating the TCP
   connection for the MSRP messages.

4.2.  MSRP Offerer Procedures

   When an MSRP endpoint sends an SDP offer for MSRP, it generates the
   SDP offer according to the procedures in RFC 4975 (and RFC 4976, if
   it is using a relay for MSRP communication), with the following
   additions and modifications:

   1) The MSRP endpoint MUST include an SDP a=msrp-cema attribute in the
   MSRP media description of the SDP offer.

   2) If the MSRP endpoint is not using a relay for MSRP communication,
   it MUST include an SDP a=setup attribute in the MSRP media
   description of the SDP offer, according to the procedures in RFC
   [RFC6135].

   3) If the MSRP endpoint is using a relay for MSRP communication, it



Holmberg & Blau         Expires December 18, 2011               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                    MRSP                         June 2011


   MUST include the address information on the relay (the MSRP URI of
   the topmost SDP a=path attribute), rather than the address
   information of itself, in the SDP c/m-line associated with the MSRP
   media description.  In addition, it MUST include an SDP a=setup:
   actpass attribute in the MSRP media description of the SDP offer.

   When the MSRP endpoint receives the first SDP answer to the SDP offer
   above, and the SDP answer indicates that the offered MSRP media has
   been accepted by the remote MSRP endpoint (i.e. the port number of
   the MSRP media description is not set to zero), if the MSRP media
   description of the SDP answer does not contain an SDP a=msrp-cema
   attribute, the MSRP endpoint MUST check whether any of the following
   criteria is fulfilled:

   1) The SDP c/m-line address information associated with the MSRP
   media description does not match the information in the MSRP URI of
   the topmost SDP a=path attribute, and the MSRP media description
   contains an SDP a=setup:active attribute (indicating that the remote
   MSRP endpoint is "active").

   2) The MSRP media description contains multiple SDP a=path attributes
   (indicating that MSRP relays are used).

   If any, or both, of the criteria above is fulfilled, the MSRP
   endpoint MUST fallback to RFC 4975 behavior, by sending a new SDP
   offer according to the procedures in RFC 4975 and RFC 4976.  The new
   offer MUST NOT contain an SDP a=msrp-cema attribute.

   NOTE: In the absence of the SDP a=msrp-cema attribute in the new
   offer, the Middlebox will in all cases have to, in order to be able
   to anchor MSRP media, enable MSRP B2BUA functionality.

   NOTE: The MSRP endpoint can send the new offer within the existing
   early dialog [RFC3261], or it can terminate the early dialog and
   establish a new dialog by sending the new offer in a new initial
   INVITE request.

   In all other cases, where the MSRP endpoint becomes "active", it MUST
   use the SDP c/m-line for establishing the MSRP TCP connection.  If
   the MSRP endpoint becomes "passive", it will wait for the remote MSRP
   endpoint to establish the TCP connection, according to the procedures
   in RFC 4975.

4.3.  MSRP Answerer Procedures

   When an MSRP endpoint receives an SDP offer for MSRP, it MUST check
   the following criteria:




Holmberg & Blau         Expires December 18, 2011               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                    MRSP                         June 2011


   1) Both MSRP endpoints are using relays for MSRP communication.

   NOTE: If the MSRP media description of the SDP offer contains
   contains multiple SDP a=path attributes, it can be determined that
   the remote MSRP endpoint is using a relay for MSRP communication.

   2) The remote MSRP endpoint uses a relay for MSRP communciation, and
   will become "active" (either by default, or if the MSRP media
   description of the SDP offer contains an SDP a=setup:active
   attribute).

   NOTE: This case should not occur if the remote MSRP endpoint supports
   the CEMA extension, as the remote MSRP endpoint would include an SDP
   a=setup:actpass attribute in the SDP offer, as described in section
   4.2.

   3) The MSRP endpoint uses a relay for MSRP communication, and is not
   able to become "passive" (the MSRP media description of the offer
   contains an SDP a=setup:passive attribute).

   NOTE: This case should never occur, as an MSRP entity is not allowed
   to include an SDP a=setup:passive attribute in an SDP offer, as
   described in RFC 6135.

   4) The MSRP media description of the SDP offer does not contain an
   SDP a=msrp-cema attribute, the SDP c/m-line address information
   associated with the MSRP media description does not match the
   information in the MSRP URI of the topmost SDP a=path attribute, and
   the remote MSRP endpoint will become "active" (either by default, or
   if the MSRP media description of the SDP offer contains an SDP
   a=setup:active attribute).

   If any, or all, of the criteria above is fulfilled, the MSRP endpoint
   MUST fallback to RFC 4975 behavior, and generate the associated SDP
   answer according to the procedures in RFC 4975 and RFC 4976.  The
   MSRP endpoint MUST NOT insert an SDP a=msrp-cema attribute in the
   MSRP media description of the SDP answer.

   In all other cases, the MSRP endpoint generates the associated SDP
   answer according to the procedures in RFC 4975 and RFC 4976, with the
   following additions and modifications:

   1) The MSRP endpoint MUST include an SDP a=msrp-cema attribute in the
   MSRP media description of the SDP answer.

   2) If the MSRP endpoint is not using a relay for MSRP communication,
   it MUST include an SDP a=setup attribute in the MSRP media
   description of the answer, according to the procedures in RFC 6135.



Holmberg & Blau         Expires December 18, 2011               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                    MRSP                         June 2011


   3) If the MSRP endpoint is using a relay for MSRP communication, it
   MUST include the address information on the relay (the MSRP URI of
   the topmost SDP a=path attribute), rather than the address
   information of itself, in the SDP c/m-line associated with the MSRP
   media description.  In addition, it MUST include an SDP a=setup:
   passive attribute in the MSRP media description of the SDP answer.

   If the MSRP endpoint included an SDP a=msrp-cema attribute in the
   MSRP media description of the SDP answer, and if the MSRP endpoint
   becomes "active", it MUST use the received SDP c/m-line for
   establishing the MSRP TCP connection.  If the MSRP endpoint becomes
   "passive", it will wait for the remote MSRP endpoint to establish the
   TCP connection, according to the procedures in RFC 4975.

4.4.  Usage With The Alternative Connection Model

   An MSRP endpoint that supports the CEMA extension MUST in addition
   also support the mechanism defined in RFC 6135, as it extends the
   number of scenarios where the CEMA extension can be used, and
   Middleboxes do not need to enable MSRP B2BUA functionality.  An
   example is where a MSRP endpoint is using a relay for MSRP
   communication, and it needs to be "passive" in order to use the CEMA
   extension (instead of doing a fallback to RFC 4975 behavior.


5.  Middlebox assumptions

5.1.  General

   This document does not specify explicit Middlebox behavior,
   eventhough some of the procedures will be enabled by Middleboxes.
   However, as the main reason behind the CEMA extension is to allow
   MSRP endpoints to communicate in networks where Middleboxes that want
   to anchor media are present, this document makes certain assumptions
   regarding to how such Middleboxes behave.

5.2.  MSRP awareness

   This document assumes that an Middlebox, in order to support
   interoperability between UAs that support the CEMA extension and UAs
   that do not support the extension, is MSRP aware, meaning that it
   implements MSRP B2BUA functionality, and that it enables that
   functionality in cases where support of the CEMA extension is not
   indicated.  In cases where support of the CEMA extension is indicated
   by at least one MSRP endpoint, the Middlebox can simply modifies the
   SDP c/m-line address information for the MSRP connection.  However,
   MSRP communication will work if the Middlebox enables MSRP B2BUA
   functionality also in such cases.



Holmberg & Blau         Expires December 18, 2011               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                    MRSP                         June 2011


5.3.  TCP connection reuse

   When the CEMA extension is used, in cases where Middleboxes do not
   need to enable MSRP B2BUA functionality, the Middleboxes are not
   required to parse and modify the MSRP payload.  An Middlebox that
   does not parse the MSRP payload might not enable re-usage of TCP
   connections for multiple MSRP sessions.  Instead, in order to
   associate an MSRP message with a specific session, the Middlebox
   often assigns a unique local address:port combination for each MSRP
   session.

5.4.  SDP integrity

   This document assumes that Middleboxes are able to modify the SDP
   address information associated with the MSRP media, and therefore can
   not be deployed in environments that require SIP identity [RFC4916]
   based peer-to-peer SDP protection.

5.5.  TLS

   This document considers two approaches how an Middlebox handles TLS
   protected MSRP connections.

   In the first approach, the Middlebox relays the MSRP media packets at
   the transport layer.  The TLS handshake and resulting security
   association (SA) are established peer-to-peer between the MSRP
   endpoints.  The Middlebox will see encrypted MSRP media packets, but
   is unable to inspect the cleartext content.

   In the second approach, the Middlebox acts as a TLS B2BUA, meaning
   that separate SAs are established between the Middlebox and each MSRP
   endpoint.  The Middlebox decrypts MSRP media packets received from
   one MSRP endpoint, and then re-encrypts them before sending them
   toward the other MSRP endpoint.  With this approach, the Middlebox
   can inspect and modify the MSRP message content.


6.  Security Considerations

6.1.  Man in the middle

   In some cases, where MSRP B2BUA functionality does not need to be
   enabled, the CEMA extension makes it easier for a man in the middle
   (MiTM) to transparently insert itself in the communication between
   MSRP endpoints in order to monitor or record unprotected MSRP
   communication.  It does not however make it easier for a MiTM to
   monitor TLS protected MSRP, or in any significant way modify TLS
   protected MSRP content or even find out that the packets contain MSRP



Holmberg & Blau         Expires December 18, 2011               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft                    MRSP                         June 2011


   messages, since that would require the MiTM to implement MSRP B2BUA
   functionality, no matter if UAs support the CEMA extension or not.
   It would thus require the MiTM to terminate the TCP/TLS/MSRP
   connection in both directions.

6.2.  TLS

   The CEMA extension supports the usage of name based authentication
   for TLS, also in the presence of Middleboxes.

   NOTE: If an Middlebox acts as a TLS B2BUA, MSRP endpoints will also
   be able to use fingerprint based authentication for TLS, no matter if
   they support the CEMA extension or not.  In such cases, as the
   Middlebox acts as a TLS endpoints, MSRP endpoints might be given an
   incorrect impression that there is an end-to-end SA between the MSRP
   endpoints.

   If an Middlebox does not act as a TLS B2BUA, fingerprint based
   authentication will not work, as the "SIP Identity" based integrity
   protection of SDP will break.  Therefore, in addition to the
   authentication mechanisms defined in RFC 4975, an MSRP endpoint
   supporting the CEMA extension SHOULD also support an authentication
   mechanism that does not rely on peer-to-peer SDP integrity.

   It is RECOMMENDED that an MSRP endpoint supports one of the following
   authentication mechanisms:

   1) TLS certificates together with support of interacting with a
   Certificate Management Service [ref to draft-ietf-sip-certs], to
   which it publishes the public version of its own self-signed
   certificate and from which it fetches on need the public certificates
   of other endpoints.

   2) TLS-PSK managed e.g. by MIKEY-TICKET based Key Management and Key
   Management Service [RFC6043].

   NOTE: 3GPP has specified usage of the MIKEY-TICKET based Key
   Management and Key Management Service authentication mechanism for
   the IP Multimedia Subsystem (IMS).

   When an MSRP endpoint generates an SDP offer for MSRPS it MUST, in
   addition to the SDP attributes associated with the TLS authentication
   mechanisms described in RFC 4975, it MUST include any information
   elements associated with the other authentication mechanisms that it
   supports.

   Unless the MSRP endpoints are able to use name based authentication,
   and they support a common authentication mechanism, they MUST use



Holmberg & Blau         Expires December 18, 2011              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft                    MRSP                         June 2011


   that mechanism.  If the MSRP endpoints do not support such common
   authentication mechanism, they MUST try fingerprint based
   authentication, which will succeed if there are no Middleboxes
   present.  If that also fails, the MSRP endpoints MUST either:

   1) Consider the TLS authentication as failed, in accordance with RFC
   4975; or

   2) If the SIP signalling between the MSRP endpoints is protected
   through e.g.  SIPS, use fingerprint based authentication without
   requiring peer-to-peer SDP integrity, and thus trust the network
   endpoints in the signaling path for SDP integrity.

   NOTE: As defined in RFC 4975, if TLS authentication fails, the user
   need to be able to decide whether to try to anyway establish an MSRP
   connection.


7.  IANA Considerations

7.1.  IANA Registration of the SDP a=msrp-cema attribute

   This section registers a new SDP attribute, a=msrp-cema.  The
   required information for this registration, as specified in RFC 4566,
   is:

       Contact name: Christer Holmberg

           Contact e-mail: christer.holmberg@ericsson.com

           Attribute name: a=msrp-cema

       Type of attribute: media level

       Purpose: This attribute is used to indicate support of
                    the MSRP Connection Establishment for Media
                            Anchoring (CEMA) extension defined in
                            RFC XXXX. When present in an MSRP media
                            description of an SDP body, it indicates
                            that the sending UA supports the CEMA
                            mechanism.

       Values: The attribute does not carry a value

           Charset dependency: no






Holmberg & Blau         Expires December 18, 2011              [Page 11]

Internet-Draft                    MRSP                         June 2011


8.  Acknowledgements

   Thanks to Ben Campbell, Remi Denis-Courmont, Nancy Greene, Hadriel
   Kaplan, Adam Roach, Robert Sparks, Salvatore Loreto, Shida Schubert,
   Ted Hardie, Richard L Barnes, Inaki Baz Castillo, Saul Ibarra
   Corretge and Adrian Georgescu for their guidance and input in order
   to produce this document.


9.  Change Log

   [RFC EDITOR NOTE: Please remove this section when publishing]

   Changes from draft-ietf-simple-msrp-sessmatch-12
   o  Extension name changed to Connection Establishment for Media
      Anchoring (CEMA).
   o  Middlebox defintion added.
   o  ALG terminology replaced with Middlebox.
   o  SDP attribute name changed to a=msrp-cema.
   o  Applicability Statement section expanded.
   o  Re-structuring of MSRP Answerer section.
   o  Changes based on comments from Saul Ibarra Corretge (1406111).

   Changes from draft-ietf-simple-msrp-sessmatch-11
   o  Modification of the sessmatch mechanism.
   o  - Extension name changed to Alternative Connection Establishment
      (ACE)
   o  - Session matching procedure no longer updated.
   o  - SDP c/m-line used for MSRP TCP connection.
   o  - sessmatch option-tag removed.
   o  - a=msrp-ace attribute defined.
   o  - Support of RFC 6135 mandatory.

   Changes from draft-ietf-simple-msrp-sessmatch-10
   o  Sessmatch option-tag added, based on WG discussions and concensus.

   Changes from draft-ietf-simple-msrp-sessmatch-08
   o  OPEN ISSUE regarding the need for a sessmatch option-tag removed.

   Changes from draft-ietf-simple-msrp-sessmatch-07
   o  Sessmatch defined as an MSRP extension, rather than MSRP update
   o  Additional security considerations text added


10.  References






Holmberg & Blau         Expires December 18, 2011              [Page 12]

Internet-Draft                    MRSP                         June 2011


10.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC3261]  Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., Camarillo, G., Johnston,
              A., Peterson, J., Sparks, R., Handley, M., and E.
              Schooler, "SIP: Session Initiation Protocol", RFC 3261,
              June 2002.

   [RFC4566]  Handley, M., Jacobson, V., and C. Perkins, "SDP: Session
              Description Protocol", RFC 4566, July 2006.

   [RFC4975]  Campbell, B., Mahy, R., and C. Jennings, "The Message
              Session Relay Protocol (MSRP)", RFC 4975, September 2007.

   [RFC4976]  Jennings, C., Mahy, R., and A. Roach, "Relay Extensions
              for the Message Sessions Relay Protocol (MSRP)", RFC 4976,
              September 2007.

   [RFC6135]  Holmberg, C. and S. Blau, "An Alternative Connection Model
              for the Message Session Relay Protocol (MSRP)", RFC 6135,
              February 2011.

10.2.  Informative References

   [RFC4916]  Elwell, J., "Connected Identity in the Session Initiation
              Protocol (SIP)", RFC 4916, June 2007.

   [RFC6043]  Mattsson, J. and T. Tian, "MIKEY-TICKET: Ticket-Based
              Modes of Key Distribution in Multimedia Internet KEYing
              (MIKEY)", RFC 6043, March 2011.

   [3GPP.23.228]
              3GPP, "IP Multimedia Subsystem (IMS); Stage 2", 3GPP
              TS 23.228 10.5.0, June 2011.


Authors' Addresses

   Christer Holmberg
   Ericsson
   Hirsalantie 11
   Jorvas  02420
   Finland

   Email: christer.holmberg@ericsson.com




Holmberg & Blau         Expires December 18, 2011              [Page 13]

Internet-Draft                    MRSP                         June 2011


   Staffan Blau
   Ericsson
   Stockholm  12637
   Sweden

   Email: staffan.blau@ericsson.com













































Holmberg & Blau         Expires December 18, 2011              [Page 14]

