

SIMPLE Working Group                                         C. Holmberg
Internet-Draft                                                   S. Blau
Intended status: Standards Track                                Ericsson
Expires: March 17, 2012                                        E. Burger
                                                   Georgetown University
                                                      September 14, 2011


  Connection Establishment for Media Anchoring (CEMA) for the Message
                     Session Relay Protocol (MSRP)
                   draft-ietf-simple-msrp-cema-02.txt

Abstract

   This document defines an Message Session Relay Protocol (MSRP)
   extension, Connection Establishment for Media Anchoring (CEMA).
   Support of the extension is optional.  The extension allows
   middleboxes to anchor the MSRP connection, without the need for
   middleboxes to modify the MSRP messages, and thus also enables a
   secure end-to-end MSRP communication in networks where such
   middleboxes are deployed.  The document also defines a Session
   Description Protocol (SDP) attribute, a=msrp-cema, that MSRP
   endpoints use to indicate support of the CEMA extension.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on March 17, 2012.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents



Holmberg, et al.         Expires March 17, 2012                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                    MRSP                    September 2011


   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Conventions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Applicability Statement  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   4.  Connection Establishment for Media Anchoring Mechanism . . . .  6
     4.1.  General  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     4.2.  MSRP Offer Procedures  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     4.3.  MSRP Answer Procedures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     4.4.  Usage With the Alternative Connection Model  . . . . . . .  9
   5.  Middlebox Assumptions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     5.1.  General  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     5.2.  MSRP Awareness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     5.3.  TCP Connection Reuse . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     5.4.  SDP Integrity  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     5.5.  TLS  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   6.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     6.1.  Man in the Middle  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     6.2.  TLS Usage  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     6.3.  TLS and Insecure Signaling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   7.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     7.1.  IANA Registration of the SDP a=msrp-cema Attribute . . . . 14
   8.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   9.  Change Log . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   10. References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
     10.1. Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
     10.2. Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16














Holmberg, et al.         Expires March 17, 2012                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                    MRSP                    September 2011


1.  Introduction

   The Message Session Relay Protocol (MSRP) [RFC4975] expects to use
   MSRP relays [RFC4976] as a means for Network Address Translation
   (NAT) traversal and policy enforcement.  However, many Session
   Initiation Protocol (SIP) [RFC3261] networks, which deploy MSRP,
   contain middleboxes.  These middleboxes anchor and control media,
   perform tasks such as NAT traversal, performance monitoring, lawful
   intercept, address domain bridging, interconnect Service Layer
   Agreement (SLA) policy enforcement, and so on.  One example is the
   Interconnection Border Control Function (IBCF) [GPP23228], defined by
   the 3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP).  The IBCF controls a
   media relay that handles all types of SIP session media such as
   voice, video, MSRP, etc.

   MSRP, as defined in RFC 4975 [RFC4975] and RFC 4976 [RFC4976], cannot
   anchor through middleboxes.  The reason is that MSRP messages have
   routing information embedded in the message.  Without an extension
   such as CEMA, middleboxes must read the message to change the routing
   information.  This occurs because middleboxes modify the address:port
   information in the Session Description Protocol (SDP) [RFC4566] c/m-
   line in order to anchor media.  Since the active MSRP UA establishes
   the MSRP TCP or TLS connection based on the MSRP URI of the SDP
   a=path attribute, this means that the MSRP connection will not,
   unless the middlebox also modifies the MSRP URI of the topmost SDP
   a=path attribute, be routed through the middlebox.  In many scenarios
   this will prevent the MSRP connection from being established.  In
   addition, if the middlebox modifies the MSRP URI of the SDP a=path
   attribute, then the MSRP URI comparison procedure [RFC4975], which
   requires consistency between the address information in the MSRP
   messages and the address information carried in the MSRP URI of the
   SDP a=path attribute, will fail.

   The only way to achieve interoperability in this situation is for the
   middlebox to act as a MSRP back-to-back User Agent (B2BUA).  Here the
   MSRP B2BUA acts as the endpoint for the MSRP signaling and media,
   performs the corresponding modification in the associated MSRP
   messages, and originates a new MSRP session towards the actual remote
   endpoint.  However, the enabling of MSRP B2BUA functionality requires
   substantially more resource usage in the middlebox, that normally
   result in negative performance impact.  In addition, the MSRP message
   needs to be exposed in clear text to the MSRP B2BUA, which violates
   the end-to-end principle [RFC3724] .

   This specification defines an MSRP extension, Connection
   Establishment for Media Anchoring (CEMA).  CEMA in most cases allows
   MSRP endpoints to communicate through middleboxes, as defined in
   Section 2, without a need for the middleboxes to be a MSRP B2BUA.  In



Holmberg, et al.         Expires March 17, 2012                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                    MRSP                    September 2011


   such cases, middleboxes, that want to anchor the MSRP connection
   simply modify the SDP c/m-line address information, similar to what
   it does for non-MSRP media types.  MSRP endpoints that support the
   CEMA extension will use the SDP c/m-line address information for
   establishing the TCP or TLS connection for sending and receiving MSRP
   messages.

   The CEMA extension is fully backward compatible.  In scenarios where
   MSRP endpoints do not support the CEMA extension, an MSRP endpoint
   that supports the CEMA extension behaves in the same way as an MSRP
   endpoint that does not support it.  The CEMA extension only provides
   an alternative mechanism for negotiating and providing address
   information for the MSRP TCP connection.  After the creation of the
   MSRP connection, an MSRP endpoint that supports the CEMA extension
   acts according to the procedures for creating MSRP messages,
   performing checks when receiving MSRP messages defined in RFC 4975
   and, when it is using a relay for MSRP communications, RFC 4976.


2.  Conventions

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in BCP 14, RFC 2119
   [RFC2119].

   Definitions:

   Fingerprint Based TLS Authentication: An MSRP endpoint that uses a
   self-signed TLS certificate and sends a certificate fingerprint in
   SDP.

   Name Based TLS Authentication: An MSRP endpoint that uses a
   certificate from a well known certificate authority and the other
   endpoint matches the hostname in the received TLS communication
   SubjectAltName parameter towards the hostname received in the MSRP
   URI in SDP.

   B2BUA: This is an abbreviation for back-to-back user agent.

   MSRP B2BUA: A network element that terminates a MSRP connection from
   one MSRP endpoint and reoriginates that connection towards another
   MSRP endpoint.  Note the MSRP B2BUA is distinct from a SIP B2BUA.  A
   SIP B2BUA terminates a SIP session and reoriginates that session
   towards another SIP endpoint.  In the context of MSRP, a SIP endpoint
   initiates a SIP session towards another SIP endpoint.  However, that
   INVITE may go through, for example, an outbound Proxy or inbound
   Proxy to route to the remote SIP endpoint.  As part of that SIP



Holmberg, et al.         Expires March 17, 2012                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                    MRSP                    September 2011


   session a MSRP session, that may follow the SIP session path, is
   negotiated.  However, there is no requirement to co-locate the SIP
   network elements with the MSRP network elements.

   TLS B2BUA: A network element that terminates security associations
   (SAs) from endpoints, and establishes separate SAs between itself and
   each endpoint.

   Middlebox: A SIP network device that modifies SDP media address:port
   information in order to steer or anchor media flows described in the
   SDP, including TCP and TLS connections used for MSRP communication,
   through a media proxy function controlled by the SIP endpoint.  In
   most cases the media proxy function relays the MSRP messages without
   modification, while in some circumstances it acts as a MSRP B2BUA.
   Other SIP related functions, such as related to routing, modification
   of SIP information etc, performed by the Middlebox, and whether it
   acts a SIP B2BUA or not, is outside the scope of this document.
   Section 5 describes additional assumptions regarding how the
   Middlebox handles MSRP in order to support the extension defined in
   this document.


3.  Applicability Statement

   This document defines an Message Session Relay Protocol (MSRP)
   extension, Connection Establishment for Media Anchoring (CEMA).
   Support of the extension is optional.  The extension allows
   Middleboxes to anchor the MSRP connection, without the need for
   Middleboxes to modify the MSRP messages, and thus also enables a
   secure end-to-end MSRP communication in networks where such
   Middleboxes are deployed.  The document also defines a Session
   Description Protocol (SDP) attribute, a=msrp-cema, that MSRP
   endpoints use to indicate support of the CEMA extension.

   The CEMA extension is primarily intended for MSRP endpoints that
   operate in networks in which Middleboxes that want to anchor media
   connections are deployed, without the need for the Middleboxes to
   enable MSRP B2BUA functionality.  An example of such network is the
   IP Multimedia Subsystem (IMS) defined by the 3rd Generation
   Partnership Project (3GPP), which also has the capability for all
   endpoints to use Name-based TLS Authentication.  The extension is
   also useful for other MSRP endpoints operating in other networks, but
   that communicate with MSRP endpoints in networks with such
   Middleboxes, unless there is a gateway between the networks that by
   default always enable MSRP B2BUA functionality.

   This document assumes certain behaviors on the part of Middleboxes,
   as described in Section 5.  These behaviors are not standardized.  If



Holmberg, et al.         Expires March 17, 2012                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                    MRSP                    September 2011


   Middleboxes do not behave as assumed, then the CEMA extension does
   not add any value over base MSRP behavior.  MSRP endpoints that
   support CEMA are required to use RFC 4975 behavior in cases where
   they detect that the CEMA extension cannot be enabled.


4.  Connection Establishment for Media Anchoring Mechanism

4.1.  General

   This section defines how an MSRP endpoint that supports the CEMA
   extension generates SDP offers and answers for MSRP, and what SDP
   information elements the MSRP endpoint uses when creating the TCP or
   TLS connection for the MSRP messages.

   In the following cases, where there is a Middlebox in the network,
   the CEMA extension can not be used, and there will be a fallback to
   the MSRP connection establishment procedures defined in RFC 4975 and
   RFC 4976:

   - A non-CEMA-enabled MSRP endpoint becomes "active" (no matter
   whether it uses a relay for its MSRP communication or not), as it
   will always establish the MSRP connection using the SDP a=path
   attribute, which contains the address information of the remote MSRP
   endpoint, instead of using the SDP c/m-line which contains the
   address information of the Middlebox.

   - A non-CEMA-enabled MSRP endpoint that uses a relay for its MSRP
   communication becomes "passive", as it can not be assumed that the
   MSRP endpoint inserts the address information of the relay in the SDP
   c/m-line.

   - A CEMA-enabled MSRP endpoint that uses a relay for its MSRP
   communication becomes "active", since if it adds the received SDP
   c/m-line address information to the ToPath header field of the MSRP
   message (in order for the relay to establish the MSRP connection
   towards the Middlebox), the session matching performed by the remote
   MSRP endpoint will fail.

4.2.  MSRP Offer Procedures

   When a CEMA-enabled MSRP endpoint sends an SDP offer for MSRP, it
   generates the SDP offer according to the procedures in RFC 4975.  In
   addition, the endpoint follows RFC 4976 if it is using a relay for
   MSRP communication.  The endpoint also performs the following
   additions and modifications:

   1.  The MSRP endpoint MUST include an SDP a=msrp-cema attribute in



Holmberg, et al.         Expires March 17, 2012                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                    MRSP                    September 2011


   the MSRP media description of the SDP offer.

   2.  If the MSRP endpoint is not using a relay for MSRP communication,
   it MUST include an SDP a=setup attribute in the MSRP media
   description of the SDP offer, according to the procedures in RFC 6135
   [RFC6135].

   3.  If the MSRP endpoint is using a relay for MSRP communication, it
   MUST include the address information of the relay (the MSRP URI of
   the topmost SDP a=path attribute), rather than the address
   information of itself, in the SDP c/m-line associated with the MSRP
   media description.  In addition, it MUST include an SDP a=setup:
   actpass attribute in the MSRP media description of the SDP offer.

   If the MSRP media description of the SDP answer does not contain an
   SDP a=msrp-cema attribute, the MSRP endpoint MUST check the criteria
   below.  If either or all of the criteria is met, the MSRP endpoint
   MUST fallback to RFC 4975 behavior, by sending a new SDP offer
   according to the procedures in RFC 4975 and RFC 4976.  The new offer
   MUST NOT contain an SDP a=msrp-cema attribute.

   1.  The SDP c/m-line address information associated with the MSRP
   media description does not match the information in the MSRP URI of
   the a=path attribute(s) (in which case is assumed that the SDP c/m-
   line contains the address to a Middlebox), and the MSRP endpoint will
   become "passive" (if the MSRP media description of the SDP answer
   contains an SDP a=setup:active attribute).

   2.  The MSRP endpoint uses a relay for its MSRP communication, the
   SDP c/m-line address information associated with the MSRP media
   description does not match the information in the MSRP URI of the SDP
   a=path attribute(s) (in which case is assumed that the SDP c/m-line
   contains the address to a Middlebox), and the MSRP endpoint will
   become "active" (either by default or if the MSRP media description
   of the SDP answer contains an SDP a=setup:passive attribute).

   3.  The remote MSRP endpoint uses a relay for its MSRP communication,
   the SDP c/m-line address information associated with the MSRP media
   description does not match the information in the MSRP URI of the SDP
   a=path attributes (in which case is assumed that the SDP c/m-line
   contains the address to a Middlebox), and the MSRP endpoint will
   become "active" (either by default or if the MSRP media description
   of the SDP answer contains an SDP a=setup:passive attribute).

   NOTE: As described in section 5, in the absence of the SDP a=msrp-
   cema attribute in the new offer, it is assumed that a Middlebox will
   act as an MSRP B2BUA in order to anchor MSRP media.




Holmberg, et al.         Expires March 17, 2012                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                    MRSP                    September 2011


   The MSRP endpoint MAY choose to terminate the session establishment
   if it can detect that a Middlebox acting as a MSRP B2BUA is not the
   desired remote endpoint.

   The MSRP endpoint can send the new offer within the existing early
   dialog [RFC3261], or it can terminate the early dialog and establish
   a new dialog by sending the new offer in a new initial INVITE
   request.

   If the remote MSRP endpoint uses a relay for its MSRP communication,
   and the SDP c/m-line address information associated with the MSRP
   media description matches one of the SDP a=path attributes, it is
   assumed that there is no Middlebox in the network.  In that case the
   MSRP endpoint MUST fallback to RFC 4975 behavior, but it does not
   need to send a new SDP offer.

   In other cases, where none of the criteria above is met, and where
   the MSRP endpoint becomes "active", it MUST use the SDP c/m-line for
   establishing the MSRP TCP connection.  If the MSRP endpoint becomes
   "passive", it will wait for the remote MSRP endpoint to establish the
   TCP connection, according to the procedures in RFC 4975.

4.3.  MSRP Answer Procedures

   If the MSRP media description of the SDP offer does not contain an
   SDP a=msrp-cema attribute, and the SDP c/m-line address information
   associated with the MSRP media description does not match the
   information in the MSRP URI of the SDP a=path attribute(s), the MSRP
   endpoint MUST either reject the offered MSRP connection (by using a
   zero port value number in the generated SDP answer), or reject the
   whole SDP offer carrying SIP request with a 488 Not Acceptable Here
   [RFC3261] response.

   If any of the criteria below is met, the MSRP endpoint MUST fallback
   to RFC 4975 behavior and generate the associated SDP answer according
   to the procedures in RFC 4975 and RFC 4976.  The MSRP endpoint MUST
   NOT insert an SDP a=msrp-cema attribute in the MSRP media description
   of the SDP answer.

   1.  Both MSRP endpoints are using relays for their MSRP
   communication.  The MSRP endpoint can detect if the remote MSRP
   endpoint is using a relay for its MSRP communication if the MSRP
   media description of the SDP offer contains multiple SDP a=path
   attributes.

   2.  The remote MSRP endpoint uses a relay for its MSRP communication,
   and will become "active" (either by default or if the MSRP media
   description of the SDP offer contains an SDP a=setup:active



Holmberg, et al.         Expires March 17, 2012                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                    MRSP                    September 2011


   attribute).  Note that a CEMA-enabled endpoint would include an SDP
   a=setup:actpass attribute in the SDP offer, as described in Section
   4.2.

   3.  The MSRP endpoint uses a relay for MSRP communication and is not
   able to become "passive" (if the MSRP media description of the offer
   contains an SDP a=setup:passive attribute.  Note that an MSRP
   endpoint is now allowed to include an SDP a=setup:passive attribute
   in an SDP offer, as described in RFC 6135.

   In all other cases, the MSRP endpoint generates the associated SDP
   answer according to the procedures in RFC 4975 and RFC 4976, with the
   following additions and modifications:

   1.  The MSRP endpoint MUST include an SDP a=msrp-cema attribute in
   the MSRP media description of the SDP answer.

   2.  If the MSRP endpoint is not using a relay for MSRP communication,
   it MUST include an SDP a=setup attribute in the MSRP media
   description of the answer, according to the procedures in RFC 6135.

   3.  If the MSRP endpoint is using a relay for MSRP communication, it
   MUST include the address information on the relay (the MSRP URI of
   the topmost SDP a=path attribute), rather than the address
   information of itself, in the SDP c/m-line associated with the MSRP
   media description.  In addition, it MUST include an SDP a=setup:
   passive attribute in the MSRP media description of the SDP answer.

   If the MSRP endpoint included an SDP a=msrp-cema attribute in the
   MSRP media description of the SDP answer, and if the MSRP endpoint
   becomes "active", it MUST use the received SDP c/m-line for
   establishing the MSRP TCP or TLS connection.  If the MSRP endpoint
   becomes "passive", it will wait for the remote MSRP endpoint to
   establish the MSRP TCP or TLS connection, according to the procedures
   in RFC 4975.

4.4.  Usage With the Alternative Connection Model

   An MSRP endpoint that supports the CEMA extension MUST support the
   mechanism defined in RFC 6135, as it extends the number of scenarios
   where one can use the CEMA extension.  An example is where a MSRP
   endpoint is using a relay for MSRP communication, and it needs to be
   "passive" in order to use the CEMA extension, instead of doing a
   fallback to RFC 4975 behavior.







Holmberg, et al.         Expires March 17, 2012                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft                    MRSP                    September 2011


5.  Middlebox Assumptions

5.1.  General

   This document does not specify explicit Middlebox behavior, even
   though Middleboxes enable some of the procedures described here.
   However, as MSRP endpoints are expected to operate in networks where
   Middleboxes that want to anchor media are present, this document
   makes certain assumptions regarding to how such Middleboxes behave.

5.2.  MSRP Awareness

   In order to support interoperability between UAs that support the
   CEMA extension and UAs that do not support the extension, the
   Middlebox is MSRP aware.  This means that it implements MSRP B2BUA
   functionality.  The Middlebox enables that functionality in cases
   where the SDP offerer does not support the CEMA extension.  In cases
   where the SDP offer indicates support of the CEMA extension, the
   Middlebox can simply modify the SDP c/m-line address information for
   the MSRP connection.

   If the Middlebox does not implement MSRP B2BUA functionality, or does
   not enable it when the SDP a=msrp-cema attribute is not present in
   the SDP offer, CEMA-enabled MSRP endpoints will is some cases be
   unable to interoperate with non-CEMA-enabled endpoints across the
   Middlebox.

5.3.  TCP Connection Reuse

   Middleboxes do not need to parse and modify the MSRP payload when
   endpoints use the CEMA extension.  A Middlebox that does not parse
   the MSRP payload probably will not be able to reuse TCP connections
   for multiple MSRP sessions.  Instead, in order to associate an MSRP
   message with a specific session, the Middlebox often assigns a unique
   local address:port combination for each MSRP session.  Due to this,
   between two Middleboxes there might be a separate connection for each
   MSRP session.

   If the Middlebox does not assign a unique address:port combination
   for each MSRP session, and does not parse MSRP messages, it might end
   up forwarding MSRP messages towards the wrong destination.

5.4.  SDP Integrity

   This document assumes that Middleboxes are able to modify the SDP
   address information associated with the MSRP media.  Middleboxes
   cannot be deployed in environments that require end-to-end SDP
   protection using SIP identity [RFC4916].



Holmberg, et al.         Expires March 17, 2012                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft                    MRSP                    September 2011


   If the Middlebox is unable to modify SDP payloads due to end-to-end
   integrity protection, it will be either unable to anchor MSRP media,
   or the SIP signaling might fail due to integrity violations.

5.5.  TLS

   When UAs use the CEMA extension, this document assumes that
   Middleboxes relay MSRP media packets at the transport layer.  The TLS
   handshake and resulting security association (SA) can be established
   peer-to-peer between the MSRP endpoints.  The Middlebox will see
   encrypted MSRP media packets, but is unable to inspect the clear text
   content.

   When UAs fallback to RFC 4975 behavior Middleboxes act as TLS B2BUAs.
   The Middlebox decrypts MSRP media packets received from one MSRP
   endpoint, and then re-encrypts them before sending them toward the
   other MSRP endpoint.  Middleboxes can inspect and modify the MSRP
   message content.  As CEMA does not require a Middlebox to modify the
   MSRP content, this can be prevented if TLS is used for the MSRP
   communication, assuming that the SIP signalling channel is end-to-end
   integrity protected.


6.  Security Considerations

6.1.  Man in the Middle

   In some cases, where MSRP B2BUA functionality does not need to be
   enabled, the CEMA extension makes it easier for a man in the middle
   (MiTM) to transparently insert itself in the communication between
   MSRP endpoints in order to monitor or record unprotected MSRP
   communication.  It does not however make it easier for a MiTM to
   monitor TLS protected MSRP, or in any significant way modify TLS
   protected MSRP content or even find out that the packets contain MSRP
   messages, since that would require the MiTM to implement MSRP B2BUA
   functionality, no matter if UAs support the CEMA extension or not.
   It would thus require the MiTM to terminate the TCP/TLS/MSRP
   connection in both directions.  MSRP endpoints SHOULD use encrypted
   channels, if possible.  For backward compability, a CEMA-enabled MSRP
   endpoint MUST implement TLS.

6.2.  TLS Usage

   The CEMA extension supports the usage of name-based authentication
   for TLS in the presence of Middleboxes.

   If a Middlebox acts as a TLS B2BUA, MSRP endpoints will be able to
   use fingerprint based authentication and name-based authentication



Holmberg, et al.         Expires March 17, 2012                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft                    MRSP                    September 2011


   for TLS, no matter if they support the CEMA extension or not.  In
   such cases, as the Middlebox acts as TLS endpoints, MSRP endpoints
   might be given an incorrect impression that there is an end-to-end
   security association (SA) between the MSRP endpoints.

   If a Middlebox does not act as a TLS B2BUA, fingerprint based
   authentication will not work, as the "SIP Identity" based integrity
   protection of SDP will break.  Therefore, in addition to the
   authentication mechanisms defined in RFC 4975, it is RECOMMENDED that
   a CEMA-enabled MSRP endpoint also supports one of the following
   authentication mechanisms, that do not rely on peer-to-peer SDP
   integrity:

   1.  TLS certificates together with support of interacting with a
   Certificate Management Service [RFC6072], to which it publishes the
   public version of its own self-signed certificate and from which it
   fetches on demand the public certificates of other endpoints.

   2.  TLS-PSK managed by MIKEY-TICKET Based Key Management and Key
   Management Service [RFC6043].  Note that 3GPP has specified the
   MIKEY-TICKET based Key Management and Key Management Service
   authentication mechanism for the IP Multimedia Subsystem (IMS).  Thus
   it will be available in that environment.

   When an MSRP endpoint generates an SDP offer for MSRPS, in addition
   to the SDP attributes associated with the TLS authentication
   mechanisms described in RFC 4975, it MUST include any information
   elements associated with the other authentication mechanisms that it
   supports.

   If possible, MSRP endpoints MUST use name-based authentication.  If
   not possible, if the MSRP endpoints support a common authentication
   mechanism, they MUST use that mechanism.  If the MSRP endpoints do
   not support such common authentication mechanism, they MUST try
   fingerprint-based authentication, which will succeed if there are no
   Middleboxes present.  If that also fails, the MSRP endpoints MUST
   either:

   1.  Consider the TLS authentication as failed, in accordance with RFC
   4975; or

   2.  If the SIP signaling is integrity protected between the endpoint
   and network elements on a hop-by-hop basis, typically through use of
   IPsec or TLS transport, then an endpoint can depending on local
   policy chose to trust the network endpoints in the signalling path
   for SDP integrity and accept fingerprint based TLS authentication
   without requiring end-to-end SDP integrity.




Holmberg, et al.         Expires March 17, 2012                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft                    MRSP                    September 2011


   NOTE: As defined in RFC 4975, if TLS authentication fails, the user
   need to be able to decide whether to try to anyway establish a
   connection with unprotected MSRP media.

6.3.  TLS and Insecure Signaling

   One of the side effects of relieving Middleboxes from manipulating
   message content is CEMA provides an environment necessary for end-to-
   end integrity of MSRP media.

   CEMA recommends using an integrity-protected media channel, such as
   TLS.  As defined in RFC 4975, all MSRP endpoints MUST support TLS.
   That applies also to CEMA-enabled endpoints.

   One issue with usage of TLS is the availability of a certificate
   infrastructure.  Endpoints can always provide self-signed
   certificates.  However, this is problematic in that any endpoint can
   masquerade as another, by providing a self-signed certificate with
   the victim's information.

   One of the target deployments for CEMA is the 3GPP IMS SIP network.
   In this environment service providers provision signed certificates
   or manage signed certificates on behalf of their subscribers.  This
   does require trusting the service provider, but those issues are
   beyond the scope of this document.

   Alternate key distribution mechanisms, such as DANE [DANE], PGP
   [RFC6091], or some other technology, might become ubiquitous enough
   to solve the key distribution problem in the future.

   Even with seemingly end-to-end media integrity, at the time of the
   publication of this document there are other vulnerabilities in MSRP,
   due to vulnerabilities in the SIP signaling.  If there are no
   integrity protections on the SIP signaling, it is easy to insert
   malicious middleboxes to alter, record, or otherwise harm the media.
   With insecure signaling, it can be difficult for an endpoint to even
   be aware the remote endpoint has any relationship to the expected
   endpoint.  Securing the SIP signaling does not solve all problems.
   For example, in a SIPS environment, the endpoints have no
   cryptographic way of validating that one or more SIP Proxies in the
   proxy chain are not, in fact, malicious.


7.  IANA Considerations







Holmberg, et al.         Expires March 17, 2012                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft                    MRSP                    September 2011


7.1.  IANA Registration of the SDP a=msrp-cema Attribute

   This section registers a new SDP attribute, a=msrp-cema.  The
   required information for this registration, as specified in RFC 4566,
   is:

   Contact name: Christer Holmberg

   Contact e-mail: christer.holmberg@ericsson.com

   Attribute name: a=msrp-cema

   Type of attribute: media level

   Purpose: This attribute is used to indicate support of
            the MSRP Connection Establishment for Media
            Anchoring (CEMA) extension defined in
            RFC XXXX. When present in an MSRP media
            description of an SDP body, it indicates
            that the sending UA supports the CEMA
            mechanism.

   Values: The attribute does not carry a value

   Charset dependency: none


8.  Acknowledgements

   Thanks to Ben Campbell, Remi Denis-Courmont, Nancy Greene, Hadriel
   Kaplan, Adam Roach, Robert Sparks, Salvatore Loreto, Shida Schubert,
   Ted Hardie, Richard L Barnes, Inaki Baz Castillo, Saul Ibarra
   Corretge, Cullen Jennings, and Adrian Georgescu for their guidance
   and input in order to produce this document.


9.  Change Log

   [RFC EDITOR NOTE: Please remove this section when publishing]

   Changes from draft-ietf-simple-msrp-cema-01
   o  Changes based on comment from Ben Campbell.
   o  - TLS B2BUA added to definitions section.
   o  - Middlebox added.
   o  - Editorial changes.

   Changes from draft-ietf-simple-msrp-sessmatch-13




Holmberg, et al.         Expires March 17, 2012                [Page 14]

Internet-Draft                    MRSP                    September 2011


   o  Changed the draft name, as was suggested by our AD and work group.
   o  Clean up language use, clarify language, and clean up editorial
      and style issues.
   o  Formally defined a MSRP B2BUA.

   Changes from draft-ietf-simple-msrp-sessmatch-12
   o  Extension name changed to Connection Establishment for Media
      Anchoring (CEMA).
   o  Middlebox definition added.
   o  ALG terminology replaced with Middlebox.
   o  SDP attribute name changed to a=msrp-cema.
   o  Applicability Statement section expanded.
   o  Re-structuring of MSRP Answerer section.
   o  Changes based on comments from Saul Ibarra Corretge (1406111).

   Changes from draft-ietf-simple-msrp-sessmatch-11
   o  Modification of the sessmatch mechanism.
   o  - Extension name changed to Alternative Connection Establishment
      (ACE)
   o  - Session matching procedure no longer updated.
   o  - SDP c/m-line used for MSRP TCP connection.
   o  - sessmatch option-tag removed.
   o  - a=msrp-ace attribute defined.
   o  - Support of RFC 6135 mandatory.

   Changes from draft-ietf-simple-msrp-sessmatch-10
   o  Sessmatch option-tag added, based on WG discussions and concensus.

   Changes from draft-ietf-simple-msrp-sessmatch-08
   o  OPEN ISSUE regarding the need for a sessmatch option-tag removed.

   Changes from draft-ietf-simple-msrp-sessmatch-07
   o  Sessmatch defined as an MSRP extension, rather than MSRP update
   o  Additional security considerations text added


10.  References

10.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC3261]  Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., Camarillo, G., Johnston,
              A., Peterson, J., Sparks, R., Handley, M., and E.
              Schooler, "SIP: Session Initiation Protocol", RFC 3261,
              June 2002.




Holmberg, et al.         Expires March 17, 2012                [Page 15]

Internet-Draft                    MRSP                    September 2011


   [RFC4566]  Handley, M., Jacobson, V., and C. Perkins, "SDP: Session
              Description Protocol", RFC 4566, July 2006.

   [RFC4975]  Campbell, B., Mahy, R., and C. Jennings, "The Message
              Session Relay Protocol (MSRP)", RFC 4975, September 2007.

   [RFC4976]  Jennings, C., Mahy, R., and A. Roach, "Relay Extensions
              for the Message Sessions Relay Protocol (MSRP)", RFC 4976,
              September 2007.

   [RFC6072]  Jennings, C. and J. Fischl, "Certificate Management
              Service for the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)",
              RFC 6072, February 2011.

   [RFC6135]  Holmberg, C. and S. Blau, "An Alternative Connection Model
              for the Message Session Relay Protocol (MSRP)", RFC 6135,
              February 2011.

10.2.  Informative References

   [RFC3724]  Kempf, J., Austein, R., and IAB, "The Rise of the Middle
              and the Future of End-to-End: Reflections on the Evolution
              of the Internet Architecture", RFC 3724, March 2004.

   [RFC4916]  Elwell, J., "Connected Identity in the Session Initiation
              Protocol (SIP)", RFC 4916, June 2007.

   [RFC6043]  Mattsson, J. and T. Tian, "MIKEY-TICKET: Ticket-Based
              Modes of Key Distribution in Multimedia Internet KEYing
              (MIKEY)", RFC 6043, March 2011.

   [RFC6091]  Mavrogiannopoulos, N. and D. Gillmor, "Using OpenPGP Keys
              for Transport Layer Security (TLS) Authentication",
              RFC 6091, February 2011.

   [GPP23228]
              3GPP, "IP Multimedia Subsystem (IMS); Stage 2", 3GPP
              TS 23.228 10.5.0, June 2011.

   [DANE]     "DNS-based Authentication of Named Entities Work Group".











Holmberg, et al.         Expires March 17, 2012                [Page 16]

Internet-Draft                    MRSP                    September 2011


Authors' Addresses

   Christer Holmberg
   Ericsson
   Hirsalantie 11
   Jorvas  02420
   Finland

   Email: christer.holmberg@ericsson.com


   Staffan Blau
   Ericsson
   Stockholm  12637
   Sweden

   Email: staffan.blau@ericsson.com


   Eric Burger
   Georgetown University
   Department of Computer Science
   37th and O Streets, NW
   Washington, DC  20057-1232
   United States of America

   Phone:
   Fax:   +1 530 267 7447
   Email: eburger@standardstrack.com
   URI:   http://www.standardstrack.com





















Holmberg, et al.         Expires March 17, 2012                [Page 17]

