


Network Working Group                                            M. Ertl
Internet-Draft                                         November 23, 2011
Intended status: Informational
Expires: May 26, 2012


                    Protocol for Stage Illumination
                           draft-mertl-psi-02

Abstract

   This memo describes a protocol that builds upon UDP/IP to transport
   illumination and control data for stage, architectural and other
   illumination requirements.

   It may be understood as a spiritual successor of the traditional DMX
   (Digital MultipleX) specification series, removing it's limitations
   and adding flexibility and usability enhancements like auto-discovery
   and metadata, among other useful features.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on May 26, 2012.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must



Ertl                      Expires May 26, 2012                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                     PSI                     November 2011


   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.
















































Ertl                      Expires May 26, 2012                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                     PSI                     November 2011


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.  Description  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     2.1.  Groups . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     2.2.  Clusters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     2.3.  Current Values . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     2.4.  Safe Values  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     2.5.  Message length . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     2.6.  Operating modes  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     2.7.  Multiple PSI Masters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
       2.7.1.  GID Synchronization  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   3.  Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
     3.1.  System-independent representation (transfer syntax)  . . . 15
     3.2.  Versioning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
     3.3.  Identifier for nodes: IN (Identification Number) . . . . . 17
     3.4.  Message types  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
     3.5.  Headers  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
       3.5.1.  Message header . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
       3.5.2.  Node header  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
       3.5.3.  Sentence header  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
     3.6.  Word types . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
     3.7.  Constants  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
       3.7.1.  Conventions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
       3.7.2.  Protocol version . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
       3.7.3.  Bases for constants  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
       3.7.4.  Message types  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
       3.7.5.  Node Options . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
       3.7.6.  Sentence Options . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
       3.7.7.  Sentence types . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
       3.7.8.  Detailed Reactor Status  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 70
       3.7.9.  Channel status . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
       3.7.10. Reactor types  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 74
       3.7.11. Channel types  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75
     3.8.  Dynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 76
       3.8.1.  Discovery  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77
       3.8.2.  Initialization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79
       3.8.3.  Normal Operation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 80
   4.  Summary of operation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83
     4.1.  PSI Master . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 84
     4.2.  Reactor  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 84
   5.  Routing Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85
   6.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85
   7.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 86
   8.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 87
     8.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 87
     8.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 87




Ertl                      Expires May 26, 2012                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                     PSI                     November 2011


1.  Introduction

   This document contains the specification of the Protocol for Stage
   Illumination.  The intent of this protocol is to be as useful and
   easy to use as [DMX512-A] while doing away with the severe
   limitations of DMX in terms of flexibility, structure and speed, and
   also adding several convenience and management features.  The most
   important benefits are:

   o  virtually unlimited number of nodes

   o  automated (re-)discovery of all nodes at any time

   o  larger and distinct data fields, including metadata

   o  fully bidirectional communication, including reception of data by
      the PSI Master

   o  ability to conglomerate individual PSI Reactors into Groups for
      improved transfer efficiency, as well as simultaneous unicast
      addressing as individual PSI Reactors, in any combination

   o  ability to use a very wide range of readily available, even stock,
      components as transport media, leading to immediate adaptability
      to many environments

   o  may be run alongside other traffic, enabling the use of DHCP, or
      HTTP configuration in PSI Reactors, over the same network
      infrastructure

   o  while not recommended, PSI may be run across a preexisting,
      general network infrastructure including domestic networks without
      interfering (within limits of bandwidth requirements)



   Comments are solicited and should be addressed to the author.


   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in
   [RFC2119].

2.  Description

   The PSI operates on top of existing protocols, namely UDP/IP.  It is
   bidirectional and geared towards the typical environment found in



Ertl                      Expires May 26, 2012                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                     PSI                     November 2011


   stage lighting systems.  The theoretical maximum number of nodes is
   given by the IN (Identification Number) that is eight octets in size
   (see Section 3.3).  In practice, bandwidth and memory limits are
   expected to set the actual limit for any given installation.  A small
   number, usually exactly one, of controlling nodes, referred to as
   "PSI Masters", query, prepare, and send values to a potentially vast
   number of other nodes, referred to as "Reactors".  All messages for
   Reactors are sent to UDP port 7911; all messages for PSI Masters are
   sent to UDP port 4919.  Two different ports are used so that both
   personalities can be run on a single node.
   Even though a PSI Master may have multiple network interfaces for
   various reasons like limiting bandwidth requirements, the entirety of
   Reactors connected to all it's interfaces is normally available as a
   whole, and is referred to as "Nexus".  A PSI Master implementation
   may however choose to split the Nexus in any way deemed useful.  In
   addition to data, information about all Reactors is gathered by the
   PSI Master, and can be presented to the user to aid in management and
   other tasks.  Especially useful for this are the user-defined string
   and the user-defined numbers, because they may be used to indicate
   physical whereabouts and other distinguishing properties of any
   Reactor, in addition to a similar set of data that is vendor-
   specific.

   Because the PSI does not use the underlying networks in
   unconventional ways, it will coexist peacefully, within bandwidth
   limits, with any other protocol running over the same networks.  This
   enables, for example, the use of HTTP for configuration interfaces
   and DHCP for IP address assignment.  Because a Nexus does not change
   behavior much during normal operation, even streaming media may be
   run alongside PSI.

   To achieve a significant degree of flexibility and safety, it does
   not suffice to assign a channel number through the index of the data
   inside the data stream, like it is done in DMX ([DMX512-A]) , nor on
   a per-Reactor basis.  While that method has the advantage of lower
   overhead, it has several disadvantages.  One is that each message
   needs to contain every single channel, at least up to the one
   actually intended for changing: if the 512th channel is supposed to
   be changed, all 511 previous channels must be sent as well, even if
   they are not even assigned to any device.

   Additionally, a damaged, missing or misplaced value can not be
   detected, so that transmission errors may lead to incorrect settings
   in the receiving devices.  Explicit channel numbers, on the other
   hand, allow for selectively sending data for arbitrary channels and
   in any order and make sure that a datum received truly is intended
   for a particular channel, instead of possibly being the result of a
   transmission error.



Ertl                      Expires May 26, 2012                  [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                     PSI                     November 2011


   Additionally, UDP's checksumming is automatically used, and any
   intrinsic error detection and correction methods offered by the
   network are also taken advantage of.  For example, PSI's expected
   primary deployment platform, Ethernet, uses a 32 bit checksum that
   provides a great deal of reliability to received data.  The addition
   of a 16 bit checksum in the extended options of DMX proves the
   necessity of such reliability.  While DMX needs to cope with legacy
   devices and thus can only make this checksum optional, it always has
   been mandatory in Ethernet.
   In addition to that, PSI binds each channel to a specific Reactor,
   which is not possible with DMX.  This way, the user can at any given
   time check and control, through the PSI Master, which Reactor
   contains any given channel, while in DMX this can only be achieved by
   physically examining every single device.  The PSI Master allows the
   user to spot and resolve conflicts without moving, and without
   changing settings in Reactors.  This is especially convenient because
   settings like these otherwise necessarily make use of vendor-specific
   interfaces, requiring the user to first study the device
   documentation before being able to make the necessary changes.  The
   PSI puts this configuration into the PSI Master, where the user
   actually is located.

   If a device needs to be replaced, the use of DMX requires that the
   new device is configured to mimic the replaced one.  This will lead
   to problems if the replaced device supported functions the new one
   doesn't support, like assignment of non contiguous channel numbers.
   In such a case the entire controlling sequence, and / or other,
   completely unrelated devices, would need to be changed resp.
   reconfigured, resulting in a lengthy and error-prone management
   effort.
   Through explicit assignment of channel numbers, paired with binding
   of channels to their containing devices, a change like that can be
   done easily: it only requires the physical replacement of the device
   in question and reassignment of that device's channels to the new
   device.  If the PSI Master provides an abstract channel plane that is
   above the physical devices, then the logical arrangement created on
   top of the plane never needs to be touched.  This means that any
   logical arrangement may be used, unchanged, on any Nexus, as soon as
   an appropriate abstract plane has been created through the PSI
   Master.

   While DMX controllers may also support such an abstract plane (called
   "soft patching"), they can only map logical channels to DMX channels,
   without real relation to physical devices present.  This therefore
   still leaves the problem of non contiguous channel ranges possibly
   forcing reconfiguration of many unrelated devices, on top of the need
   to change the soft patching.  So, with DMX the user needs to maintain
   an updated list of all devices present, plus their configuration, to



Ertl                      Expires May 26, 2012                  [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                     PSI                     November 2011


   be able to configure new devices and to manage the soft patching,
   whereas the PSI Master automatically maintains this list.  The list
   available from a PSI Master therefore is instantly available and,
   more importantly, always up to date.  PSI creates this list on each
   restart from the devices actually present, and is able to flag
   removed devices and list newly added devices, without changing the
   current configuration.  Newly (re-)appearing devices can also be
   dynamically added to the appropriate list, without changing the
   currently loaded patching.

   The meta datatypes defined by PSI allow for a defined and therefore
   universal way to gather detailed information about the devices
   present on any given Nexus.  These include vendor and device type,
   channel counts, and data types as well as user assigned identifiers
   and comments and detailed status information, allowing for a
   continuous overview of the entire Nexus.

   Another advantage is the availability of larger data types, which are
   particularly useful for devices like scanners, moving heads and
   anything requiring finer resolution than the brightness of a lamp
   does.  The development of (non-standard) 16 bit DMX by interpreting
   two consecutive 8 bit values as single 16 bit value shows that such
   larger data types are needed in many cases.  Should even larger or
   different data be required, PSI provides additional data types in a
   well-defined and universal way, allowing for easy use of, for
   example, 64 bit values.

   If a channel cannot handle the full range of possible values offered
   by the Word type required, it informs the PSI Master of it's value
   boundaries so it's limitations can be honored.  A channel MUST
   tolerate reception of values outside these boundaries, and in
   response switch to Safe Values and set the appropriate Reactor
   Status.

   Additionally, devices requiring unconventional data types may be
   employed without reinterpreting stock data types, by using the
   variable length data types defined by PSI.  These may be used for
   images or similar data, but their actual interpretation completely
   depends on the device using them.

   An alternative to using these opaque data types is the MIME type,
   because while still containing raw data, it features a description of
   it's contents so the receiver is able to compare the received
   description to it's expectations.

   Each message sent to the PSI Master also contains a crude status
   indicator, allowing for quick notification about unusual
   circumstances, possibly automatically triggering more detailed



Ertl                      Expires May 26, 2012                  [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                     PSI                     November 2011


   inquiries and / or other measures by the PSI Master.  This is
   especially useful in large installations, because such a Nexus cannot
   normally be satisfactorily presented as a whole.  Since the PSI
   Master always possesses complete and up to date information, it is
   able to actively notify the user of any irregularities in all cases.

2.1.  Groups

   Groups are used to efficiently handle installations that are composed
   of many Reactors with few channels each.  Sending data to each of
   them in a separate message may unduly impact the available bandwidth,
   so it may make sense to handle a number of such Reactors in a single
   multicast message (see Section 3.4).  To do so, an identifier is
   assigned to all Reactors that the new Group shall contain.  This
   identifier may then be used whenever a message applies to more than
   one member of the Group.  Use of this identifier allows all Reactors
   that are not part of the specific Group to quickly discard the
   message without having to process it any further.  A message directed
   at members of a Group contains the usual identifiers for the
   individual Reactors and may therefore convey totally different data
   to each member.

   All multicast traffic, including discoveries, is sent to a single
   multicast group, see Section 3.8.1 for details.

   The Group facility is OPTIONAL for PSI Masters, but any PSI Master
   implementing it MUST allow the user to disable it.  Reactors MUST
   implement this facility.  Grouping may be handled by any means
   conceivable, be it manual and / or automatic.  In any case, GID
   assignments may be changed at any time.

2.2.  Clusters

   Clusters are Groups applying the same data to all members (indicated
   by the flag PSI_NO_FM_CLUSTER being set).  From PSI's point of view,
   a Cluster is exactly the same as a Group.  However, from the user's
   point of view, both are distinct.  While Groups serve to more
   efficiently utilise bandwidth in case of large numbers of Reactors
   with few channels, Clusters serve to efficiently apply the same data
   values to multiple Reactors, so these Reactors may have a large
   number of channels but need to be reasonably similar to each other,
   especially in terms of channel configuration.  Therefore, a PSI
   Master that implements Clusters should distinguish Clusters and
   Groups, and apply sanity checks whenever the user adds members to a
   Cluster.  Specifically, Clusters composed of Reactors using different
   channel configurations or data types should require explicit user
   confirmation.  It may allow this regardless, because the Cluster flag
   MAY be used to convey general instructions (like Node Options), or to



Ertl                      Expires May 26, 2012                  [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                     PSI                     November 2011


   set only a limited subset of channels that may be applicable to all
   Reactors in the Cluster.  For example, all Reactors in a Cluster may
   have a channel that is mapped at number 10 and uses 32 bit data.  So
   even though the remaining channels of the clustered Reactors may
   differ, this single channel may be assigned values using a Cluster
   message.  The PSI Master SHOULD check if there are any matching
   channels in all clustered Reactors when a new one is added to the
   Cluster, and inform the user of the result.  It MAY offer the user a
   filter to display only the matching channels.

   Also, the CLUSTER flag need not be used in all, even most, messages
   sent to a Reactor.  It is perfectly acceptable to, for example, use
   this flag only to assign values to a single channel out of many, and
   to do so only occasionally.  Of course, the more this flag is used,
   the higher transmission efficiency will be.

   The Cluster facility is OPTIONAL for PSI Masters, but any PSI Master
   implementing it MUST allow the user to disable it.  Reactors MUST
   implement this facility.  Clustering may be handled by any means
   conceivable, be it manual and / or automatic.  In any case, GID
   assignments may be changed at any time.  Because Clusters rely on
   Groups, a PSI Master implementing Clusters needs to implement Groups,
   but not vice-versa.

2.3.  Current Values

   The Current Values are what is being sent by the PSI Master to a
   Reactor.  They are the result of calculations and / or inputs of any
   sort.  Because they can be any value of the possible value range,
   they are not suited for continued use in case of loss of control.
   Instead, Safe Values must be used in that case.

2.4.  Safe Values

   The Safe Values are specific to each channel.  They are designed to
   be used whenever a channel receives no updates from the PSI Master,
   and can be used continuously without posing danger for the device or
   audience.

2.5.  Message length

   Because fragmenting of messages leads to greater impact of packet
   loss, it should normally be avoided.  In order to keep IP from
   fragmenting messages, the default maximum message length should be
   1400, since 1500 is the normal MTU for Ethernet, allowing some room
   for different configurations.

   A Reactor implementation MAY allow the user to change this maximum,



Ertl                      Expires May 26, 2012                  [Page 9]

Internet-Draft                     PSI                     November 2011


   in response to the actual network performance, but it SHOULD NOT be
   less than 1400.  In fact, the maximum message length of Reactors may
   be significantly larger by default, because the PSI Master is free to
   stay well below the maximum, and therefore can adapt, possibly
   automatically, to network loss rate.  On the other hand, the PSI
   Master's maximum message length may change, and an information
   message is sent to the Reactors, during normal operation, so that the
   Reactors do not need to be manually reconfigured to stay below a
   certain size.

   An embedded platform therefore is free to choose an absolute maximum
   message length, so that it can use static buffers, but advertise less
   than that if deemed reasonable.

2.6.  Operating modes

   In addition to the DMX-like operation of continually re-sending all
   data for all channels regardless of changes in their values (Rapid
   Change / Redundancy mode), PSI offers a mode where only changed
   values are sent (Slow Change / ACKed mode).  This is done by setting
   the flag PSI_NO_FM_SENDACK (see Section 3.7.5) in the data messages,
   and checking the response for consistency with the intended values.
   Because switching from ACKed mode to Redundancy Mode is done by
   omission of this flag, both modes may be changed at any time, and
   even arbitrarily mixed operation, down to individual channels, is
   possible.

   A PSI Master MAY implement both of these modes.

   o  Redundancy mode

      This mode is very much like the DMX mode of operation: the PSI
      Master refreshes all channels at a high rate, without caring for
      the proper arrival of the message or individual data.  Data that
      are lost in transit are automatically compensated for by the high
      number of redundant data sent, guaranteeing that lost or damaged
      values do not noticeably affect the outcome.
      Redundancy mode is primarily suited to systems where values are
      changing rapidly, like stage and disco lighting systems.  Due to
      the high refresh rate, this mode requires significantly more
      bandwidth than the ACKed mode.  However, whenever a large number
      of all channel's values change rapidly, this bandwidth requirement
      may very well be lower than in ACKed mode because no replies need
      to be sent.  Additionally, the processing and memory overhead and
      therefore latency of especially the PSI Master is reduced
      significantly, because no replies need to be waited for, re-
      requested and compared.




Ertl                      Expires May 26, 2012                 [Page 10]

Internet-Draft                     PSI                     November 2011


   o  ACKed mode

      In this mode, the PSI Master only refreshes a channel whenever
      it's value changes or other circumstances require it, like a node
      being restarted.  To ensure that the values actually and properly
      reach the channel, the data messages are decorated with the flag
      PSI_NO_FM_SENDACK (see Section 3.7.5), so the Reactor sends back a
      message documenting the execution of the original request.  If
      this reply does not arrive within a certain time, the message is
      re-sent.  This time usually is around 200 ms but SHOULD be
      changeable by the user to allow for very low bandwidth / high
      latency links or other preferences.  Timeout and retransmission
      happen until a proper reply is received by the PSI Master, or a
      new value needs to be set for that channel.
      ACKed mode is primarily suited to systems where values change only
      infrequently, like architectural or artistic installations.
      Except on startup, due to the low refresh rate it consumes only
      very little bandwidth, so low bandwidth links may be used.
      Because of the requirement for an acknowledge, the PSI Master
      needs to retain the outstanding requests, process the results, and
      be able to re-send them if needed.  This means memory and
      processing overhead that may outweigh the bandwidth reduction in
      some cases.

2.7.  Multiple PSI Masters

   While normally only one PSI Master is used, multiple PSI Masters may
   be desirable in certain situations, so PSI Reactors SHOULD be able to
   deal with that.  Reasons include failover, specialized PSI Masters
   for different Reactors, or even channels, within one Nexus, or
   different sources of data available only from different PSI Masters.

   Any Reactor SHOULD therefore provide an option via it's interface for
   handling the conflicts (merging), by allowing the user to select a
   maximum number of PSI Masters that the Reactor will accept commands
   and data from.  A default of one makes sense, so one PSI Master will
   be the only one data and commands are accepted from, but there is no
   upper limit besides the Reactor's capabilities.  Internally, the
   Reactor might maintain a list of PSI Masters that have gone through
   the Initialization (see Section 3.8.2), and recently have contacted
   it.
   It is not recommended for a Reactor to disable the check whether a
   PSI Master has gone through the Initialization, meaning that it will
   accept data and commands in any case.  Doing so may create problems
   due to incorrect configurations, so if it is done, the user SHOULD
   have an option to enable this check.

   Whenever one or more of the original PSI Masters cease to communicate



Ertl                      Expires May 26, 2012                 [Page 11]

Internet-Draft                     PSI                     November 2011


   (time out), then the Reactor will replace them with the next PSI
   Masters from the list.  The way the Reactor picks the PSI Masters
   (even the initial one) MAY be configurable by the user, and this
   management may be as sophisticated as desired.  A sensible option is
   to simply go down the list, wrapping around if needed, but it is
   conceivable to let the user define a fixed selection order, allow
   only specific, predefined PSI Masters, or allow specific PSI Masters
   access to different channels of the same Reactor only.
   Devices intended to routinely communicate with multiple PSI Masters
   will likely allow the user to essentially control the entire process,
   while devices designed primarily for use with one single PSI Master
   would prefer to not bother the user with unnecessary complexity.  In
   any case, a simple, automatic default configuration SHOULD be
   preconfigured, so that any Reactor will immediately work, without
   requiring reconfiguration, in a single PSI Master environment.

   If the Reactor is configured to react to more than one PSI Master,
   conflict resolution methods SHOULD be selectable by the user.  A
   sensible set of choices might include:

   o  last value persists: always use the most recent value from the PSI
      Master that sent values most recently.

   o  first value persists: always use the most recent value from the
      PSI Master that sent values least recently.

   o  lowest value persists: compare the most recently sent value of
      each PSI Master and pick the lowest.

   o  highest value persists compare the most recently sent value of
      each PSI Master and pick the highest.

   o  average of (1 to N) values: the values are stored for each PSI
      Master so that no two values from the same PSI Master get
      averaged; N may be lower (but not higher) than the maximum umber
      of PSI Masters, so that only the most recently received n values
      from different PSI Masters get averaged.

   o  free-for-all: allow any PSI Master to do anything, values are
      replaced by the one most recently received, regardless of the
      originating PSI Master, as are commands.

   Also, a user-configurable timeout is used for when to discard the
   values sent by one master (timeout), so that even if one PSI Master
   remains active (sends periodic status inquiries) but does not send
   values anymore, the stale values can be flushed.  Values set using
   ACKed mode must be kept much longer, so a second timeout value MUST
   be used for them.  The user MUST be able to change both values, and



Ertl                      Expires May 26, 2012                 [Page 12]

Internet-Draft                     PSI                     November 2011


   SHOULD be able to disable this timeout entirely for ACKed mode.  The
   timeouts for switching to Safe Values MAY be used for this purpose.
   It is advisable that the list provides at least one space more than
   the maximum number of PSI Masters the Reactor is configured to react
   to, so that any failing PSI Master can instantly be replaced by
   another, if present.  Otherwise, potential replacement PSI Masters
   could only go through the Initialization after the failing one has
   been flagged, unless the Reactor implements some other way of keeping
   track of excess PSI Masters.

   Whenever there are more PSI Masters than spaces in a Reactor's list,
   the Reactor SHOULD NOT respond to Discoveries sent by the excess PSI
   Masters.  This means that the excess PSI Masters cannot recognize the
   Reactor at all.  If the PSI Master ever gets added into the list, it
   MUST be responded to normally.

   Any PSI Master may have had contact with a Reactor before being
   dropped from it's list.  Any PSI Master querying a Reactor that does
   currently not respond to it will result in the
   "PSI_RS_MASTER_IGNORED" status in addition to all other status codes
   (see Section 3.7.8).

2.7.1.  GID Synchronization

   A limited amount of synchronization between PSI Masters is required
   to make the Group and Cluster facility usable by all PSI Masters in a
   system.  If such synchronization is not done, only one PSI Master can
   manage and GIDs, and the remaining PSI Masters can not use them
   meaningfully.

   To facilitate synchronization, every PSI Master maintains a TCP
   connection with every other PSI Master.  This is acceptable because
   the number of PSI Masters within a system will normally be very low.
   Whenever any PSI Master changes GID assignments, it will send a
   message to every other PSI Master it is connected to (normally, this
   will be all PSI Masters in the system).  Regardless of the command
   sent to the Reactor, the message sent to the connected PSI Masters
   contains the full list of GIDs that are assigned to the Reactor, not
   only the changes.  It is of type FM and must only contain one single
   sentence with the flag PSI_SO_FM_GIDSET set, with the TIN field
   containing the IN of the Reactor in question.  In other words, the
   entire message is constructed just as it would be sent to a Reactor,
   but must not be acknowledged by the receiving PSI Master.  Since the
   message is received on the TCP connection from a PSI Master, the
   receiving PSI Master knows that it receives the message for good
   reason.

   Whenever a PSI Master comes up, every another PSI Master will learn



Ertl                      Expires May 26, 2012                 [Page 13]

Internet-Draft                     PSI                     November 2011


   about it via it's Discovery messages, as it will learn about the
   other PSI Masters the same way.  For every resulting pair of PSI
   Masters, the PSI Master with the lower IN will initiate the TCP
   connection to the PSI Master with the higher IN.  The rendezvous port
   number for TCP is the same PSI Master port that is used for UDP.

   Whenever a PSI Master comes up, it SHOULD query every Reactor for
   it's GID assignments, unless it has no intention of making use of the
   Group or Cluster facilities.  This querying can be done as part of
   the initialization (see Section 3.8.2), or at any later time, but
   SHOULD be done before the PSI Master starts using or changing GIDs in
   any way.  An exception is if the PSI Master is going to fully
   redefine all GID assignments, because that can be done without
   knowledge of any prior assignments.

   Ideally, only a single PSI Master should make changes to GID
   assignments at any given time.  Any automatic GID handling SHOULD
   therefore be disabled by default, so the user will need to
   selectively enable it on the PSI Master best suited.  Manual changes
   may still be done via any PSI Master and thus cause a race condition
   if not all PSI Masters are fully synchronized yet, but this will be
   rare and known to the user, who can make sure that all PSI Masters
   are up and connected, or will have their lists cleared before
   connection.

   The race condition occurs when more than one PSI Master is set to
   actively manage GID assignments and any of the following occurs:

   a change is in progress while a connection has not yet been
   established

      a newly started PSI Master might have received the assignment list
      from a Reactor already, but another, not yet contacted PSI Master
      changes it's assignments, and the operation completes before
      contact is made.  Thus the newly started PSI Master will never
      receive the update message and therefore keep the outdated
      assignment even when it makes contact with the PSI Master that
      changed this assignment.

   the PSI Master has been disconnected but not restarted and changes
   have been made meanwhile

      a PSI Master will retain it's list during disconnection.  Only
      when the disconnection lasts long enough to make the Reactors
      consider the PSI Master lost, and subsequently send Discoveries to
      it when it comes back, will the PSI Master re-read the GIDs.  If
      the duration of the disconnection does not suffice to cause such a
      timeout, but a GID change has occurred meanwhile, the PSI Master



Ertl                      Expires May 26, 2012                 [Page 14]

Internet-Draft                     PSI                     November 2011


      will maintain the old list.

   Automatic conflict detection and correction of the lists can be done
   by periodically requesting the GID assignment list of every Reactor
   and comparing that to the stored state, so that synchronization will
   be re-established after a while.  Because any Reactor will be member
   of only a few groups, the resulting traffic will be low and can be
   combined with the periodic status inquiries.  When to do such re-
   requests, if at all, depends strongly on the amount of PSI Masters in
   the Nexus, and also on the frequency of GID assignment changes.  In a
   Nexus with only a single PSI Master, there will be no need to ever do
   this.
   Depending on it's capabilities, the PSI Master should inform the user
   about list corrections it had to do, or maybe even prompt for
   confirmation if the user so wishes.

3.  Design

   This section describes the construction of messages sent over the
   medium.

3.1.  System-independent representation (transfer syntax)

   In order to not add yet another protocol-specific data representation
   that would require implementors to create yet another, likely non-
   reusable and probably less tested library, PSI uses the already well-
   tested CDR (Common Data Representation, [CORBA-CDR]).  CDR also forms
   the basis for CORBA (Common Object Request Broker Architecture) and
   defines a single format for every primitive type, but two endian
   representations that can be chosen by the sender.  Therefore, every
   receiver must be prepared to octet-swap if needed.  CDR offers data
   types down to 8 bit, without the overhead of explicit typing and
   length fields wherever possible.  Normally, as defined in the CORBA
   specification, CDR requires all data types to start at an aligned
   position matching their own size, with a few exceptions.  Since this
   means overhead of a couple of octets if a large data type follows
   smaller types that sum up to less than the alignment restriction of
   the larger type, PSI does not follow this part of the usual CDR
   practice, and instead uses unaligned CDR.
   Also, because CDR does not specify the endianness of bit fields, they
   are explicitly defined by PSI to match the endianness of the
   remainder of the message.

   Using unaligned CDR does not require creating special libraries
   because some implementations, like the one of The Ace Orb ([TAO]),
   already offer the option of turning off the alignment restrictions.
   Using unaligned CDR, the bandwidth available from a typical, switched
   100 Mbit network will suffice for a Nexus larger than two DMX



Ertl                      Expires May 26, 2012                 [Page 15]

Internet-Draft                     PSI                     November 2011


   universes even without use of any optimizations like Groups and
   Clusters, while maintaining a higher refresh rate even under the
   worst-case assumption that every single channel has an associated
   Reactor and thus requires an entire message for a single value.
   Similarly, 10 Gbit Ethernet can support a Nexus larger than 200 DMX
   universes, still at a higher refresh rate, over a single cable.

   Of course, while PSI has no need for explicit typing done by the
   transfer syntax, a minimum of meta data still needs to be sent to
   identify the messages and their contents for flexibility.  The
   resulting hybrid approach is somewhat similar to what is discussed in
   section 5 (6) of [RFC4506], so PSI does not have the same raw
   bandwidth efficiency as DMX.  The approach taken by PSI is considered
   by the author to strike a reasonable balance between still allowing
   for comparatively efficient bandwidth utilization and not sacrificing
   flexibility to any significant degree.

3.2.  Versioning

   Even though multiple versions are not planned, and should not be
   created without proper deliberation, every PSI message, including
   discovery messages, contains a version field.  It MUST be checked by
   every receiver against it's list of supported versions to determine
   how the remainder of the message needs to be interpreted.  If a
   Reactor supports more than one version, it SHOULD respond using the
   version used by the PSI Master.  If the Reactor does not support the
   version used by the PSI Master, it discards its messages.  For every
   message received in an incompatible version, the Reactor sends a
   Version Mismatch message (see Section 3.7.4) to the sender.  The PSI
   Master must flag any version differences for the user to see, and do
   so prominently for incompatibilities.
   Likewise, a Reactor that doesn't use it's preferred version should,
   if it provides other indicators to the user, indicate a warning, and
   an error if it does not have a compatible version to use.  A node may
   support any number of different versions, and allow the user to
   selectively disable their use, and to specify which is the preferred
   version.

   In order for a node running any protocol version to be able to detect
   and report version incompatibilities as well as to send Version
   Mismatch messages to the sender, the message header needs to maintain
   the structure and contents described in this memo for all versions
   created.  It therefore MUST be modified only in ways that keep the
   structure in place, like by appending to the basic format.  The
   contents of the basic structure must be made as meaningful as
   possible.





Ertl                      Expires May 26, 2012                 [Page 16]

Internet-Draft                     PSI                     November 2011


3.3.  Identifier for nodes: IN (Identification Number)

   Each node needs to be uniquely identifiable and thus referable within
   the entire Nexus, for example by a number.  The uniqueness of this
   identifier is very important to guarantee the correct functioning of
   the installation.  To facilitate this without requiring lengthy and
   error-prone configuration of each Reactor, it needs to even be
   globally unique.  Since PSI is geared towards Ethernet, making use of
   the MAC-address of the first NIC found in the node makes sense, as it
   is globally unique already.  Regardless, the user may assign the INs
   in any way convenient as long as they are unique within the Nexus.
   Despite the MAC address of Ethernet and most other media types being
   six octets in length, this field is defined to be 8 octets in length
   to accommodate the 8 octet MAC format (EUI-64) and to facilitate
   other uses, like multiple personalities (PSI Master and Reactor).
   The MAC octet sequence is filled in in canonical format, with the OUI
   and the remainder of the MAC separated by as many filler octets with
   the value 0xFF (and, if necessary, bits with value 1) as needed so
   that both the OUI and the remainder of the MAC address occupy the
   outmost octets.  This conversion therefore is compatible with the
   IEEE's suggested practice, albeit making no distinction between
   MAC-48 and EUI-48.
   Since this number has no corresponding data type, it is defined as
   sequence of 8 octets.  This is no problem in this case, because
   sequences of octets are stored the same on all architectures, meaning
   that no endian issues arise from this (see Section 3.1 for details).
   Through the IN, identification of nodes does not depend on IP address
   assignment, so that may be done through DHCP.
   In the event that a single node runs more than one personality (PSI
   Master / Reactor) at the same time, each of them MUST use a
   different, unique, IN.  In a Nexus using the 6 octet MAC format
   exclusively, this can be accomplished easily by using the two filler
   octets as an index.  Alternatively, and especially when using the 8
   octet MAC format, the user may assign artificial INs in any way
   convenient, provided they are unique within the Nexus.

3.4.  Message types

   PSI uses a number of basic message types that are further split by
   direction (to or from the PSI Master).  This allows for quick
   checking whether the received message can be intended for the
   receiving node at all.  For example, a *_FM_* message can not be
   intended for a PSI Master, not even by other PSI Masters.
   Additionally, the meaning of some message types differs depending on
   direction.  Any message may only contain those elements (like
   sentence types, Node Options, etc.), that apply to it's direction,
   because some differ greatly, or even conflict, depending on
   direction.  Therefore it is necessary to check for the proper



Ertl                      Expires May 26, 2012                 [Page 17]

Internet-Draft                     PSI                     November 2011


   direction before using data from a received message.

   The various existing and allowed message types are as follows:

   o  Unicast message

      This is the basic message type and is usable for all nodes.  It is
      sent directly to a single node and therefore creates little
      processing overhead for any other nodes.  Additionally, the entire
      content of the message is meaningful to the receiving node, so no
      irrelevant portions require processing.  Therefore, messages of
      this type must only contain information for a single node.
      However, they may be spread over multiple Node Sections.  Use of
      the flag NODE_FINISHED is optional and does not influence the
      transmission efficiency.  The unicast message uses no GID so this
      field is omitted in the message header.  Even though sending
      messages of this type as multicast or broadcast can make sense,
      for example using multiple Node Sections with different TINs, that
      SHOULD be avoided in favor of the more appropriate multicast
      message type using a GID to reduce processing overhead for all (or
      all matching) nodes.  See Section 2.1 for details.

      The allowed contents differ depending on direction for this
      message type, see Constants (Section 5).


   o  Multicast message

      This message type is intended for use in conjunction with Groups
      (see Section 2.1), so that the bandwidth can be used more
      efficiently in installations with many Reactors of only few
      channels each.  A message of this type therefore can contain
      multiple Node Sections encapsulating contents for different
      Reactors.  As in unicast messages, it is allowed to send multiple
      Node Sections for the same Reactor in a single message.  To
      increase efficiency, the last node header preceding data for any
      specific Reactor SHOULD have the flag NODE_FINISHED set, so that
      the Reactor can discard the remainder of the message immediately.
      It is recommended that all Node Sections applying to any specific
      Reactor be consecutive, since that further reduces overhead for
      all but the last Reactor addressed in the message.

      The allowed contents differ depending on direction for this
      message type, see Constants (Section 5).


   o  Discovery message




Ertl                      Expires May 26, 2012                 [Page 18]

Internet-Draft                     PSI                     November 2011


      This is a special message type that must not contain additional
      data.  It's use is restricted to, depending on direction, inform
      PSI Masters of newly appearing Reactors, or to instruct all
      Reactors present to send discovery messages, allowing a new or
      restarted PSI Master to build and maintain an inventory of the
      Nexus (See Section 3.8 for details).  Another use is to directly
      contact a PSI Master in case it ceased sending messages to a
      Reactor without apparent reason.  This way, the Reactor can
      initiate being (re-)added to the PSI Master's inventory if, for
      example, the PSI Master has been restarted but no global discovery
      request has been made, or in case the Reactor has missed it (it
      may have been disconnected from the network at that time).
      A Reactor receiving a discovery message SHOULD switch to Safe
      Values; channels using Safety Sequence MUST do so, cease
      operation, ensure safety if at all possible and also MUST discard
      any progress through their Safety Sequences.
      This message may therefore be sent, depending on the sending node,
      as unicast or multicast, and is therefore not further subdivided.


   o  Version Mismatch message

      This is a special message type that must not contain additional
      data.  It's use is to inform the receiver that the sender does not
      support the protocol version that was used to contact the sender.
      The version field contains a version supported by the sender.  If
      the sender supports multiple versions, then the first Version
      Mismatch message contains it's preferred, default version.  If the
      sender receives another incompatible message, then it sends the
      next version that it supports, until it starts over at the
      preferred version.
      The receiver of such a message will check if it supports the
      version indicated, and if it does, then it will establish
      communication using that version.  If it does not, it will collect
      all versions supported by the sender by sending messages to the
      sender.  The list is complete if the sequence has repeated at
      least once, possibly more often to allow for duplication, loss and
      out of order delivery.  The receiver may then check this list
      against it's own support list and pick the version that is nearest
      to the beginning of both node's lists, or by any other criteria,
      if multiple matching versions exist.  This way, it is ensured that
      communication is established eventually, and also that, if more
      than one possible match exists, the version picked is always the
      same.

      The reason this is done this way is to have as few message types
      and contents that must be maintained compatibly across all
      versions as possible.  Using Node Specification to list all



Ertl                      Expires May 26, 2012                 [Page 19]

Internet-Draft                     PSI                     November 2011


      supported versions in order of preference, for example, would not
      only fix that Word type, but also force the entire structure of at
      least the unicast message to be essentially fixed.


3.5.  Headers

   PSI uses three headers that represent different layers of the
   protocol and are related in a strictly hierarchical manner.

3.5.1.  Message header

   The message header represents the highest layer of the PSI.  Every
   message must have exactly one message header, as it contains all
   necessary information like protocol version, source and the type of
   the message.  Additionally, it allows for checking the completeness
   of the received message in terms of length.  The method of specifying
   the source of the message instead of it's destination is uncommon and
   stems from the requirement that the protocol must be able to send
   information for different Reactors in a single message, in order to
   reduce the message overhead for Reactors with only minimal data
   requirements (like those with only a couple of channels).  Otherwise
   messages, and therefore Ethernet frames, would need to be sent for
   even a single channel.  This way, messages for several Reactors can
   be sent as one single message as multicast (using broadcast is NOT
   RECOMMENDED), significantly reducing the number of messages that need
   to be sent (see Section 2.1).

   To facilitate this, PSI uses an additional data field in the message
   header of multicast messages, the Group IDentification (GID).
   Through use of the GID, no Reactor needs to check every such message
   received for relevant information.  Instead, it may immediately abort
   processing the message if the GID in the received header does not
   match any of the GIDs assigned to the Reactor, if there are any.
   Only messages of type PSI_MT_xx_MULTICAST contain a GID-field.
   Sending messages of type PSI_MT_xx_UNICAST as multicast or broadcast
   is NOT RECOMMENDED.














Ertl                      Expires May 26, 2012                 [Page 20]

Internet-Draft                     PSI                     November 2011


   Over the wire format:

    0                   1                   2                   3
    0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
   |    Version    |D+E+S+  Type   |         Message Length        |
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
   | : . Message Length (ctd.) . : |              SIN              |
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
   |                          SIN (ctd.)                           |
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
   |          SIN (ctd.)           | : . : . : . :GID: . : . : . : |
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
   | : . : . :GID (ctd.) : . : . : |
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+

   Legend:
   : . XYZ . : = octets that only exist when certain conditions are met

   The PSI message header.

                                 Figure 1

   Detailed description of the header fields:

   Version: 8 bit

      This field contains the version of the sending PSI stack.  This is
      used to determine if the message can be interpreted, and if so,
      how.  See Section 3.2 for details.


   Message type: 8 bit

      This field specifies the type of the message.  The basic types are
      subdivided into two subtypes each, that define the message
      direction (from the PSI Master or to the PSI Master); see
      Section 3.4 for a list and descriptions.  These subtypes differ in
      what their contents may be, and also allow testing for logical
      correctness.  For example, a message sent to the PSI Master cannot
      be intended for it if it is of subtype "from PSI Master".

      Additionally, the endianness and the size of all length fields in
      the message is defined through bits 1 and 2, respectively, of this
      field in the following way:

      For all message types, bit 1 of the "message type" field indicates
      the endianness of the entire message (including bit fields): if



Ertl                      Expires May 26, 2012                 [Page 21]

Internet-Draft                     PSI                     November 2011


      bit 1 is set, then the message is in big endian format, otherwise
      the message is in little endian format.  The receiver therefore
      only needs to convert if the sender uses the other format.  An
      implementation MAY allow the user to choose which endian type to
      use for sending, regardless of the architecture's natural format.
      For example, if most Reactors use one format while the PSI Master
      uses the other, the PSI Master could be configured to use the
      predominant format for sending, instead of it's native format.

      For all message types, bit 2 of the "message type" field indicates
      the size of all length fields in the entire message: if bit 2 is
      set, then the length fields are 32 bits in size, otherwise their
      size is 16 bit.
      This is done because in nearly all cases, the maximum message size
      will be around one Ethernet MTU, or at least well below the 65536
      octets possible using 16 bits, so for each length field, two
      octets less bandwidth are required.  Since the message components
      (Node Sections and Sentences) can only be smaller than the total
      message length, their length fields will never need to be larger
      than the one of the message header.  In the uncommon case when
      truly large chunks of data need to be sent in one message, then 32
      bits may be used for all length fields.  In that case, the
      additional octets for the length fields will not impact
      performance due to the large amount of data to be sent.

      Thus, including the message direction (bit 0, see Section 3.7.3),
      the most significant 3 bits are used as flags.


   Message length: 16 / 32 bit

      This field contains the length of the message in octets, including
      the message header with the length field itself.  The receiver
      compares it to the number of octets received to see if the message
      is complete.


   SIN: 8 octets

      This is the Source Identification Number and contains the sender's
      IN (see Section 3.3).  It informs the receiver of the source of
      the message.  It is used, depending on the message type, for
      checking (for example, if the sender actually is allowed /
      supposed to send a particular message type or contents to the
      receiver) or, especially in case of Discovery messages, to
      maintain the list of PSI Masters in the Reactors, and the list of
      Reactors in the PSI Master(s).




Ertl                      Expires May 26, 2012                 [Page 22]

Internet-Draft                     PSI                     November 2011


   GID: 32 bit

      The Group ID is specific to multicast message types.  It narrows
      the scope of the message to possibly only a small subset of the
      receiving Reactors.  By simply comparing the GID to the list of
      GIDs assigned to itself, a Reactor can decide if it needs to
      interpret the remainder of the message at all.  If a Reactor has
      no GIDs assigned, it may ignore multicast messages, since they
      cannot contain information for that Reactor.

      Assignment of GIDs is done by the PSI Master and may be changed
      during normal operation, for example when Reactors vanish or new
      Reactors appear.  The field's size of 32 bit allows for about 4.2
      billion unique Groups, which suffices for even large systems.

3.5.2.  Node header

   The node header is used to identify the target node and marks the
   beginning of a Node Section.  Each message, except for Discovery
   messages, may contain any number of Node Sections that, depending on
   the message type, may apply to the same node and / or to different
   nodes.  To facilitate easy jumping across irrelevant (to any
   particular node) sections, and to allow for checking completeness and
   correctness, each node header contains the length of the entire Node
   Section.  It also contains the Target Identification Number ("TIN")
   as well as a field for options that govern the intended use of the
   data grouped under this header, or represent simple instructions for
   the entire node.  Due to the last part, a node header may be
   solitary: it does not need to be followed by any Sentence headers
   (Section 3.5.3).





















Ertl                      Expires May 26, 2012                 [Page 23]

Internet-Draft                     PSI                     November 2011


   Over the wire format:

    0                   1                   2                   3
    0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
   |                         Node Options                          |
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
   |         Section Length        + : . Section Length (ctd.) . : |
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
   | : . : . : . : . : . : . : . :TIN: . : . : . : . : . : . : . : |
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
   | : . : . : . : . : . : . :TIN (ctd.) : . : . : . : . : . : . : |
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
   | : . : . : Request ID: . : . : +
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
   Legend:
   : . XYZ . : = octets that only exist when certain conditions are met

   The PSI node header.

                                 Figure 2

   Detailed description of the header fields:

   Node Options: 32 bit

      This is a bit field that contains instructions for the use of the
      data contained in the current Node Section, as well as self-
      contained instructions and information.  This usually are queries
      that apply to the entire node, or the flags NODE_FINISHED and
      REACTOR_ACCEPTED.  A description of all Node Options is found in
      Section 3.7.5.


   Section Length: 16 / 32 bit

      Similar to the length field of the message header (Section 3.5.1),
      this field contains the length of the Node Section, including the
      node header and the length field itself.  It allows for checking
      for completeness and correctness, and easy jumping across parts
      not interesting to the particular node.  Since the next Node
      Section starts, relative to the start of the length field, at an
      offset of exactly the amount of octets named in the field, this
      weeding out can be done relatively easily.







Ertl                      Expires May 26, 2012                 [Page 24]

Internet-Draft                     PSI                     November 2011


   TIN: 8 octets

      This is the Target Identification Number and contains the target's
      IN (Section 3.3).  It defines the intended receiver for the
      current Node Section.  If the TIN in any given Node Section does
      not match the receiver's IN, it must not be interpreted or
      otherwise used.  In this case, a simple jump across the entire
      Node Section makes sense, using the length field, to not waste CPU
      time.  An implementation MAY also choose to process the Node
      Section the normal way and just discard the extracted data
      afterwards, for example if a thorough consistency check is
      desired.  The method chosen has no effect on the data transferred
      or other nodes.

      If the CLUSTER flag is set, the TIN field MUST NOT be present.

   Request ID: 16 bit

      This field is present only for requests that have the SENDACK flag
      set, and for the corresponding acknowledgements (Section 3.7.5).
      It identifies the request that the acknowledgement refers to, so
      the receiver can easily match the acknowledgement to the
      outstanding requests.  The sender of a Node Section decorated with
      the SENDACK flag decides how to generate the number for the next
      such message, but the method chosen SHOULD ensure that the
      available number space is fully utilised to minimize chances of
      collisions in case of duplicated messages.

3.5.3.  Sentence header

   The Sentence header contains information that applies to the actual
   data transferred, in order to precisely identify them.  It controls
   which type of Words make up the subordinate sentence.  Any given
   sentence must contain only Words of the same type, but a Node Section
   may contain any number (including zero) of sentences of any type.
















Ertl                      Expires May 26, 2012                 [Page 25]

Internet-Draft                     PSI                     November 2011


   Over the wire format:

    0                   1                   2                   3
    0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
   | Sentence Type |       Sentence Options        |Sentence Length|
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
   |S. Len. (ctd.) + : .Sentence Length (ctd.) . : |
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+

   Legend:
   : . XYZ . : = octets that only exist when certain conditions are met

   The PSI sentence header.

                                 Figure 3

   Detailed description of the header fields:

   Sentence Type: 8 bit

      The sentence type specifies the type of the Words making up the
      current sentence.  It is the same for all Words of any given
      sentence and can thus be used, in combination with the sentence
      length field, to compute the Word count.  This saves an additional
      field for the Word count.  See Section 3.6 for a description of
      all Word types.


   Sentence Options: 16 bit

      This field is, like the Node Options field, a bit field, that
      specifies the data contained in the current sentence as well
      giving instructions to their use.  It is especially used to govern
      the use of generic Word types like Node Specification and Channel
      Specification.  Additionally, it may contain requests or
      instructions that are to be applied to the data contained in the
      sentence.  This way, the PSI Master can use a single sentence of
      type Channel Number to request all information about the channels
      specified, as well as switch the channels between Safe Values and
      Current Values.  By using Words of one of the Data Word types, new
      values may be assigned to the specified channels at the same time.
      In messages to the PSI Master, this field merely specifies the use
      of the generic Word types.







Ertl                      Expires May 26, 2012                 [Page 26]

Internet-Draft                     PSI                     November 2011


   Sentence Length: 16 / 32 bit

      Like the length fields in the message- and node headers, this
      field contains the number of octets used by the current sentence,
      including the Sentence header and it's length field.  Contrary to
      the lengths of Node Sections and Messages, it is not meant to
      facilitate jumping across the sentence, since the relevance of any
      particular sentence has already been established by the previous
      examination of the preceding node header.  Instead, this field
      describes the number of Words contained in the sentence.  To be
      consistent with the other length fields and to allow for easy
      checking of consistency, it contains the total octet count.
      If the length of the current Word type, which is given in the
      sentence type, is fixed, then the number of Words contained can be
      derived through simple division, allowing further check for
      consistency of Word type and sentence length.  If the length of
      the current Word type is variable, like for example the Reactor
      Status, the sentence may contain only exactly one Word, with the
      sentence length representing the actual length.  This restriction
      stems from the deliberation that Words of variable length will be
      used only occasionally, with their length possibly becoming
      comparatively large.  Therefore, the overhead of a complete
      Sentence header per Word is acceptable in this case.  Since the
      majority of Words transferred is of fixed length however, the
      introduction of an additional length field for each Word would
      cause comparatively large overhead, while it's usefulness would be
      restricted to comparatively few and seldom used Words and thus
      marginal.  Especially with small Words, like channel numbers, the
      overhead would be 100% of the actual data and therefore not
      justified.

3.6.  Word types

   To further explain the structure of PSI messages, this section lists
   and describes the types of Words used.  The sequence described is the
   sequence as seen on the network.  The ordering of octets and other
   issues are governed by the transfer syntax (Section 3.1) and
   therefore not explicated here.  Channel number sizes are given by the
   appropriate Sentence Option.  The Word type used, in conjunction with
   the data boundaries, defines the resolution to use, so the PSI Master
   knows which range of values is allowed for the channel and can scale
   the values appropriately.  Values within the Word type but outside
   the defined boundaries MUST make the channel switch to Safe Values
   and setting of the appropriate Reactor Status.

   While a PSI Master MUST implement all of these types except where
   mentioned otherwise, a Reactor only needs to implement the types of
   PSI_Word_Datum that it actually uses.



Ertl                      Expires May 26, 2012                 [Page 27]

Internet-Draft                     PSI                     November 2011


   Boolean Data Word: PSI_Word_DatumB

      This data Word consists of the channel number and the actual,
      boolean, datum.
      The syllables are sent in the sequence: "channel number, datum".


   Signed 8 bit Data Word: PSI_Word_DatumS8

      This data Word consists of the channel number and the actual,
      signed, datum, with a width of 8 bits.
      The syllables are sent in the sequence: "channel number, datum".


   Unsigned 8 bit Data Word: PSI_Word_DatumU8

      This data Word consists of the channel number and the actual,
      unsigned, datum, with a width of 8 bits.
      The syllables are sent in the sequence: "channel number, datum".


   Signed 16 bit Data Word: PSI_Word_DatumS16

      This data Word consists of the channel number and the actual,
      signed, datum, with a width of 16 bits.
      The syllables are sent in the sequence: "channel number, datum".


   Unsigned 16 bit Data Word: PSI_Word_DatumU16

      This data Word consists of the channel number and the actual,
      unsigned, datum, with a width of 16 bits.
      The syllables are sent in the sequence: "channel number, datum".


   Signed 32 bit Data Word: PSI_Word_DatumS32

      This data Word consists of the channel number and the actual,
      signed, datum, with a width of 32 bits.
      The syllables are sent in the sequence: "channel number, datum".


   Unsigned 32 bit Data Word: PSI_Word_DatumU32

      This data Word consists of the channel number and the actual,
      unsigned, datum, with a width of 32 bits.
      The syllables are sent in the sequence: "channel number, datum".




Ertl                      Expires May 26, 2012                 [Page 28]

Internet-Draft                     PSI                     November 2011


   Signed 64 bit Data Word: PSI_Word_DatumS64

      This data Word consists of the channel number and the actual,
      signed, datum, with a width of 64 bits.
      The syllables are sent in the sequence: "channel number, datum".


   Unsigned 64 bit Data Word: PSI_Word_DatumU64

      This data Word consists of the channel number and the actual,
      unsigned, datum, with a width of 64 bits.
      The syllables are sent in the sequence: "channel number, datum".


   Floating-point Data Word: PSI_Word_DatumF32

      This data Word supplies 32 bit for a floating-point datum.
      The syllables are sent in the sequence: "channel number, datum".

      Whenever possible, one of the fixed-point Word types should be
      used instead of the floating-point representations, so that less
      complex hardware is needed and interoperability is improved.

      Implementation of this type is recommended for PSI Masters, and
      optional for Reactors.


   Double floating-point Data Word: PSI_Word_DatumF64

      This data Word supplies 64 bit for a floating-point datum.
      The syllables are sent in the sequence: "channel number, datum".

      Whenever possible, one of the fixed-point Word types should be
      used instead of the floating-point representations, so that less
      complex hardware is needed and interoperability is improved.

      Implementation of this type is recommended for PSI Masters, and
      optional for Reactors.


   Quadruple floating-point Data Word: PSI_Word_DatumF128

      This data Word supplies 128 bit for a floating-point datum.
      The syllables are sent in the sequence: "channel number, datum".

      Whenever possible, one of the fixed-point Word types should be
      used instead of the floating-point representations, so that less
      complex hardware is needed and interoperability is improved.



Ertl                      Expires May 26, 2012                 [Page 29]

Internet-Draft                     PSI                     November 2011


      Implementation of this type is recommended for PSI Masters, and
      optional for Reactors.


   Fixed-point Data Word: PSI_Word_Datum_Fixedpoint_D16

      This data Word provides a fixed-point data representation.  An
      unsigned 64 bit integer is used for the integer part, and a signed
      16 bit integer for the divisor.  This way, all convenient fixed-
      point formats can be expressed using a single Word type, so that
      all implementations supporting this format can interoperate.
      Through placing the sign bit in the divisor, the integer part can
      utilise the entire 64 bit range, at the expense of a little
      complexity on the sending side.  The divisor only requires a much
      smaller range, so halving it has little impact.
      The syllables are sent in the sequence: "channel number, integer
      part, divisor".

      This data type should be preferred over the floating-point
      representations whenever possible, so that less complex hardware
      is needed and interoperability is improved.


   Fixed-point Data Word: PSI_Word_Datum_Fixedpoint_D64

      This data Word provides a fixed-point data representation.  An
      unsigned 64 bit integer is used for the integer part, and a signed
      64 bit integer for the divisor.  This way, all convenient fixed-
      point formats can be expressed using a single Word type, so that
      all implementations supporting this format can interoperate.
      Through placing the sign bit in the divisor, the integer part can
      utilise the entire 64 bit range, at the expense of a little
      complexity on the sending side.  The divisor only requires a much
      smaller range, so halving it has little impact.
      The syllables are sent in the sequence: "channel number, integer
      part, divisor".

      This data type should be preferred over the floating-point
      representations whenever possible, so that less complex hardware
      is needed and interoperability is improved.


   Data Word of variable length: PSI_Word_Data_Opaque

      This Word allows the transfer of unspecified data.  It may be used
      for exotic systems that cannot be reasonably covered using the
      other Word types.  It is necessary to note that no processing of
      the supplied data is performed, so that device-dependent issues



Ertl                      Expires May 26, 2012                 [Page 30]

Internet-Draft                     PSI                     November 2011


      are left for the communicating nodes to solve themselves.  Merely
      the channel number is transferred as usual.
      Whether or not the querying or using the range for this type makes
      sense also depends on the communicating nodes.
      Because the interpretation depends entirely on the receiver, these
      generic types are just asking for trouble and should be used only
      when truly necessary.

      This is one of the Word types that have no fixed length and
      therefore may only occur once per sentence, requiring a sentence
      per Word.  The reason is that the sentence length is used to
      convey the number of octets making up the Word, which therefore
      represent the syllables of this type of sentence.  See also
      Section 3.5.3.  The syllables are sent in the sequence: "channel
      number, data octets".

      Implementation of this type is completely optional.


   Data Word for device-specific data: PSI_Word_Opaque_Plain

      This Word differs from PSI_Word_Data_Opaque only in that it does
      not contain a channel number.
      The syllables are sent in the sequence: "data octets".

      Implementation of this type is completely optional.


   Data Word for text: PSI_Word_Data_Text

      This is another Word without fixed length, and is thus only
      allowed to occur once per sentence because it's length is given by
      the sentence length.  It's syllables are single octets that
      contain purely text data.  It is converted appropriately if needed
      by any specific system architecture.  In addition to the data and
      termination octets, the transfer syntax prepends the actual number
      of octets, creating an overhead of four octets that also needs to
      be taken into account in the sentence length.
      The syllables are sent in the sequence: "channel number, Word
      length (implicit), data octets".

      The encoding used is UTF-8 ([RFC3629]) (the sender MAY use plain
      US-ASCII), and it SHOULD be encoded using the string type.

      Implementation of this type is completely optional.






Ertl                      Expires May 26, 2012                 [Page 31]

Internet-Draft                     PSI                     November 2011


   Data Word for plain text: PSI_Word_Text_Plain

      This Word differs from PSI_Word_Data_Text only in that it does not
      contain a channel number.
      The syllables are sent in the sequence: "Word length (implicit),
      data octets".


   Data Word for MIME content: PSI_Word_Data_MIME

      This is another Word without fixed length, and is thus only
      allowed to occur once per sentence because it's length is given by
      the sentence length.  It's data syllables are single octets that
      contain binary data that are not converted in any way.  For the
      MIME Content-Type syllable itself that uses the same encoding as
      the String and Text words do, the transfer syntax prepends the
      actual number of octets, creating an overhead of four octets that
      also needs to be taken into account in the sentence length.
      Being capable of binary transport, no conversion of the MIME data
      from it's native representation is allowed.  The Content-Type is
      used according to [RFC2045] (section 5).
      The syllables are sent in the sequence: "channel number, MIME
      Content-Type length (implicit), MIME Content-Type text, data
      octets".

      Implementation of this type is completely optional.


   Data Word for plain MIME content: PSI_Word_MIME_Plain

      This Word differs from PSI_Word_Data_MIME only in that it does not
      contain a channel number.
      The syllables are sent in the sequence: "Word length (implicit),
      data octets".

      This type is part of the replies to the USI and VSI queries, and
      can be especially useful when used for user- or vendor defined
      images that may help with identification of a Reactor.  However,
      implementation of this type MAY be restricted to the capability of
      sending an empty sentence with a length of zero in case of a
      Reactor, and to discarding any sentences of this type in case of a
      PSI Master.  Also, though any MIME type MAY be contained in these
      sentences, it is RECOMMENDED to stick to PNG for images and to
      vorbis for audio, in order to enhance chances that any given PSI
      Master will be able to use the contents.
      A Reactor MAY use different images for different maximum message
      lengths, so if a PSI Master supports a greater maximum message
      length, a correspondingly larger (in terms of octets) image can be



Ertl                      Expires May 26, 2012                 [Page 32]

Internet-Draft                     PSI                     November 2011


      sent.


   Data Word for time content: PSI_Word_Data_Time

      This type is used for defining current, start, stop, etc. times.
      The exact use depends on the application, as it may be used, for
      example, for synchronization and / or for setting up times to
      start or stop actions, as well as define repetitions and / or
      intervals.  Use for clock synchronization will be affected by
      network delay and is therefore non-deterministic, so the use of
      NTP or similar is recommended for that purpose.  Another use is
      the synchronization of data, usually contained in the same
      message, to some definition of time.  This may be media frames,
      for example, or a channel may be instructed to change the output
      to the values defined in the message at the specified time.

      The syllables are signed 16 bit integers for years and days, and
      signed 8 bit integers for hours, minutes, seconds and hundredth of
      seconds, as well as doublets of one unsigned 16 bit integer
      (integer part) and one signed 16 bit integer (divisor) for the
      frame rate and frames time, one unsigned 8 bit integer as a flag
      field and one unsigned 64 bit integer for the repetition count.
      The syllables are sent in the sequence: "channel number, years,
      days, hours, minutes, seconds, hundredth of seconds, frame rate
      integer part, frame rate divisor, frames time integer part, frames
      time divisor, flags, repetition count".
      Any implementation SHOULD be able to cope with the full binary
      range for the date fields (years, days, etc.), even though it is
      DISCOURAGED to exceed the conventional limits.  Being application
      specific anyway, handling of leap seconds, etc. is left to the
      implementation.

      The flag field is defined as:

      *  Bit 7 to indicate the application of the "Drop Frame" method
         when set

      *  Bit 6 to indicate the time is relative to now (actually, the
         arrival / processing of the message, which will be affected by
         assorted non-deterministic delays) when set

      *  Bit 5 to indicate it is part of an interval (normally, both
         start and stop times will be sent consecutively) when set

      *  Bit 4 to indicate if it is a start (set) or stop (not set) time
         (usually as part of an interval)




Ertl                      Expires May 26, 2012                 [Page 33]

Internet-Draft                     PSI                     November 2011


      Note: the frame rate and frames time fields need to be able to
      express fractions, because some video formats like NTSC use non-
      integer values.  To avoid requiring floating-point capabilities, a
      format similar to the fixed-point data types is used, but with
      less range due to the smaller numbers commonly used.  While using
      a type list would remove the need for these fields, that would
      severely reduce flexibility and adaptability.  Usually, the
      occurrence of this Word will be comparatively low or the remaining
      message content sufficiently long to outweigh this bloat.

      Whether or not querying or using the range for this type makes
      sense depends on the communicating nodes.  It might be used to
      query the frame rate and Drop Frame usage of the Reactor, for
      example.

      Implementation of this type is completely optional.


   Data Word for plain time content: PSI_Word_Time_Plain

      This Word differs from PSI_Word_Data_Time only in that it does not
      contain a channel number.
      The syllables are sent in the sequence: "years, days, hours,
      minutes, seconds, hundredth of seconds, frame rate integer part,
      frame rate divisor, frames time integer part, frames time divisor,
      flags, repetition count".

      Implementation of this type is completely optional.


   Data Word for plain Channel Number: PSI_Word_Channel_Number

      This Word contains only one syllable, representing a channel
      number.  It is used in conjunction with Sentence Options to send
      instructions to and to query information about the channel(s)
      named.
      The syllables are sent in the sequence: "channel number".


   Generic Data Word for numbers: PSI_Word_Generic_32

      This Word also has no fixed length, and is given by the sentence
      length.  It is used for transferring numbers like the user-
      assigned numeric IDs.  All syllables are 32 bits wide and thus the
      sentence length always is a multiple of four octets.  Therefore it
      can be used to calculate the number of syllables and no additional
      field is needed to store the actual length.
      The syllables are sent in the sequence: "datum, datum,...".



Ertl                      Expires May 26, 2012                 [Page 34]

Internet-Draft                     PSI                     November 2011


   Data Word for Reactor Status: PSI_Word_Reactor_Status

      This Word also has no fixed length, and is given by the sentence
      length.  It is used for transferring detailed status information
      about a Reactor, one per syllable.  All syllables are 8 bits wide
      and thus the sentence length can be used to calculate the number
      of syllables and no additional field is needed to store the actual
      length.
      The syllables are sent in the sequence: "datum, datum,...".


   Data Word for channel status: PSI_Word_Channel_Status

      This Word contains two syllables: a channel number and the channel
      status, that is encoded as bit field of 16 bits.
      The syllables are sent in the sequence: "channel number, channel
      status".


   Data Word for Safety Sequence: PSI_Word_Safety_Sequence

      This Word is used to convey the sequence required to change the
      value of a channel that requires extra safety.  It has a variable
      length and thus must only occur once per sentence.  It's component
      syllables are 32 bits in size and thus the sentence length can be
      used to calculate the number of syllables, without the need for an
      additional length field.  The first syllable is the channel
      number; all following syllables are the numbers to send, in the
      same sequence as given in this Word, to activate the channel.
      The syllables are sent in the sequence: "channel number, sequence
      component 0, sequence component 1,...".

      Any such channel MUST NOT change it's value if the sequence is not
      received fully, out of order, or numbers not in the sequence are
      received.  To change the value of such a channel, the PSI Master
      MUST split the sequence into individual messages containing Words
      of this type, but only a single component of the sequence at a
      time.  The sentence length in this direction therefore MUST be 1.
      The value that the channel is supposed to switch to MUST be sent
      in a separate sentence of the same message, with the Word type
      matching the channel's data type, with every component of the
      sequence.  All messages that contain a part of the sequence MUST
      contain the same target value.  If the target value in one of the
      messages does not match the previous, then, even if the sequence
      component itself matches the one expected, any sequence progress
      MUST be discarded and the value MUST NOT be changed.

      Without the requirement for splitting, chances of transmission



Ertl                      Expires May 26, 2012                 [Page 35]

Internet-Draft                     PSI                     November 2011


      errors creating the valid sequence would still be very low, but
      because all packets would always contain the correct sequence, a
      single duplicated packet could trigger a second value change.
      Unless the sequence length is 1, which is allowed but strongly
      discouraged, this cannot occur due to the splitting.
      However, multiple channels, including channels using Safety
      Sequence, may be served in a single message.
      Because any packet may get lost or received incorrectly, to ensure
      that the sequence has been advanced, the flag PSI_NO_FM_SENDACK
      may be used.

      Additionally, a channel using Safety Sequence MUST NOT advance the
      sequence when it is using Safe Values, like after receiving
      PSI_SO_FM_GOSAFE or PSI_NO_FM_GOSAFE.

      The actual length of the sequence is left to be assigned by the
      users of the system, governed to their safety requirements, so an
      implementation MUST NOT expect any specific length.  A device MAY
      include a default sequence deemed reasonable by the vendor, but it
      MUST allow the user to change the sequence, including it's length.
      A length of 1 MUST NOT be used as default, and an implementation
      MUST warn the user about the safety implications of setting it to
      that length.  A length of zero MUST make the channel ignore any
      value changes it may receive, effectively disabling it.  A
      sequence MUST NOT contain any single number more than once, so
      that duplicated or reordered packets can not advance the sequence.
      Whenever the sequence received does not match the required
      sequence, the receiver MUST discard all parts received already,
      and restart at the beginning.  The numbers 0 (all bits cleared)
      and 0xFFFFFFFF (all bits set) MUST reset the receiver, and
      therefore cannot be used as part of a sequence.  This is done so
      that any channel using Safety Sequence can safely be reset without
      knowing the sequence that has been assigned to it.

      Note: it would be possible to add explicit numbering to each part
      of the sequence, but because the sequence length will always be
      small compared to the available number space, this seems to be
      unnecessary overhead, adding to the overhead already created by
      splitting.
      A preliminary suggestion is for a channel implementation to have
      room for a length of at least 20 per channel.  Any PSI Master
      implementing Safety Sequence is expected to allow for longer
      sequences.

      Implementation of this type is completely optional.






Ertl                      Expires May 26, 2012                 [Page 36]

Internet-Draft                     PSI                     November 2011


   Data Word for channel counts: PSI_Word_Channel_Count

      This Word is composed of three syllables, each 32 bit in size,
      specifying the counts of the various channel types in a Reactor.
      The syllables are sent in the sequence: "input channel count, in/
      out channel count, output channel count".


   Generic Word for Node Specification: PSI_Word_Node_Specification

      This Word only contains a single value of 32 bits.  It's meaning
      is defined by the Sentence Options.  This method was chosen to not
      have to define a large number of Words that differ in name only.
      The syllables are sent in the sequence: "node specification".


   Generic Word for Channel specification:
   PSI_Word_Channel_Specification

      This Word contains two syllables: the channel number and a channel
      specification of size 32 bit.  Like PSI_Word_Node_Specification,
      the actual meaning is given by the Sentence Options.
      The syllables are sent in the sequence: "channel number, channel
      specification".

3.7.  Constants

   This section lists and explains the constants used in PSI.  Since
   only the values of the constants are transferred between nodes, an
   implementor may choose to use any convenient naming and assignment
   scheme.


3.7.1.  Conventions

   The conventions used in this document are as follows:


   o  Naming

      All constants are prefixed with "PSI" to emphasize their belonging
      to the PSI, and to avoid collision and confusion with other
      constants.  An underscore ("_") separates the specification of the
      general usage in the form "AB".  Following another underscore is
      the direction in form "CD", if the constant is defined for more
      than one direction.  A further underscore separates this from the
      general meaning of the constant, usually given by an acronym "E".
      Thus, constant names are constructed like this:



Ertl                      Expires May 26, 2012                 [Page 37]

Internet-Draft                     PSI                     November 2011


      PSI_AB_CD_E (directional constant), like PSI_ST_TM_WD32
      PSI_AB_E (nondirectional constant), like PSI_CR_8

      Values for AB:

      PV: Protocol Version
      MT: Message Type
      NO: Node Option
      SO: Sentence Option
      ST: Sentence Type
      RT: Reactor Type
      RS: Reactor Status
      CT: Channel Type
      CS: Channel Status

      Values for CD:

      FM: From PSI Master
      TM: To PSI Master

      Constants that have different application (like single or
      conglomerate constants) are named in a way to show their meaning,
      and are prefixed with "PSI".


   o  Values

      Especially bit constants are given in the form "bit X", specifying
      the bit that is set, counting the MSB of the field as bit 0.
      Other constants, especially large ones, are given as hexadecimal,
      prefixed by the conventional "0x".

3.7.2.  Protocol version


   PSI 32 Bit: PSI_PV_0

   This is the protocol described here.
   It is defined as 0.

3.7.3.  Bases for constants

   To ease readability and structure, there are a few constants serving
   as base for others.  The bases are chosen in a way to allow the
   constants of every area to start from 0 by adding the base as offset.






Ertl                      Expires May 26, 2012                 [Page 38]

Internet-Draft                     PSI                     November 2011


   Type base for 'direction from PSI Master': PSI_TYPE_BASE_FM

      This is the base for all constants that depend on the message
      direction, identifying data coming from the PSI Master.
      It's value is 0.


   Type base for 'direction to PSI Master': PSI_TYPE_BASE_TM

      This is the base for all constants that depend on the message
      direction, identifying data sent to the PSI Master.
      It's value is "bit 7", dividing the available number space by
      half.


   Type base for 'message from the PSI Master': PSI_MT_BASE_FM

      This is the base for all message types that are sent by the PSI
      Master.
      It's value is PSI_TYPE_BASE_FM.


   Type base for 'message from the PSI Master': PSI_MT_BASE_TM

      This is the base for all message types that are sent to the PSI
      Master.
      It's value is PSI_TYPE_BASE_TM.


   Type base for sentences in messages coming from the PSI Master:
   PSI_ST_BASE_FM

      This is the base for sentence types that are used in messages sent
      by the PSI Master.
      It's value is PSI_TYPE_BASE_FM.


   Type base for sentences in messages sent to the PSI Master:
   PSI_ST_BASE_TM

      This is the base for sentence types that are used in messages sent
      to the PSI Master.
      It's value is PSI_TYPE_BASE_TM.








Ertl                      Expires May 26, 2012                 [Page 39]

Internet-Draft                     PSI                     November 2011


3.7.4.  Message types

   The following constants identify the message types as described in
   Section 3.4.  The direction of the message is identified by use of
   the appropriate constant.  The meaning of a message may differ
   depending on it's direction, so this is not only important for
   plausibility checking.

   As described in Section 3.5.1, including the message direction (bit
   0), the most significant 3 bits are used as flags.

   Messages from the PSI Master:

   Normal (unicast) message: PSI_MT_FM_NORMAL

      This designates the most basic type of data message.  The message
      is directed at a single Reactor only and therefore does not
      contain a field for a GID.  It may, however, contain multiple Node
      Sections.
      It's value is (PSI_MT_BASE_FM+0).


   Multicast message: PSI_MT_FM_MULTICAST

      This type designates a message intended for multicasting.
      Contrary to the unicast message, it contains a field for a GID.
      It's value is (PSI_MT_BASE_FM+1).


   Discovery message: PSI_MT_FM_DISCOVERY

      This type designates a PSI Master to Reactor Discovery message.
      It does not contain information besides the message header itself.
      It's value is (PSI_MT_BASE_FM+2).


   Version mismatch message: PSI_MT_FM_VERSION_MISMATCH

      This type designates a PSI Master to Reactor version mismatch
      message.  It does not contain information besides the message
      header itself.  The version field indicates the next supported
      version.
      It's value is (PSI_MT_BASE_FM+3).


   Messages to the PSI Master:





Ertl                      Expires May 26, 2012                 [Page 40]

Internet-Draft                     PSI                     November 2011


   Normal (unicast) message: PSI_MT_TM_NORMAL

      This message is directed at a single PSI Master.  This is the
      usual case even in the presence of multiple PSI Masters.
      It's value is (PSI_MT_BASE_TM+0).


   Multicast message: PSI_MT_TM_MULTICAST

      This type designates a message intended for multicasting.
      Contrary to the unicast message, it contains a field for a GID.
      It's value is (PSI_MT_BASE_TM+1).


   Discovery message: PSI_MT_TM_DISCOVERY

      This type designates a Reactor to PSI Master Discovery message.
      It does not contain information besides the message header itself.
      It's value is (PSI_MT_BASE_TM+2).


   Version mismatch message: PSI_MT_TM_VERSION_MISMATCH

      This type designates a Reactor to PSI Master version mismatch
      message.  It does not contain information besides the message
      header itself.  The version field indicates the next supported
      version.
      It's value is (PSI_MT_BASE_FM+3).

3.7.5.  Node Options

   This section describes the constants defined for Node Options.  The
   Node Options are encoded as bit field to conserve bandwidth.

   Node Options for messages from the PSI Master:

   These Node Options are valid coming from the PSI Master.  They may be
   combined in any number, with certain exceptions.  This way it is
   possible to request all possible information about a Reactor with a
   single message.  Some requests may result in more data to be sent
   than the current maximum message length.  Unless a single Word
   exceeds the maximum message length (which is an error; truncation is
   only possible for non-essential things like vendor-specific
   information), the reply is split across multiple messages, using
   proper sentences.






Ertl                      Expires May 26, 2012                 [Page 41]

Internet-Draft                     PSI                     November 2011


   Query all data types: PSI_NO_FM_DTREQ

      This flag is used to request transmission of the data types of all
      channels to the PSI Master.  If the resulting list is longer than
      the maximum message length, it may be split into separate
      messages.
      It's value is "bit 31".


   Query all channel types: PSI_NO_FM_CTREQ

      This flag is used to request transmission of the types of all
      channels to the PSI Master.  If the resulting list is longer than
      the maximum message length, it may be split into separate
      messages.
      It's value is "bit 30".


   Query all channel's data boundaries: PSI_NO_FM_DBREQ

      This flag is used to request transmission of the boundaries of all
      channels to the PSI Master.  If the resulting list is longer than
      the maximum message length, it may be split into separate
      messages.
      It's value is "bit 29".


   Query all channel states: PSI_NO_FM_CSREQ

      This flag is used to request transmission of the status of all
      channels to the PSI Master.  If the resulting list is longer than
      the maximum message length, it may be split into separate
      messages.
      It's value is "bit 28".


   Query all data values: PSI_NO_FM_VREQ

      This flag is used to request transmission of the Current Values of
      all channels to the PSI Master.  If the resulting list is longer
      than the maximum message length, it may be split into separate
      messages.
      It's value is "bit 27".








Ertl                      Expires May 26, 2012                 [Page 42]

Internet-Draft                     PSI                     November 2011


   Query the Reactor's status: PSI_NO_FM_RSREQ

      This flag makes the Reactor send a detailed status message to the
      PSI Master.
      It's value is "bit 26".


   Query maximum message length: PSI_NO_FM_MMLREQ

      This flag is used to request transmission of the Reactor's maximum
      message length to the PSI Master.  This SHOULD be at least around
      1400 octets, but MAY be significantly larger.  The PSI Master MUST
      NOT send messages larger than this to the Reactor (including Group
      messages, so these will always be at most the size of the lowest
      maximum of all Reactors in the group), but may send any size below
      this.  If a Reactor's maximum message size changes, it MUST set
      the PSI_RS_REREAD_ALL status.
      Note that even though the Reactor must know the PSI Master's
      maximum message length, there is no corresponding request flag.
      That is because the PSI Master will send this information by
      itself, usually alongside it's REACTOR_ACCEPTED message.  If for
      some reason the Reactor has not received this information despite
      a REACTOR_ACCEPTED message, and is sent other requests or data, it
      MUST resume responding to Discovery messages, discarding the
      REACTOR_ACCEPTED message.
      It's value is "bit 25".


   Query maximum refresh rate: PSI_NO_FM_MRRREQ

      This flag is used to request transmission of the Reactor's maximum
      refresh rate to the PSI Master.  This MUST be at least 100 Hz, but
      MAY be significantly larger.  The Reactor MUST be able to sustain
      this rate indefinitely, under all circumstances that may arise
      during normal operation, especially in the face of any combination
      of group, cluster and other messages, and regardless of how the
      channel data are distributed across the messages.
      Channels using Safety Sequence may depend on the length of the
      sequence, so a separate refresh rate is sent for these, based on
      the current sequence's length.
      The PSI Master SHOULD NOT refresh any Reactor faster than it's
      advertised maximum refresh rate, so this may affect grouping and
      clustering decisions.
      The PSI Master MAY decide to refresh only a subset of any
      Reactor's channels, and may then use a correspondingly increased
      refresh rate.
      Note that there is no corresponding rate info for the PSI Master,
      since all messages, except for Discoveries, are explicitly



Ertl                      Expires May 26, 2012                 [Page 43]

Internet-Draft                     PSI                     November 2011


      requested by the PSI Master, which therefore controls the rate.
      It's value is "bit 24".


   Query maximum number of GIDs: PSI_NO_FM_MGIDREQ

      This flag is used to request transmission of the maximum number of
      GIDs that can be assigned to a Reactor.
      It's value is "bit 23".


   Query GIDs: PSI_NO_FM_GIDREQ

      This flag is used to request transmission of all GIDs assigned to
      it to the PSI Master.
      It's value is "bit 22".


   Query vendor specific information: PSI_NO_FM_VSIREQ

      This flag is used to request transmission of vendor specific
      information like vendor name, device name, model number, etc. to
      the PSI Master.  The Reactor sends the vendor string (using the
      generic text message Word PSI_ST_TM_WTP), the vendor numbers
      (using the generic 32 bit Word PSI_ST_TM_WG32), and the vendor
      MIME data (using the generic MIME type word PSI_ST_TM_WMP), if
      any.  If nothing has been set, an empty sentence of the respective
      type is sent.
      It's value is "bit 21".


   Query user specific information: PSI_NO_FM_USIREQ

      This flag is used to request transmission of all user specific
      information.  Like PSI_NO_FM_VSIREQ, the Reactor sends the user
      string (using the generic text message Word PSI_ST_TM_WTP), the
      user numbers (using the generic 32 bit Word PSI_ST_TM_WG32), and
      the user MIME data (using the generic MIME type word
      PSI_ST_TM_WMP), if any.  If nothing has been set, an empty
      sentence of the respective type is sent.
      It's value is "bit 20".


   Query the Reactor's type: PSI_NO_FM_RTREQ

      This flag is used to request transmission of the Reactor's type to
      the PSI Master.
      It's value is "bit 19".



Ertl                      Expires May 26, 2012                 [Page 44]

Internet-Draft                     PSI                     November 2011


   Query the Reactor's Identification Number: PSI_NO_FM_INREQ

      This flag makes the Reactor send a message.  Since the IN is part
      of the message header (see Section 3.5.1), any message that needs
      to be sent to the PSI Master anyway will do.  If no message needs
      to be sent at that time, an empty message of type PSI_ST_TM_WN is
      sent.
      It's value is "bit 18".


   Query channel counts: PSI_NO_FM_CCREQ

      This flag is used to request transmission of the number of
      channels of each type (Output, InOut, Input) to the PSI Master.
      Channels using Safety Sequence count as Output or InOut, according
      to their properties.
      It's value is "bit 17".


   Request to use the Current Values: PSI_NO_FM_GODATA

      If this flag is set, and the Reactor is currently using Safe
      Values, it will start using the Current Values as soon as
      possible, usually after reception of values for every channel.  In
      any case, a Reactor MUST NOT start using Current Values if a
      timeout occurred, or if it has not actually received values, or
      the values received are not valid (anymore).  If it is sent in a
      message containing data Words, then the values received are
      applied immediately.  If the same message has the flag
      PSI_NO_FM_GOSAFE set, then that MUST be given precedence.
      PSI_SO_FM_GOSAFE, if set in this message or previously, overrides
      this flag on a per-channel basis, but does not clear it.
      Therefore, PSI_NO_FM_GODATA applies to these channels as soon as
      PSI_SO_FM_GODATA is received, unless it has been cleared meanwhile
      by PSI_NO_FM_GOSAFE or a timeout occurred.  As an exception,
      channels using Safety Sequence MUST discard received data unless
      they are set to use Current Values.  This flag may be sent at any
      time, but is restricted to Output and InOut Reactors.
      It's value is "bit 16".

      Note: because there is no guarantee that any message sent actually
      reaches the receiver, this flag SHOULD be repeated as long as it
      is supposed to be in effect.  This can easily be done by setting
      this flag in all Node Sections.  Alternatively, the Reactor's
      status may be queried, or replies that can doubtlessly be
      attributed to requests having been sent in this same sentence may
      also be taken as acknowledgement.  Furthermore, the flag
      PSI_NO_FM_SENDACK may also be used.



Ertl                      Expires May 26, 2012                 [Page 45]

Internet-Draft                     PSI                     November 2011


   Request to use the Safe Values: PSI_NO_FM_GOSAFE

      If this bit is set, all Output and InOut channels MUST be switched
      to their respective Safe Values, regardless of the remaining
      content of the sentence or other Sentence Options.  This MUST only
      be reverted upon reception of PSI_NO_FM_GODATA.  This flag MUST be
      applied regardless of the state of the channels, even if they have
      already been individually set to use Safe Values.  This means that
      when a channel gets set to use Current Values by use of
      PSI_SO_FM_GODATA, it will still continue using Safe Values until
      PSI_NO_FM_GODATA is sent to it's Reactor.  Channels using Safety
      Sequence MUST clear any progress made through their sequence, and
      cease operation or otherwise ensure safety if at all possible.
      This flag SHOULD be used whenever a PSI Master cannot generate new
      values for any channel of that Reactor, for example if input
      channels that are used to generate the values cease providing
      data.  It MUST be used if the PSI Master detects an internal or
      external problem that could result in incorrect values being
      generated.
      It may also be used prior to shutting down the PSI Master, or
      before a Reactor is removed from the PSI Master's inventory.
      It is valid for all Reactor types and may be sent at any time and
      combined with all other flags; if PSI_NO_FM_GODATA is set then
      that is ignored, PSI_NO_FM_GOSAFE always taking precedence.  Input
      Reactors ignore this flag.
      It's value is "bit 15".

      Note: because there is no guarantee that any message sent actually
      reaches the receiver, this flag must be repeated as long as it is
      supposed to be in effect.  This can easily be done by setting this
      flag in all Node Sections.  Alternatively, the Reactor's status
      may be queried, or the flag PSI_NO_FM_SENDACK may be used, so a
      correspondingly set PSI_NO_TM_ACK or PSI_NO_TM_NACK suffices.


   Node Section applies to all Group members: PSI_NO_FM_CLUSTER

      This flag is used to indicate that the current Node Section is to
      be interpreted by all receiving Reactors that are members of the
      Group specified, and MUST only be used in messages of type
      multicast.  A Node Section that has this flag set has no TIN
      field.  This flag exists to increase efficiency in case there are
      several Reactors that are supposed to receive identical data.
      Normally, this will be the case for functionally similar Reactors,
      but because it may be combined with any flag except PSI_NO_FM_ACK,
      PSI_NO_FM_NACK, PSI_NO_FM_REACTOR_ACCEPTED and
      PSI_NO_FM_NODE_FINISHED, it is not limited to sending data (see
      Section 2.2).  While Reactors MUST implement it, implementation



Ertl                      Expires May 26, 2012                 [Page 46]

Internet-Draft                     PSI                     November 2011


      and use of this flag MAY be omitted for PSI Masters.
      It's value is "bit 14".


   Reply to a Discovery message: PSI_NO_FM_REACTOR_ACCEPTED

      If this flag is set, the PSI Master has added the Reactor to it's
      inventory.  The PSI Master sends a message with this flag set for
      each Discovery Message it receives, until the Reactor ceases
      sending further Discoveries.  This ensures that even if an
      arbitrary number of Discovery messages and / or replies get lost,
      every Reactor in the Nexus is known to the PSI Master and has
      received a reply in the end.
      It's value is "bit 13".

      This means that

      *  prior to receipt of a reply by a Reactor, the PSI Master has
         received at least one Discovery message from that Reactor and
         therefore knows of it and that

      *  upon arrival of a Discovery message at the PSI Master the
         sending Reactor may not yet have received a reply, or the
         Discovery may already have been on it's way before the Reactor
         received the reply.  Since this cannot be known, another reply
         must be sent.  See Section 3.8 for details.


   Request to send a confirmation: PSI_NO_FM_SENDACK

      The receiving Reactor MUST acknowledge, after having executed
      them, all Node Sections that have this flag set.  This is done by
      sending each of them back (keeping the FM types) inside a Node
      Section that has either of the flags PSI_NO_TM_NACK and
      PSI_NO_TM_ACK set.  The Reactor decides whether to use NACK or
      ACK, and normally the decision should be based on whichever
      results in the shortest message.  Therefore, it is expected that
      most of the time NACK will be used, because if nothing failed only
      an empty message needs to be sent.  The PSI Master MUST ensure
      that the resulting acknowledgement will fit into it's maximum
      message length.
      Using this flag may be especially worthwhile in case of channels
      using Safety Sequence, so the advancement can be monitored, and is
      the basis of the ACKed mode (see Section 2.6).
      This flag must not be combined with the flags PSI_NO_FM_ACK and
      PSI_NO_FM_NACK.
      It's value is "bit 12".




Ertl                      Expires May 26, 2012                 [Page 47]

Internet-Draft                     PSI                     November 2011


   Confirmation of executing a request: PSI_NO_FM_ACK

      This flag indicates that the PSI Master has received and executed
      one or more requests by a Reactor.  It is always used in
      conjunction with the Request ID field, like PSI_NO_FM_NACK.  The
      Node Section with this flag set contains all requests and data
      that were executed or used from the Node Section that contained
      the PSI_NO_TM_SENDACK flag.  The first sentence MUST be of type
      PSI_Word_Node_Specification and contain a single Word that holds
      all flags from the original Node Options field that were not
      executed or used (keeping the TM types).  Everything that was in
      the original Node Section but is missing from the one with this
      flag set was not executed.  This kind of acknowledge is sent when
      PSI_NO_TM_SENDACK is set, and each Node Section that has that flag
      set is acknowledged separately, they are never split nor
      conglomerated.  The Reactor therefore MUST ensure that the
      resulting acknowledgement fits into it's maximum message length,
      and split the requests if needed.  Multiple Node Sections of the
      same message may have PSI_NO_TM_SENDACK set, and the individual
      acknowledgements may be sent in different messages, though it is
      recommended to use a single message if possible.
      This flag must not be combined with the flags PSI_NO_FM_NACK and
      PSI_NO_FM_SENDACK.
      It's value is "bit 11".


   Notification of not executing a request: PSI_NO_FM_NACK

      This flag indicates that the PSI Master has received but not
      executed one or more requests by a Reactor.  It is always used in
      conjunction with the Request ID field, like PSI_NO_FM_ACK.  The
      Node Section with this flag set contains all requests and data
      that were not executed or used from the Node Section that
      contained the PSI_NO_TM_SENDACK flag.  The first sentence MUST be
      of type PSI_Word_Node_Specification and contain a single Word that
      holds all flags from the original Node Options field that were not
      executed or used (keeping the TM types).  Everything that was in
      the original Node Section but is missing from the one with this
      flag set was executed.  This kind of negative acknowledge is sent
      when PSI_NO_TM_SENDACK is set, and each Node Section that has that
      flag set is negatively acknowledged separately, they are never
      split nor conglomerated.  The Reactor therefore MUST ensure that
      the resulting acknowledgement fits into it's maximum message
      length, and split the requests if needed.  Multiple Node Sections
      of the same message may have PSI_NO_TM_SENDACK set, and the
      individual acknowledgements may be sent in different messages,
      though it is recommended to use a single message if possible.
      This flag must not be combined with the flags PSI_NO_FM_ACK and



Ertl                      Expires May 26, 2012                 [Page 48]

Internet-Draft                     PSI                     November 2011


      PSI_NO_FM_SENDACK.
      It's value is "bit 10".


   End of relevant message content: PSI_NO_FM_NODE_FINISHED

      If this flag is set in a Node Section it indicates that this is
      the last Node Section containing data for the specific Reactor.
      The Reactor therefore does not need to interpret the remainder of
      the message, if any.  However, for error detection, the entire
      message still needs to be checked, meaning that it must have been
      received in full and the length data must match each other.  If
      this is not the case, then the message must be discarded and no
      information or requests contained in it must be used or executed
      because it is not clear which part the error actually affects.
      It's value is "bit 9".


   Node Options for messages to the PSI Master:

   The following Node Options are valid going to the PSI Master.  With
   certain exceptions, they may be combined arbitrarily.

   Reactor status OK: PSI_NO_TM_SOK

      If this flag is set, there are no issues at all.  It therefore
      must only be set if none of the other Reactor status bits
      (PSI_NO_TM_Sx) is set.
      It's value is "bit 31".


   Non-critical information: PSI_NO_TM_SNCI

      If this flag is set, there is non-critical information, so a
      status inquiry is recommended.  The correct functioning of the
      Reactor is not affected.  This is the case, for example, when the
      Reactor has been switched to Safe Values.  If this flag is set,
      PSI_NO_TM_SOK must not be set.
      It's value is "bit 30".


   Non-critical error: PSI_NO_TM_SNCE

      If this flag is set, there is a non-critical error, so a status
      inquiry is strongly recommended.  This is the case, for example,
      if the Reactor has started using Safe Values due to a timeout.  If
      this flag is set, PSI_NO_TM_SOK must not be set.
      It's value is "bit 29".



Ertl                      Expires May 26, 2012                 [Page 49]

Internet-Draft                     PSI                     November 2011


   Critical error: PSI_NO_TM_SCE

      If this flag is set, there is a critical error that may affect the
      Reactor's operation and possibly damage it.  Therefore, a status
      inquiry is required to query the exact problem(s).  This is the
      case, for example, if channels stop functioning or another
      hardware or software error has been detected.  If this flag is
      set, PSI_NO_TM_SOK must not be set.
      It's value is "bit 28".


   Status unchanged: PSI_NO_TM_SUNCH

      The Reactor's status is not OK, but has not changed since the last
      status inquiry; another inquiry is not required, but allowed at
      any time.  If this flag is set, then PSI_NO_TM_SOK must not be
      set.
      It's value is "bit 27".


   Request to send a confirmation: PSI_NO_TM_SENDACK

      The PSI Master MUST confirm all Node Sections marked with this
      flag after having executed them.  This is done by sending each of
      them back (keeping the TM types) inside a Node Section that has
      either of the flags PSI_NO_FM_NACK and PSI_NO_FM_ACK set.  The PSI
      Master decides whether to use NACK or ACK, and normally the
      decision should be based on whichever results in the shortest
      message.  Therefore, it is expected that most of the time NACK
      will be used, because if nothing failed only an empty message
      needs to be sent.  The Reactor MUST ensure that the resulting
      acknowledgement fits into it's maximum message length.
      This flag must not be combined with the flags PSI_NO_TM_ACK and
      PSI_NO_TM_NACK.
      It's value is "bit 26".


   Confirmation of executing a request: PSI_NO_TM_ACK

      This flag indicates that the Reactor has received and executed one
      or more requests by the PSI Master.  It is always used in
      conjunction with the Request ID field, like PSI_NO_TM_NACK.  The
      Node Section with this flag set contains all requests and data
      that were executed or used from the Node Section that contained
      the PSI_NO_FM_SENDACK flag.  The first sentence MUST be of type
      PSI_Word_Node_Specification and contain a single Word that holds
      all flags from the original Node Options field that were executed
      or used (keeping the FM types).  Everything that was in the



Ertl                      Expires May 26, 2012                 [Page 50]

Internet-Draft                     PSI                     November 2011


      original Node Section but is missing from the one with this flag
      set was not executed.  This kind of acknowledge is sent when
      PSI_NO_FM_SENDACK is set, and each Node Section that has that flag
      set is acknowledged separately, they are never split nor
      conglomerated.  The PSI Master therefore MUST ensure that the
      resulting acknowledgement fits into it's maximum message length,
      and split the requests if needed.  Multiple Node Sections in the
      same message may have PSI_NO_FM_SENDACK set, and the individual
      acknowledgements may be sent in different messages, though it is
      recommended to use a single message if possible.
      This flag must not be combined with the flags PSI_NO_TM_NACK and
      PSI_NO_TM_SENDACK.
      It's value is "bit 25".


   Notification of not executing a request: PSI_NO_TM_NACK

      This flag indicates that the Reactor has received but not executed
      one or more requests by the PSI Master.  It is always used in
      conjunction with the Request ID field, like PSI_NO_TM_ACK.  The
      Node Section with this flag set contains all requests and data
      that were not executed or used from the Node Section that
      contained the PSI_NO_FM_SENDACK flag.  The first sentence MUST be
      of type PSI_Word_Node_Specification and contain a single Word that
      holds all flags from the original Node Options field that were not
      executed or used (keeping the FM types).  Everything that was in
      the original Node Section but is missing from the one with this
      flag set was executed.  This kind of negative acknowledge is sent
      when PSI_NO_FM_SENDACK is set, and each Node Section that has that
      flag set is negatively acknowledged separately, they are never
      split nor conglomerated.  The PSI Master therefore MUST ensure
      that the resulting acknowledgement fits into it's maximum message
      length, and split the requests if needed.  Multiple Node Sections
      in the same message may have PSI_NO_FM_SENDACK set, and the
      individual acknowledgements may be sent in different messages,
      though it is recommended to use a single message if possible.
      This flag must not be combined with the flags PSI_NO_TM_ACK and
      PSI_NO_TM_SENDACK.
      It's value is "bit 24".


   End of relevant message content: PSI_NO_TM_MASTER_FINISHED

      If this flag is set in a Node Section it indicates that this is
      the last Node Section containing data for the specific PSI Master.
      The PSI Master therefore does not need to interpret the remainder
      of the message, if any.  However, for error detection, the entire
      message still needs to be checked, meaning that it must have been



Ertl                      Expires May 26, 2012                 [Page 51]

Internet-Draft                     PSI                     November 2011


      received in full and the length data must match each other.  If
      this is not the case, then the message must be discarded and no
      information or requests contained in it must be used or executed
      because it is not clear which part the error actually affects.
      It's value is "bit 23".

3.7.6.  Sentence Options

   This section describes the constants defined for Sentence Options.
   The Sentence Options are encoded as bit field to conserve bandwidth.
   The definitions of channel number sizes apply to all Words within any
   given sentence.  Every node MUST be able cope with all sizes, but the
   smallest size possible to SHOULD always be used.  Especially, if
   there is a substantial number of channels below any specific size
   definition in the same sentence as one or more above that size
   definition, they SHOULD be split into separate sentences so the
   smaller type can be used for the lower channels.

   Sentence Options for messages from the PSI Master:

   These Sentence Options are valid coming from the PSI Master.  They
   may be combined in any number, with certain exceptions.  This way it
   is possible to request all possible information about channels using
   a single message.

   Defines channel numbers to be 8 bit: PSI_SO_FM_CN8

      This bit defines the size of all channel numbers in the sentence
      to be 8 bit in size.  It may only be used in conjunction with
      Words actually containing channel numbers, and must not be
      combined with any other channel number definition.
      It's value is "bit 15".


   Defines channel numbers to be 16 bit: PSI_SO_FM_CN16

      This bit defines the size of all channel numbers in the sentence
      to be 16 bit in size.  It may only be used in conjunction with
      Words actually containing channel numbers, and must not be
      combined with any other channel number definition.
      It's value is "bit 14".


   Defines channel numbers to be 32 bit: PSI_SO_FM_CN32

      This bit defines the size of all channel numbers in the sentence
      to be 32 bit in size.  It may only be used in conjunction with
      Words actually containing channel numbers, and must not be



Ertl                      Expires May 26, 2012                 [Page 52]

Internet-Draft                     PSI                     November 2011


      combined with any other channel number definition.
      It's value is "bit 13".


   Query channel status: PSI_SO_FM_CSREQ

      When this bit is set, the Reactor will send the status of the
      channels given in the sentence.  Normally, it is used in sentences
      of type Channel Number, but it may be used with any type that
      contains a channel number.  It is valid for all channel types and
      may be sent at any time.
      It's value is "bit 12".


   Query the data types used: PSI_SO_FM_DTREQ

      When this bit is set, the Reactor will send the data types (that
      define the Word type to be used) of the channels given in the
      sentence.  The data type returned is the one that the channel
      sends or receives, so an Input channel will return the TM type
      while an Output channel will return the FM type here.  An InOut
      channel may return either.
      It may be used only in Words of type Channel Number, because the
      type of Data Word to be used is not known yet.  Likewise, the use
      of the flag PSI_SO_FM_GODATA is not allowed, because for lack of
      knowledge of the data types, no data can have been sent.  Use of
      the flag PSI_SO_FM_GOSAFE is allowed.  This Option is valid for
      all channel types and may be sent at any time.  Because a channel
      using Safety Sequence always uses an additional data Word, the
      type of that needs to be returned.  A channel using Safety
      Sequence MUST discard any progress through the sequence if this
      Option is received, and ensure safety if at all possible.
      While it may seem tempting, it it DISCOURAGED to have one channel
      use multiple Word types (for example an integer and the time
      type).  While this option is slightly better than using the
      generic Word types, and is OPTIONAL for any PSI Master, it is
      RECOMMENDED for Reactors to always use distinct channels even if
      they logically represent a single function (data and delay, for
      example), because this can be used by generic PSI Masters.  A PSI
      Master that does not support it should not access channels
      returning multiple Word types.  Given that channel numbers are
      per-Reactor, multiplying the number of channels of a Reactor to
      avoid multiple Word types has no negative effect.
      It's value is "bit 11".

      Note: Replies to PSI_SO_FM_VREQ allow deducing the Word type used,
      so using this flag is not strictly necessary.




Ertl                      Expires May 26, 2012                 [Page 53]

Internet-Draft                     PSI                     November 2011


   Query Safety Sequence: PSI_SO_FM_SSREQ

      When this bit is set, the Reactor will send the Safety Sequences
      for the channels given in the sentence.  Because the sequence is
      not supposed to be known yet, it may only be used with Words of
      type Channel Number.  It's use is restricted to channels using
      Safety Sequence and may be sent at any time.  A channel using
      Safety Sequence MUST discard any progress through the sequence if
      this Option is received, and also cease operation and ensure
      safety if at all possible.
      It's value is "bit 10".


   Query channel type: PSI_SO_FM_CTREQ

      If this bit is set, the Reactor will send the types of the
      channels given in the sentence.  Because the channel details
      cannot be known yet, it may only be used with Words of type
      Channel Number.  The use of PSI_SO_FM_GODATA is not allowed in
      this sentence, since no data values can have been sent yet.  Use
      of PSI_SO_FM_GOSAFE is allowed.  It may be used with all channel
      types and may be sent at any time.
      It's value is "bit 9".


   Query the channel's data boundaries: PSI_SO_FM_DBREQ

      If this bit is set, the Reactor sends the minimum and maximum
      values that are meaningful to the channels listed in the sentence.
      This bit may be used with any Word type that contains a channel
      number, and may be sent to channels of all types and at any time.
      Even though it is expected that for most channels the boundaries
      will be given by the Word type, this query must be used because
      that is not necessarily the case.  Knowing the proper range is
      important for correctly calculating values to send, especially
      since a receiver may use any method for fitting the data received
      into it's storage (discarding the superfluous bits is suggested).
      It's value is "bit 8".


   Value request: PSI_SO_FM_VREQ

      If this bit is set, the Reactor will send the Current Values of
      the channels given in the sentence (for output channels, the value
      assigned last is sent).  Normally, it is used in sentences of type
      Channel Number, but it may be used with any type that contains a
      channel number.  It is valid for all channel types and may be sent
      at any time.



Ertl                      Expires May 26, 2012                 [Page 54]

Internet-Draft                     PSI                     November 2011


      It's value is "bit 7".


   Maximum message length information: PSI_SO_FM_MMLINFO

      This flag is valid only in conjunction with a Word of type
      PSI_Word_Node_Specification, that contains the maximum message
      length of the PSI Master.  A Reactor MUST NOT send messages larger
      than that to the PSI Master, but may send any size below.  The PSI
      Master MAY change this at any time during normal operation,
      usually as part of adapting to packet loss.  It then sends a
      message with this flag, and usually also the flag
      PSI_NO_FM_SENDACK set.  This way, and because the PSI Master
      controls the length of it's own messages, it is in full control of
      the maximum message sizes that are sent, and therefore the
      Reactors do not need to be reconfigured to adapt to new network
      conditions.
      The PSI Master's maximum message length SHOULD be around 1400
      octets, at least initially, to allow configuration information to
      be sent as complete as possible, but MAY become significantly
      larger and also smaller in response to network packet loss.
      This means that Words without fixed length, like vendor- and user-
      specific information, should be well below 1400 octets in length,
      because otherwise they may be truncated, or sending may abort with
      an error.  Don't be unnecessarily chatty! ;)
      It's value is "bit 6".


   Assignment of Group IDs: PSI_SO_FM_GIDSET

      This bit may only be used in conjunction with Words of type
      PSI_Word_Node_Specification, that contain the GIDs to be used.
      Multiple Words may be used to assign as many GIDs.  Any sentence
      having this flag set clears and replaces all GIDs assigned
      previously, if any.  Use of this flag in an empty sentence removes
      all assigned GIDs.  Execution must be acknowledged (see
      PSI_NO_TM_SENDACK in Section 3.7.5).  Use of this flag is
      optional.
      It's value is "bit 5".


   Additional assignment of Group IDs: PSI_SO_FM_GIDADD

      This bit may only be used in conjunction with Words of type
      PSI_Word_Node_Specification, that contain the GIDs to be added.
      Multiple Words may be used to add as many GIDs.  Any sentence
      having this flag set adds the GIDs listed to any GIDs that were
      assigned previously.  Execution must be acknowledged (see



Ertl                      Expires May 26, 2012                 [Page 55]

Internet-Draft                     PSI                     November 2011


      PSI_NO_TM_SENDACK in Section 3.7.5).  Because of duplicated
      packets and lost ACKs, duplicates may occur, so the receiver must
      be prepared to handle this.  These cases are no errors: the
      request must be acknowledged as if no duplicate had occurred.  Use
      of this flag is optional.
      It's value is "bit 4".


   Removal of Group IDs: PSI_SO_FM_GIDREM

      This bit may only be used in conjunction with Words of type
      PSI_Word_Node_Specification, that contain the GIDs to be removed.
      Multiple Words may be used to remove as many GIDs.  Any
      duplicates, if they were not weeded out already, must also be
      removed from the list.  Use of this flag in an empty sentence
      removes all assigned GIDs.  Execution must be acknowledged (see
      PSI_NO_TM_SENDACK in Section 3.7.5).  Because of duplicated
      packets and lost ACKs, requests to remove GIDs that are not
      assigned to the Reactor may occur, so it must be prepared to
      handle this.  These cases are not errors: the request must be
      acknowledged as if no duplicate had occurred.  Use of this flag is
      optional.
      It's value is "bit 3".


   Request to use Current Values: PSI_SO_FM_GODATA

      If this flag is set, and the channels listed are currently using
      Safe Values, they will start using the Current Values as soon as
      possible, usually after reception of the first value.  In any
      case, a channel MUST NOT start using Current Values if a timeout
      occurred, or if it has not actually received values, or the values
      received are not valid (anymore).  This flag may be used with any
      Word type containing a channel number, and at any time, but is
      restricted to Output and InOut channels.  If it is set in a
      sentence containing data Words, then the values received are
      applied immediately.  If the same sentence has the flag
      PSI_SO_FM_GOSAFE set, then that MUST be given precedence.
      PSI_NO_FM_GOSAFE, if set in this message or previously, overrides
      this flag, but does not clear it.  Therefore, PSI_SO_FM_GODATA is
      applied as soon as PSI_NO_FM_GODATA is received, unless it has
      been cleared meanwhile by PSI_SO_FM_GOSAFE or a timeout occurred.
      As an exception, channels using Safety Sequence MUST discard
      received data unless they are set to use Current Values.
      It's value is "bit 2".

      Note: because there is no guarantee that any message sent actually
      reaches the receiver, this flag SHOULD be repeated as long as it



Ertl                      Expires May 26, 2012                 [Page 56]

Internet-Draft                     PSI                     November 2011


      is supposed to be in effect.  This can easily be done by setting
      this flag in all sentences.  Alternatively, the channels status
      may be queried, or replies that can doubtlessly be attributed to
      requests having been sent in this same sentence may also be taken
      as acknowledgement.  Furthermore, the flag PSI_NO_FM_SENDACK may
      also be used.


   Request to use Safe Values: PSI_SO_FM_GOSAFE

      If this bit is set, all channels listed in this sentence MUST be
      switched to their respective Safe Values, regardless of the
      remaining content of the sentence or other Sentence Options.  This
      MUST only be reverted upon reception of PSI_SO_FM_GODATA.  This
      flag MUST be applied regardless of the state of the Reactor, even
      if the Reactor as a whole has already been set to use Safe Values.
      This means that when the Reactor gets set to use Current Values by
      use of PSI_NO_FM_GODATA, channels having received this flag
      continue using Safe Values until PSI_SO_FM_GODATA is sent to them.
      Channels using Safety Sequence MUST clear any progress made
      through their Safety Sequence, and cease operation or otherwise
      ensure safety if at all possible.  This flag MUST be used whenever
      a PSI Master cannot generate new values for a channel, for example
      if an Input channel that is used to generate the value ceases
      providing data.  It is valid for all channel types (Input channels
      ignore it) and may be sent at any time and combined with all other
      flags; if PSI_SO_FM_GODATA is set then that is ignored,
      PSI_SO_FM_GOSAFE always taking precedence.
      It's value is "bit 1".

      Note: because there is no guarantee that any message sent actually
      reaches the receiver, this flag must be repeated as long as it is
      supposed to be in effect.  This can easily be done by setting this
      flag in all sentences.  Alternatively, the channel's status may be
      queried, or the flag PSI_NO_FM_SENDACK may be used, so a
      correspondingly set PSI_NO_TM_ACK or PSI_NO_TM_NACK suffices.


   Assignment of new values: PSI_SO_FM_VSET

      This flag must only be used in sentences containing data Words and
      makes the Reactor assign the new values to the corresponding
      channels.  Except for channels using Safety Sequence, this applies
      regardless of the current state of the Reactor: the values are
      applied even if the Reactor or channels are set to use Safe
      Values.  As soon as these conditions are removed, the values are
      used as long as no timeout occurs.  Channels using Safety Sequence
      MUST discard any values sent to them unless they are set to use



Ertl                      Expires May 26, 2012                 [Page 57]

Internet-Draft                     PSI                     November 2011


      Current Values and have no other prohibitive states.  This flag is
      valid for Output and InOut channels only.
      It's value is "bit 0".


   Sentence Options for messages to the PSI Master:

   These Sentence Options are valid in messages sent to the PSI Master.
   Contrary to those coming from the PSI Master, and except for being
   combined with a channel number definition, they are mutually
   exclusive because they define the meaning of generic Words.

   Defines channel numbers to be 8 bit: PSI_SO_TM_CN8

      This bit defines the size of all channel numbers in the sentence
      to be 8 bit in size.  It may only be used in conjunction with
      Words actually containing channel numbers, and must not be
      combined with any other channel number definition.
      It's value is "bit 15".


   Defines channel numbers to be 16 bit: PSI_SO_TM_CN16

      This bit defines the size of all channel numbers in the sentence
      to be 16 bit in size.  It may only be used in conjunction with
      Words actually containing channel numbers, and must not be
      combined with any other channel number definition.
      It's value is "bit 14".


   Defines channel numbers to be 32 bit: PSI_SO_TM_CN32

      This bit defines the size of all channel numbers in the sentence
      to be 32 bit in size.  It may only be used in conjunction with
      Words actually containing channel numbers, and must not be
      combined with any other channel number definition.
      It's value is "bit 13".


   Words contain Data Type information: PSI_SO_TM_DTINFO

      This flag means that the Words of type
      PSI_Word_Channel_Specification in this sentence contain the data
      types used by the channels listed.  These need to be known before
      values can be sent or received.
      It's value is "bit 12".





Ertl                      Expires May 26, 2012                 [Page 58]

Internet-Draft                     PSI                     November 2011


   Words contain Channel Type information: PSI_SO_TM_CTINFO

      This flag means that the Words of type
      PSI_Word_Channel_Specification in this sentence contain the types
      of the channels listed.  These need to be known before values can
      be sent or received.
      It's value is "bit 11".


   Words contain data boundary information: PSI_SO_TM_DBINFO

      This flag means that the Words in this sentence contain the
      boundaries of the channels listed.  These should be known before
      values are sent or received.
      In order to prevent proliferation of Word types, the same types as
      used for data values are used.  Therefore for each channel, two
      data Words of the same type are sent consecutively within the same
      sentence, both containing the channel number.  The first Word
      contains the minimum value and the second one contains the maximum
      value in the value syllable.  The overhead created by sending the
      channel number a second time is tolerable because this kind of
      sentence is used only upon initialization of the Nexus and thus
      does not impact normal operation.
      Channels for which a range cannot be meaningfully defined are
      those using the string and MIME data types and possibly the opaque
      type, depending on the actual content of the opaque data.  These
      channels send the minimum and maximum data sizes inside two
      instances of the generic Channel Specification Word type.
      Channels using the MIME data type additionally send a Word of type
      String that contains all supported MIME types, one per line.
      It's value is "bit 10".


   Words contain Current Values: PSI_SO_TM_VINFO

      This flag means that the Words in this sentence contain the
      Current Values of the respective channels, of the appropriate data
      type.
      It's value is "bit 9".


   Maximum message length information: PSI_SO_TM_MMLINFO

      This flag is valid only in conjunction with a Word of type
      PSI_Word_Node_Specification, that contains the maximum message
      length of the Reactor.  A PSI Master MUST NOT send messages larger
      than that to the Reactor, but may send any size below.  Even
      though not normally necessary, the Reactor MAY change this during



Ertl                      Expires May 26, 2012                 [Page 59]

Internet-Draft                     PSI                     November 2011


      normal operation, usually after user configuration changes.  In
      that case, it MUST set the status PSI_RS_REREAD_ALL so the PSI
      Master will request the information anew.
      The maximum message length SHOULD be at least around 1400 octets,
      but MAY be significantly larger.
      It's value is "bit 8".


   Maximum refresh rate information: PSI_SO_TM_MRRINFO

      This flag is valid only in conjunction with a sentence containing
      one or two Words of type PSI_Word_Node_Specification, that contain
      the maximum refresh rates of the Reactor.  The first Word contains
      the maximum refresh rate for normal channels, while the second
      Word contains the maximum refresh rate for all channels using
      Safety Sequence, and is present only if the Reactor actually
      contains any such channels.
      The Reactor MAY change these during normal operation, usually
      after user configuration changes.  In that case, it MUST set the
      status PSI_RS_REREAD_ALL so the PSI Master will request the
      information anew.
      The maximum refresh rate for normal channels MUST be at least 100
      Hz, but MAY be significantly larger.  That of channels using
      Safety Sequence is unrestricted and depends solely on the needs of
      the respective channels.
      It's value is "bit 7".


   Word contains GID maximum: PSI_SO_TM_MGIDINFO

      This flag means that the Word of type PSI_Word_Node_Specification
      in this sentence contains the maximum number of GIDs that can be
      assigned to the Reactor.  At minimum, a Reactor should be able to
      be assigned 10 GIDs.
      It's value is "bit 6".


   Word contains Reactor type: PSI_SO_TM_RTINFO

      This flag means that the Word of type PSI_Word_Node_Specification
      in this sentence contains the type of the Reactor.  This needs to
      be known before values can be sent or received.
      It's value is "bit 5".








Ertl                      Expires May 26, 2012                 [Page 60]

Internet-Draft                     PSI                     November 2011


   Words contain Group identifiers: PSI_SO_TM_GIDINFO

      This flag means that the Words of type PSI_Word_Node_Specification
      in this sentence contain the GIDs that currently are assigned to
      the Reactor.  These need to be known before multicast messages can
      be sent.
      It's value is "bit 4".


   Words contain vendor specific information: PSI_SO_TM_VSINFO

      This flag means that the Words in this sentence contain vendor
      specific information; the sentence type is either PSI_ST_TM_WTP,
      PSI_ST_TM_WG32 or PSI_ST_TM_WMP.
      It's value is "bit 3".


   Words contain user specific information: PSI_SO_TM_USINFO

      This flag means that the Words in this sentence contain user
      specific information; the sentence type is either PSI_ST_TM_WTP,
      PSI_ST_TM_WG32 or PSI_ST_TM_WMP.
      It's value is "bit 2".

3.7.7.  Sentence types

   The sentence type defines the type of the Words that the sentence
   consists of.

   Sentence types for messages from a PSI Master:

   Sentence of boolean Data Words: PSI_ST_FM_WDB

      This type identifies a sentence consisting of Words of type
      PSI_Word_DatumB.
      It's value is (PSI_ST_BASE_FM+0).


   Sentence of signed 8 bit Data Words: PSI_ST_FM_WDS8

      This type identifies a sentence consisting of Words of type
      PSI_Word_DatumS8.
      It's value is (PSI_ST_BASE_FM+1).








Ertl                      Expires May 26, 2012                 [Page 61]

Internet-Draft                     PSI                     November 2011


   Sentence of unsigned 8 bit Data Words: PSI_ST_FM_WDU8

      This type identifies a sentence consisting of Words of type
      PSI_Word_DatumU8.
      It's value is (PSI_ST_BASE_FM+2).


   Sentence of signed 16 bit Data Words: PSI_ST_FM_WDS16

      This type identifies a sentence consisting of Words of type
      PSI_Word_DatumS16.
      It's value is (PSI_ST_BASE_FM+3).


   Sentence of unsigned 16 bit Data Words: PSI_ST_FM_WDU16

      This type identifies a sentence consisting of Words of type
      PSI_Word_DatumU16.
      It's value is (PSI_ST_BASE_FM+4).


   Sentence of signed 32 bit Data Words: PSI_ST_FM_WDS32

      This type identifies a sentence consisting of Words of type
      PSI_Word_DatumS32.
      It's value is (PSI_ST_BASE_FM+5).


   Sentence of unsigned 32 bit Data Words: PSI_ST_FM_WDU32

      This type identifies a sentence consisting of Words of type
      PSI_Word_DatumU32.
      It's value is (PSI_ST_BASE_FM+6).


   Sentence of signed 64 bit Data Words: PSI_ST_FM_WDS64

      This type identifies a sentence consisting of Words of type
      PSI_Word_DatumS64.
      It's value is (PSI_ST_BASE_FM+7).


   Sentence of unsigned 64 bit Data Words: PSI_ST_FM_WDU64

      This type identifies a sentence consisting of Words of type
      PSI_Word_DatumU64.
      It's value is (PSI_ST_BASE_FM+8).




Ertl                      Expires May 26, 2012                 [Page 62]

Internet-Draft                     PSI                     November 2011


   Sentence of floating-point Data Words: PSI_ST_FM_WDF32

      This type identifies a sentence consisting of Words of type
      PSI_Word_DatumF32.
      It's value is (PSI_ST_BASE_FM+9).


   Sentence of double floating-point Data Words: PSI_ST_FM_WDF64

      This type identifies a sentence consisting of Words of type
      PSI_Word_DatumF64.
      It's value is (PSI_ST_BASE_FM+10).


   Sentence of quadruple floating-point Data Words: PSI_ST_FM_WDF128

      This type identifies a sentence consisting of Words of type
      PSI_Word_DatumF128.
      It's value is (PSI_ST_BASE_FM+11).


   Sentence of fixed-point Data Words with 16 bit divisor:
   PSI_ST_FM_WDFIPOD16

      This type identifies a sentence consisting of Words of type
      PSI_Word_Datum_Fixedpoint_D16.
      It's value is (PSI_ST_BASE_FM+12).


   Sentence of fixed-point Data Words with 64 bit divisor:
   PSI_ST_FM_WDFIPOD64

      This type identifies a sentence consisting of Words of type
      PSI_Word_Datum_Fixedpoint_D64.
      It's value is (PSI_ST_BASE_FM+13).


   Sentence of one opaque Data Word with variable length: PSI_ST_FM_WDO

      This type identifies a sentence consisting of at most one Word
      with variable length of type PSI_Word_Data_Opaque.
      It's value is (PSI_ST_BASE_FM+14).


   Sentence of one text Data Word with variable length: PSI_ST_FM_WDT

      This type identifies a sentence consisting of at most one Word
      with variable length of type PSI_Word_Data_Text.



Ertl                      Expires May 26, 2012                 [Page 63]

Internet-Draft                     PSI                     November 2011


      It's value is (PSI_ST_BASE_FM+15).


   Sentence of one MIME Data Word with variable length: PSI_ST_FM_WDM

      This type identifies a sentence consisting of at most one Word
      with variable length of type PSI_Word_Data_MIME.
      It's value is (PSI_ST_BASE_FM+16).


   Sentence of time Data Words: PSI_ST_FM_W_T

      This type identifies a sentence consisting of Words of type
      PSI_Word_Data_Time.
      It's value is (PSI_ST_BASE_FM+17).


   Sentence of one Safety Sequence Word of variable length:
   PSI_ST_FM_WSS

      This type identifies a sentence consisting of at most one Word
      with variable length of type PSI_Word_Safety_Sequence.  The
      sentence length in this direction MUST be 1.
      It's value is (PSI_ST_BASE_FM+18).


   Sentence of Channel Numbers: PSI_ST_FM_WCN

      This type identifies a sentence consisting of Words of type
      PSI_Word_Channel_Number.
      It's value is (PSI_ST_BASE_FM+19).


   Sentence of generic Channel Specification Words: PSI_ST_FM_W_C_S

      This type identifies a sentence consisting of Words of type
      PSI_Word_Channel_Specification.
      It's value is (PSI_ST_BASE_FM+20).


   Sentence of one plain opaque Word with variable length:
   PSI_ST_FM_WOP

      This type identifies a sentence consisting of at most one Word
      with variable length of type PSI_Word_Opaque_Plain.
      It's value is (PSI_ST_BASE_FM+21).





Ertl                      Expires May 26, 2012                 [Page 64]

Internet-Draft                     PSI                     November 2011


   Sentence of one plain text Word with variable length: PSI_ST_FM_WTP

      This type identifies a sentence consisting of at most one Word
      with variable length of type PSI_Word_Text_Plain.
      It's value is (PSI_ST_BASE_FM+22).


   Sentence of one plain MIME Word with variable length: PSI_ST_FM_WMP

      This type identifies a sentence consisting of at most one Word
      with variable length of type PSI_Word_MIME_Plain.
      It's value is (PSI_ST_BASE_FM+23).


   Sentence of plain time Words: PSI_ST_FM_W_T_P

      This type identifies a sentence consisting of Words of type
      PSI_Word_Time_Plain.
      It's value is (PSI_ST_BASE_FM+24).


   Sentence of generic 32 bit Words: PSI_ST_FM_WG32

      This type identifies a sentence consisting of Words of type
      PSI_Word_Generic_32.
      It's value is (PSI_ST_BASE_FM+25).


   Sentence of generic Node Specification Words: PSI_ST_FM_W_N_S

      This type identifies a sentence consisting of Words of type
      PSI_Word_Node_Specification.
      It's value is (PSI_ST_BASE_FM+26).


   Sentence without content: PSI_ST_FM_WN

      This type identifies a sentence containing no Words.  It's main
      purpose is for debugging.
      It's value is (PSI_ST_BASE_FM+27).



   Sentence types for messages to a PSI Master:







Ertl                      Expires May 26, 2012                 [Page 65]

Internet-Draft                     PSI                     November 2011


   Sentence of boolean Data Words: PSI_ST_TM_WDB

      This type identifies a sentence consisting of Words of type
      PSI_Word_DatumB.
      It's value is (PSI_ST_BASE_TM+0).


   Sentence of signed 8 bit Data Words: PSI_ST_TM_WDS8

      This type identifies a sentence consisting of Words of type
      PSI_Word_DatumS8.
      It's value is (PSI_ST_BASE_TM+1).


   Sentence of unsigned 8 bit Data Words: PSI_ST_TM_WDU8

      This type identifies a sentence consisting of Words of type
      PSI_Word_DatumU8.
      It's value is (PSI_ST_BASE_TM+2).


   Sentence of signed 16 bit Data Words: PSI_ST_TM_WDS16

      This type identifies a sentence consisting of Words of type
      PSI_Word_DatumS16.
      It's value is (PSI_ST_BASE_TM+3).


   Sentence of unsigned 16 bit Data Words: PSI_ST_TM_WDU16

      This type identifies a sentence consisting of Words of type
      PSI_Word_DatumU16.
      It's value is (PSI_ST_BASE_TM+4).


   Sentence of signed 32 bit Data Words: PSI_ST_TM_WDS32

      This type identifies a sentence consisting of Words of type
      PSI_Word_DatumS32.
      It's value is (PSI_ST_BASE_TM+5).


   Sentence of unsigned 32 bit Data Words: PSI_ST_TM_WDU32

      This type identifies a sentence consisting of Words of type
      PSI_Word_DatumU32.
      It's value is (PSI_ST_BASE_TM+6).




Ertl                      Expires May 26, 2012                 [Page 66]

Internet-Draft                     PSI                     November 2011


   Sentence of signed 64 bit Data Words: PSI_ST_TM_WDS64

      This type identifies a sentence consisting of Words of type
      PSI_Word_DatumS64.
      It's value is (PSI_ST_BASE_TM+7).


   Sentence of unsigned 64 bit Data Words: PSI_ST_TM_WDU64

      This type identifies a sentence consisting of Words of type
      PSI_Word_DatumU64.
      It's value is (PSI_ST_BASE_TM+8).


   Sentence of floating-point Data Words: PSI_ST_TM_WDF32

      This type identifies a sentence consisting of Words of type
      PSI_Word_DatumF32.
      It's value is (PSI_ST_BASE_TM+9).


   Sentence of double floating-point Data Words: PSI_ST_TM_WDF64

      This type identifies a sentence consisting of Words of type
      PSI_Word_DatumF64.
      It's value is (PSI_ST_BASE_TM+10).


   Sentence of quadruple floating-point Data Words: PSI_ST_TM_WDF128

      This type identifies a sentence consisting of Words of type
      PSI_Word_DatumF128.
      It's value is (PSI_ST_BASE_TM+11).


   Sentence of fixed-point Data Words with 16 bit divisor:
   PSI_ST_TM_WDFIPOD16

      This type identifies a sentence consisting of Words of type
      PSI_Word_Datum_Fixedpoint_D16.
      It's value is (PSI_ST_BASE_TM+12).


   Sentence of fixed-point Data Words with 64 bit divisor:
   PSI_ST_TM_WDFIPOD64

      This type identifies a sentence consisting of Words of type
      PSI_Word_Datum_Fixedpoint_D64.



Ertl                      Expires May 26, 2012                 [Page 67]

Internet-Draft                     PSI                     November 2011


      It's value is (PSI_ST_BASE_TM+13).


   Sentence of one opaque Data Word with variable length: PSI_ST_TM_WDO

      This type identifies a sentence consisting of at most one Word
      with variable length of type PSI_Word_Data_Opaque.
      It's value is (PSI_ST_BASE_TM+14).


   Sentence of one text Data Word with variable length: PSI_ST_TM_WDT

      This type identifies a sentence consisting of at most one Word
      with variable length of type PSI_Word_Data_Text.
      It's value is (PSI_ST_BASE_TM+15).


   Sentence of one MIME Data Word with variable length: PSI_ST_TM_WDM

      This type identifies a sentence consisting of at most one Word
      with variable length of type PSI_Word_Data_MIME.
      It's value is (PSI_ST_BASE_TM+16).


   Sentence of time Data Words: PSI_ST_TM_W_T

      This type identifies a sentence consisting of Words of type
      PSI_Word_Data_Time.
      It's value is (PSI_ST_BASE_TM+17).


   Sentence of one Safety Sequence Word of variable length:
   PSI_ST_TM_WSS

      This type identifies a sentence consisting of at most one Word
      with variable length of type PSI_Word_Safety_Sequence.
      It's value is (PSI_ST_BASE_TM+18).


   Sentence of Channel Numbers: PSI_ST_TM_WCN

      This type identifies a sentence consisting of Words of type
      PSI_Word_Channel_Number.
      It's value is (PSI_ST_BASE_TM+19).







Ertl                      Expires May 26, 2012                 [Page 68]

Internet-Draft                     PSI                     November 2011


   Sentence of generic Channel Specification Words: PSI_ST_TM_W_C_S

      This type identifies a sentence consisting of Words of type
      PSI_Word_Channel_Specification.
      It's value is (PSI_ST_BASE_TM+20).


   Sentence of channel status Words: PSI_ST_TM_WCS

      This type identifies a sentence consisting of Words of type
      PSI_Word_Channel_Status.
      It's value is (PSI_ST_BASE_TM+21).


   Sentence of one plain opaque Word with variable length:
   PSI_ST_TM_WOP

      This type identifies a sentence consisting of at most one Word
      with variable length of type PSI_Word_Opaque_Plain.
      It's value is (PSI_ST_BASE_TM+22).


   Sentence of one plain text Word with variable length: PSI_ST_TM_WTP

      This type identifies a sentence consisting of at most one Word
      with variable length of type PSI_Word_Text_Plain.
      It's value is (PSI_ST_BASE_TM+23).


   Sentence of one plain MIME Word with variable length: PSI_ST_TM_WMP

      This type identifies a sentence consisting of at most one Word
      with variable length of type PSI_Word_MIME_Plain.
      It's value is (PSI_ST_BASE_TM+24).


   Sentence of plain time Words: PSI_ST_TM_W_T_P

      This type identifies a sentence consisting of Words of type
      PSI_Word_Time_Plain.
      It's value is (PSI_ST_BASE_TM+25).


   Sentence of generic 32 bit Words: PSI_ST_TM_WG32

      This type identifies a sentence consisting of Words of type
      PSI_Word_Generic_32.
      It's value is (PSI_ST_BASE_TM+26).



Ertl                      Expires May 26, 2012                 [Page 69]

Internet-Draft                     PSI                     November 2011


   Sentence of Channel Counts: PSI_ST_TM_WCC

      This type identifies a sentence consisting of Words of type
      PSI_Word_Channel_Count.
      It's value is (PSI_ST_BASE_TM+27).


   Sentence of generic Node Specification Words: PSI_ST_TM_W_N_S

      This type identifies a sentence consisting of Words of type
      PSI_Word_Node_Specification.
      It's value is (PSI_ST_BASE_TM+28).


   Sentence of one Reactor status Word of variable length:
   PSI_ST_TM_WRS

      This type identifies a sentence consisting of at most one Word
      with variable length of type PSI_Word_Reactor_Status.
      It's value is (PSI_ST_BASE_TM+29).


   Sentence without content: PSI_ST_TM_WN

      This type identifies a sentence containing no Words.  It's main
      purpose is for debugging.
      It's value is (PSI_ST_BASE_TM+30).


3.7.8.  Detailed Reactor Status

   This section describes the detailed status as sent via
   PSI_Word_Reactor_Status by the Reactor.

   Reactor status OK: PSI_RS_OK

      This constant means that there are no issues.  It must not be
      combined with others.
      It's value is 0.


   Reactor uses Safe Values due to lack of data: PSI_RS_ND_SAFE

      This constant means that the PSI Master has not yet sent a value
      for all channels, so the Reactor still uses Safe Values for these
      channels.  All other channels are already using the Current
      Values.
      It's value is 1.



Ertl                      Expires May 26, 2012                 [Page 70]

Internet-Draft                     PSI                     November 2011


   Reactor uses Safe Values due to a timeout: PSI_RS_TO_SAFE

      This constant means that no values have been received for too
      long, resulting in a timeout: the Reactor has switched to Safe
      Values.  The PSI Master must send PSI_NO_FM_GODATA to the Reactor
      to change this status.
      It's value is 2.


   Reactor uses Safe Values due to an overshoot: PSI_RS_OB_SAFE

      This constant means that values have been received that are
      outside a channel's boundaries: the Reactor has switched to Safe
      Values.  The PSI Master must send PSI_NO_FM_GODATA to the Reactor
      to change this status.
      It's value is 3.


   Reactor uses Safe Values due to request: PSI_RS_SET_SAFE

      This constant means that the PSI Master has requested the Reactor
      to switch it's channels to Safe Values (see PSI_NO_FM_GODATA).  If
      no new values arrive, a timeout will occur in addition.  The PSI
      Master must send PSI_NO_FM_GODATA to change this status.
      It's value is 4.


   Software error occurred: PSI_RS_SWFAIL

      This constant means that the Reactor has encountered a software
      problem that may affect it's functionality.  This does not include
      problems in channels.
      It's value is 5.


   Hardware error occurred: PSI_RS_HWFAIL

      This constant means that the Reactor has encountered a hardware
      problem that may affect it's functionality.  This does not include
      problems in channels.
      It's value is 6.


   Problem with some channels: PSI_RS_CHANNELS

      This constant means that one or more channel is faulty.  The PSI
      Master needs to query each channel's status to see which channels
      report which problems.



Ertl                      Expires May 26, 2012                 [Page 71]

Internet-Draft                     PSI                     November 2011


      It's value is 7.


   Overheat condition: PSI_RS_OVERHEAT

      This constant means that the Reactor has overheated and reduced
      function as much as possible.  If the condition is allowed to
      persist, the Reactor MAY optionally develop hardware damage or
      switch off, so communication may cease at any time.
      It's value is 8.


   PSI Master uses incorrect data types: PSI_RS_REREAD_DT

      At least one channel is being fed using an incorrect data type so
      the data cannot be used.  The PSI Master must correct the problem,
      possibly requiring (re-)reading of the data types.
      It's value is 9.


   Reactor configuration must be re-read: PSI_RS_REREAD_ALL

      This constant means that changes have been made to the Reactor
      that may have invalidated information previously queried, or the
      PSI Master seems to be using incorrect information, like sending
      data to invalid channels.  Therefore the Reactor has switched to
      Safe Values, and the PSI Master must re-read all information.
      This may occur, for example, when channels are added, removed or
      swapped.  As long as the PSI Master has not queried the data anew,
      no data are accepted.
      It's value is 10.

   Reactor is ignoring commands and data: PSI_RS_MASTER_IGNORED

      This constant indicates that this Reactor currently does not
      respond to commands sent by the querying PSI Master, and also does
      not apply data sent by it.  This happens whenever more than one
      PSI Master exists (see Section 2.7), but the Reactor is configured
      to react to less than all of them, or to ignore that specific PSI
      Master.  If the Reactor is configured to ignore the PSI Master but
      can hold it in it's list, it responds normally in all other
      respects so the PSI Master will still be able to display
      information about the Reactor.  If the Reactor's list does not
      have sufficient spaces to store the presence of this PSI Master,
      the Reactor will not send anything except when queried for status,
      which will contain this flag additionally to the status.
      It's value is "bit 11".




Ertl                      Expires May 26, 2012                 [Page 72]

Internet-Draft                     PSI                     November 2011


3.7.9.  Channel status

   This section describes channel status values.  They are binary
   constants intended to be put into the channel status bit field of the
   Word PSI_Word_Channel_Status.  If the status of a channel changes to
   anything non-OK, then the Reactor status must reflect this by adding
   PSI_RS_CHANNELS.  Also, if there is a change, the flag
   PSI_NO_TM_SUNCH must be cleared.

   Channel status OK: PSI_CS_OK

      If this flag is set, then the channel works normally.
      It's value is "bit 15".


   The channel uses Safe Value due to lack of data: PSI_CS_ND_SAFE

      If this flag is set, then the channel has not yet been fed a value
      and therefore is using it's Save Value.
      It's value is "bit 14".


   The channel uses Safe Value due to timeout: PSI_CS_TO_SAFE

      If this flag is set, then the channel has not been fed data for a
      while, so a timeout occurred and the channel has switched to it's
      Safe Value.
      It's value is "bit 13".


   The channel uses Safe Value due to value overshoot: PSI_CS_OB_SAFE

      If this flag is set, then the channel has been fed values outside
      it's boundaries, so it has switched to it's Safe Value.  It's
      value is "bit 12".


   The channel uses Safe Value due to request: PSI_CS_SET_SAFE

      If this flag is set, then the channel has been switched to it's
      Safe Value.  It's value is "bit 11".


   Software error: PSI_CS_SWFAIL

      If this flag is set, then the channel is faulty due to a software
      problem.
      It's value is "bit 10".



Ertl                      Expires May 26, 2012                 [Page 73]

Internet-Draft                     PSI                     November 2011


   Hardware error: PSI_CS_HWFAIL

      If this flag is set, then the channel is faulty due to a hardware
      problem.
      It's value is "bit 9".


   Overheat condition: PSI_CS_OVERHEAT

      If this flag is set, then the channel has overheated and reduced
      functionality as much as possible.  If the condition persists, the
      channel may develop hardware failure.
      It's value is "bit 8".


   Channel does not exist: PSI_CS_VIRTUAL

      If this flag is set, then the channel does not physically exist.
      This is no error: it merely indicates that no physical channel has
      been assigned to a logical one.
      It's value is "bit 7".


   Channel status unknown: PSI_CS_UNKNOWN

      If this flag is set, then the channel hardware has no way of
      checking it's functioning, so it's status is not known.  If this
      is the case, PSI_CS_OK MUST NOT be returned.
      It's value is "bit 6".

3.7.10.  Reactor types

   This section describes the constants for the different Reactor types.

   Output Reactor: PSI_RT_OUTPUT

      This constant means that the Reactor possesses only Output
      channels, not generating any data.  This is the most common
      Reactor type like dimmers single spots LASER systems, pyro
      effects, etc..  Output channels always allow reading of their
      Current Values.
      It's value is 0.


   Input Reactor: PSI_RT_INPUT

      This constant means that the Reactor possesses only Input
      channels, generating data but not consuming any.  Reactors of this



Ertl                      Expires May 26, 2012                 [Page 74]

Internet-Draft                     PSI                     November 2011


      kind include touch boards, fader panels, etc..
      It's value is 1.


   Combined Input and Output Reactor: PSI_RT_INOUT

      This constant means that the Reactor possesses both Input and
      Output channels.  Reactors of this type may be non-transparent
      bidirectional protocol converters, sensor/actor combinations,
      etc..  Output Reactors always allow reading back their values, so
      they do not belong to this type.  Reactors having only channels of
      type PSI_CT_NONE also do not belong to this type.
      It's value is 2.


   Reactor without function: PSI_RT_NONE

      This constant means that the Reactor possesses only channels of
      type PSI_CT_NONE or no channels at all.  Reactors of this type may
      be testing equipment like protocol analyzers that are able to
      connect to a PSI Master but do not generate or consume channel
      data.
      It's value is 3.

3.7.11.  Channel types

   This section describes the constants representing the channel types.

   Output channel: PSI_CT_OUTPUT

      This constant means that the channel consumes data and outputs
      them in some way.  Most channels are of this type, like dimmer
      channels or control channels of foggers.  Channels of this type
      always allow reading out their Current Values.
      It's value is 0.


   Input channel: PSI_CT_INPUT

      This constant means that the channel creates data, for example in
      a fader panel.
      It's value is 1.


   Combined Input- and Output channel: PSI_CT_INOUT

      This constant means that the channel both creates and consumes
      data.  Because it also outputs values, it MUST have a Safe Value



Ertl                      Expires May 26, 2012                 [Page 75]

Internet-Draft                     PSI                     November 2011


      that can be read by the PSI Master in the usual way.  Because pure
      Output channels always allow reading out their Current Values,
      they do not belong to this type.
      It's value is 2.


   Channel without function: PSI_CT_NONE

      This constant means that the channel has no function, and can
      neither consume nor create data.  This type may be used for
      testing; logical channels that are not assigned to a physical
      channels may also have this type.  Data sent to channels of this
      kind will be discarded, queries for values, etc. get ignored.
      It's value is 3.


   Channel using Safety Sequence: PSI_CT_SAFETY

      This constant means that the channel controls something that
      requires extra safety measures; erroneous changes must be avoided
      at nearly all costs.  This may be a pyro effect, a LASER
      controller, high-voltage effects, motors, etc..  It requires
      correct reception of a sequence of 32 bit values to accept data.
      The sequence required may be queried using PSI_SO_FM_SSREQ.  Any
      Reactor containing channels of this type MUST ensure safety if at
      all possible whenever it receives a query about it's properties
      (like data type and even vendor information), because that
      indicates that the PSI Master does not (anymore) know how to
      access that channel, and therefore whatever value it currently
      uses may be invalid and thus potentially dangerous.
      It's value is 4.

3.8.  Dynamics

   This section describes the dynamical behavior of PSI.  Only those
   components relevant to the discussion are looked at; for a complete
   list, refer to Section 3.

   Note that if a message requests information, the reply must be sent
   as soon as possible: the node should not wait for possible further
   requests that might allow conglomeration of replies.  However, if
   there already are replies that have not yet been sent, then the node
   may do such conglomeration.  In any case, the replies generated last
   MUST be placed behind the previous ones, so that the sequence will
   always be retained.  This is especially important if for some reason
   values for the same channel are put into the same message, since
   otherwise outdated values would be mistaken for the most recent ones.
   If the same request is received more than once, and the previous



Ertl                      Expires May 26, 2012                 [Page 76]

Internet-Draft                     PSI                     November 2011


   requests have not yet been processed, then only the most recent one
   needs to be processed.  However, a node must not wait to see if there
   may be duplicate requests.

   The periodic status inquiries are an exception to the above: the PSI
   Master may delay sending of these requests for some tenths of seconds
   if no other messages, to which the requests could be added, are ready
   to be sent.  However, the Reactors must still reply immediately.

3.8.1.  Discovery

   The use of Reactor-specific channel numbers and the resulting
   explicit addressing of individual Reactors necessitates that the PSI
   Master be informed about every single Reactor in the Nexus.  Since,
   however, the Reactors also do not know about the PSI Master, neither
   side can contact the other directly to create that knowledge.
   Because of that, the multicast mechanism is used.  All multicast
   traffic (including Groups (Section 2.1) and Clusters (Section 2.2))
   is sent to a single multicast group: for IPv6, this is the lowest
   unicast-prefix based multicast address available (see [RFC3306]).
   For IPv4, this cannot be used, because [RFC6034] explicitly forbids
   the use of private IP address ranges for this use, so instead the
   general multicast group 225.0.0.0 is used for IPv4.

   A PSI Master will continuously send messages of type
   PSI_MT_FM_DISCOVERY to that multicast group.  Between each Discovery
   message sent, there MUST be a delay.  The delay should default to
   between 1 to 5 seconds, but implementations MAY allow the user to
   change the setting: for a slow network, the delay may be increased,
   for example.
   Through reception of a Discovery message from the PSI Master,
   Reactors are informed of the existence of the PSI Master, and are
   told it's IN.  Thus the Reactors can identify the specific PSI Master
   in case there are more than one; because the PSI Master's IP address
   is delivered as well, it can be used for subsequent messages.

   Only after receiving such a Discovery message from a PSI Master a
   Reactor may send a Discovery, under the following conditions:

   o  there was no contact to that Master yet (new Master) or

   o  that Master did not reply (REACTOR_ACCEPTED) yet or

   o  contact to that Master has been lost (Timeout); received
      Discoveries do not prevent the timeout, but periodic status
      inquiries do.  This is MUST NOT be same timeout as for switching
      to Safe Values and the user MUST be able to set it independently.




Ertl                      Expires May 26, 2012                 [Page 77]

Internet-Draft                     PSI                     November 2011


   If any of these conditions is met, the Reactor MUST send a single
   message of type PSI_MT_TM_DISCOVERY.  This message is sent to the
   specific PSI Master as normal unicast.  Under no circumstances will a
   Reactor send discovery messages as anything but unicast.

   Whenever a PSI Master receives a Discovery message from a Reactor, it
   adds the Reactor to it's Nexus and acknowledges it by sending it a
   message containing at least one Node Section that has the flag
   PSI_NO_FM_REACTOR_ACCEPTED set (this MUST be set in the first Node
   Section for the respective Reactor).  By using the multicast type
   (sent to the same multicast group as the Discovery messages),
   multiple Reactors MAY be acknowledged using a single message.
   Additionally, all elements that are available during normal operation
   may be used as well, so the acknowledgement message can be used to
   request information or to send data.  Because the PSI Master needs to
   inform the new Reactor of it's maximum message length (using
   PSI_SO_FM_MMLINFO) before requesting data from the Reactor, this
   message lends itself well to doing so.
   It must be noted that immediately following a (re)start of a PSI
   Master, messages may get dropped, because the remaining Reactors that
   have not yet been acknowledged are still responding to all Discovery
   messages.  Therefore, an implementation may decide to only request
   information after most Reactors have already been acknowledged,
   defined by whatever system the implementor deems reasonable.  Because
   Reactors never send Discoveries by themselves, a PSI Master MAY
   decide to temporarily stop sending Discovery messages until it has
   sent acknowledgements to all Reactors it received Discoveries from,
   but MUST resume sending normally when it has done so.
   Network effects can make the PSI Master receive a Reactor's Discovery
   message after the Reactor has received an acknowledgement by the PSI
   Master.  Because the PSI Master can not know if the Reactor actually
   received the acknowledge or not, it must send an acknowledge whenever
   it receives a Discovery message.  The Reactor must therefore be
   prepared to handle this, for example by discarding previous or excess
   acknowledgements.

   The result is "at least once" semantics.  Every message is
   idempotent, so that the entire process can be restarted by either
   side at any time, while the number of (identical) messages received
   by either side has no influence on the outcome.

   Whenever a Reactor has not received any messages from the PSI Master
   (Discoveries and messages not addressing the specific Reactor do not
   count towards this, but periodic status inquiries addressed at the
   Reactor do), it MUST time out and respond to the next Discovery
   message from that PSI Master by sending a unicast Discovery message
   to it.  The timeout SHOULD be user-configurable and default to at
   least 30 seconds and at most two minutes.  It is different from the



Ertl                      Expires May 26, 2012                 [Page 78]

Internet-Draft                     PSI                     November 2011


   timeouts used for Safe Values.

   This way, all nodes can be relatively certain that, in case one gets
   restarted, the respective partner knows that the connection needs to
   be recreated.  It cannot be 100% reliably be ensured if one takes
   into account that restarts may get masked by certain combinations of
   cabling disconnects and duplicated, old packets, but even then there
   is no real problem, because the IN is unique.  If two or more
   Reactors receive swapped IP addresses after a restart, and the PSI
   Master erroneously sends messages to the wrong Reactor, this will be
   noticed by the receiving Reactor because it's IN does not match the
   TIN from the message.  In the simplest case, it will just ignore the
   entire message, so the PSI Master will not receive any replies and
   regard the Reactor as lost, as well as the Reactor timing that PSI
   Master out.  In any case it is ensured that no incorrect data are
   used.

   Reactors do not send a reply after receiving the acknowledgement from
   the PSI Master; they just cease sending Discovery messages.  This
   means that the PSI Master does not know if the Reactor has received
   the acknowledgement, or if it was disconnected or has failed.
   However, this information is automatically gathered by way of the
   periodic status inquiries (see Section 3.8.3).

   Because a Reactor might erroneously keep sending Discovery messages
   even after receiving acknowledgements, the PSI Master SHOULD
   implement a user-configurable maximum of ignored acknowledgements,
   and should communicate the details to the user so that the Reactor
   can be inspected.

3.8.2.  Initialization

   After Discovery, Initialization occurs.  It is used to query
   information about the Reactor that has been discovered.
   Every Reactor is characterized by a number of properties describing
   it's function and uses.  The PSI Master sends specific queries to the
   Reactor to collect this information.  All such information may be
   queried in a single message, or distributed across several messages,
   possibly containing data sent to the Reactor.  The sequence of the
   queries may be chosen arbitrarily, as well as whether to wait for
   each reply before sending the next query or not.  Also, as described
   in Section 3.7, some need not be queried in all cases.  The
   individual queries are:


   1.   Reactor type





Ertl                      Expires May 26, 2012                 [Page 79]

Internet-Draft                     PSI                     November 2011


   2.   Reactor status

   3.   vendor specific information

   4.   user specific information

   5.   channel counts

   6.   channel types

   7.   data formats

   8.   data boundaries

   9.   maximum message length

   10.  maximum refresh rate

   11.  channel status

   12.  GID assignments


   Especially with Reactors having many channels, replies to one or more
   queries may need to be split into multiple messages.  It is within
   the Reactor's discretion to decide in which way to do this, so parts
   of different replies may be conglomerated into a single message.  The
   PSI Master must thus be prepared to re-request any part of the
   required information that may have been lost in transit.

   Reactors MUST reply to all of these requests, but may decide whether
   to combine multiple replies or not.

   When all information is known to the PSI Master, Initialization is
   complete.

3.8.3.  Normal Operation

   Periodic status inquiries  In order to always be informed about the
      status of the Reactors in the Nexus, the PSI Master must query
      their status periodically.  The interval SHOULD be configurable,
      but SHOULD NOT be made smaller than about 1 Hz, because the
      information is evaluated by the user, resulting in much larger
      latency.  This way, the network is not overly burdened by these
      inquiries.  Since these queries can easily be added to messages
      that need to be sent anyway, the overhead can be further reduced.
      Since nearly all Reactors are expected to receive data or queries
      at a much smaller interval, almost no extra messages will need to



Ertl                      Expires May 26, 2012                 [Page 80]

Internet-Draft                     PSI                     November 2011


      be sent to accommodate this.  On the other hand, a Reactor MUST
      NOT delay replies to status inquiries in order to combine them
      with another message, but MAY do so, within length limits, if
      there is a message pending for sending already.  This may be
      convenient if pre-arbitration (not discussed in this memo) is
      employed to schedule messages sent to the PSI Master.  If no
      message is pending for sending, a dedicated message must be sent.


   Data messages  This is the most common form of communication, as data
      messages are the core intention of this protocol.  The goal is to
      reach the highest refresh rate possible, so data must be sent as
      soon as possible.  Especially, a PSI Master must not wait for data
      to be generated before sending what has already been generated.
      This does however not mean that a message must be sent for each
      channel of a Reactor.  Actually, a PSI Master must strive to
      minimize the number of messages sent by packing data for as many
      channels as possible into every message, for example by arranging
      data generation or consumption in a way that ensures data can be
      sent and received at any time.
      However, the maximum message length may be dynamically adjusted to
      reach the lowest net data loss if the network proves unreliable.
      In that case, the PSI Master may distribute data for any Reactor's
      channels across multiple messages, but keeping identical data
      types logically ordered is still sensible.  This is because using
      a message of only a single Word type saves the overhead of
      requiring multiple Sentence headers, reducing message size and
      therefore probability for errors, as well as bandwidth needed.  In
      such a case, multicast messages also might deliberately contain
      data for fewer Reactors than it normally would, in favor of fewer
      errors.  Loss feedback methods are not discussed as part of this
      memo, however.  An implementation MAY allow the user to set a
      maximum message length that best suits their network.
      A data message itself does not require a reply, but may be
      combined with requests.


   Data requests  If no pre-arbitration (not discussed in this memo) is
      performed, data generated by Input and InOut Reactors must be
      explicitly requested by the PSI Master (polling).  As before, the
      objective is a refresh rate that is as high as possible.
      Therefore it is imperative to request data from all channels of
      any specific Reactor at once.  This way ensures that network
      latency is experienced only once per direction and Reactor.  As
      with data messages, an unreliable network may make splitting
      requests, and subsequently, replies, into multiple messages in
      favor of smaller size preferable.
      Data requests MUST always be replied to immediately, but MAY be



Ertl                      Expires May 26, 2012                 [Page 81]

Internet-Draft                     PSI                     November 2011


      combined with other messages if such messages are about to be sent
      already.  Waiting for additional requests is not allowed.  An
      implementation MAY allow the user to set a maximum message length
      that best suits their network.


   Information messages  An information message includes anything that
      are not channel data, like data types or GID assignments.  They
      are therefore not merely "informational", as the name might
      suggest.  Information messages usually appear during
      initialization of the Nexus, and therefore their impact on network
      performance is small during normal operation.  They do not require
      acknowledgement, but may be combined with requests.  They must be
      sent immediately, waiting for more information to be requested is
      not allowed.


   Information requests  This includes anything that is neither a data
      request nor a periodic status inquiry, like requests for data
      types, data boundaries or Reactor type.  They appear mostly during
      Nexus initialization, which the main cause of information
      messages, rendering their influence on network performance small.
      They may be combined with other information or data messages, but
      replies still MUST be sent immediately.  Therefore, it is
      advisable to send all information requests for any specific
      Reactor that will only generate minimal reply data within a single
      message, to reduce the number of messages that have to be sent.
      Things like Reactor type, Reactor status, channel counts and
      maximum message length are good candidates for this.  However, if
      the network is very unreliable, a higher number of smaller
      messages may be preferable even for this kind of messages.


   Lost nodes  Whenever a node does not receive replies (like periodic
      status inquiries) after 40 attempts, then the node is considered
      to be "lost".  This will happen if the node has failed, is turned
      off or disconnected from the network.  This applies to both
      Reactors and PSI Masters.


   Timeouts  Whenever a Reactor does not receive data messages from the
      PSI Master, it MUST switch all channels to Safe Values.  The time
      used for the timeout MUST be chosen according to the potential
      harm caused by the most dangerous channel of the Reactor, but
      SHOULD NOT default to than ten seconds in any case.  For dimmers,
      for example, this timeout is not critical, as they might cause
      fire only after some minutes, if at all.  A LASER unit, especially
      if it does audience scanning, is much more critical, so the



Ertl                      Expires May 26, 2012                 [Page 82]

Internet-Draft                     PSI                     November 2011


      timeout time must follow local safety regulations unless other
      measures are put into place.  This value therefore MUST be user
      configurable.
      A second timeout is used for values received using ACKed mode,
      because these values are usually intended to stay much longer.
      This value, too, MUST be user configurable, and the user may
      disable it entirely.  It should default to one minute.
      Additionally, for ACKed mode, the user may select that the timeout
      does not time out when status inquiries are received, and SHOULD
      also be able to disable the timeout entirely.

      If a single channel doesn't receive values anymore, then it, too,
      must switch to it's Safe Value just like an entire Reactor.  This
      also applies to channels using the Safety Sequence, that MUST be
      cancelled upon timeout.

      Like any other channel, a channel using Safety Sequence times out
      if it does not receive new values.  However, contrary to any other
      channel, this status is normal for an inactive channel using
      Safety Sequence: data for such channels needs to only be sent when
      the channel's value is supposed to change to or remain as anything
      possibly non-safe.  Upon timeout, such a channel MUST therefore
      immediately cease operation and ensure safety if at all possible.
      Only correctly received and matching parts of the Safety Sequence
      keep it from timing out.

      If a PSI Master doesn't receive values from an Input or InOut
      channel or Reactor anymore, then it SHOULD set all channels that
      are controlled partially or in full by those channels to use Safe
      Values, especially if they use the Safety Sequence.  In any case,
      use of Input or InOut channels to control safety-critical channels
      is not recommended, as values may be kept longer than they are
      valid.  The times and configuration for both modes are defined
      just like those for Reactors.

4.  Summary of operation

   To provide an overview of the workings of the PSI, this section
   describes a minimal subset that will result in a system that will do
   discovery and communication between one PSI Master and any number of
   Reactors, using a single data type only.  No advanced functionality
   like Groups is included, nor is handling of disconnection or lost
   nodes.  Maximum message lengths can be hardcoded at the implementor's
   discretion.  Features adding reliability, safety or avoidance of load
   peaks are mostly omitted as well, so this simplistic version will
   likely only work properly with a handful of connected Reactors.  It
   is intended to be used as a starting point to become familiar with
   the system; all the missing features can be added later.



Ertl                      Expires May 26, 2012                 [Page 83]

Internet-Draft                     PSI                     November 2011


4.1.  PSI Master

   After starting up fully, the PSI Master begins sending Discovery
   messages to the Discovery multicast group (see Section 3.8.1).
   Whenever it receives a Discovery message from a Reactor, it looks up
   the Reactor in it's list, and adds it's IN and IP address if it does
   not yet have an entry.  In any case, it marks the Reactor as "new",
   and acknowledges it by sending it a message with the
   PSI_NO_FM_REACTOR_ACCEPTED flag set in the node header (see
   Section 3.5.2).  That message need not contain any further content,
   so no sentence header exists.
   Next, the PSI Master sends a message querying the Reactor for it's
   Reactor type and channel counts (see Section 3.8.2), using the flags
   PSI_NO_FM_RTREQ and PSI_NO_FM_CCREQ in the node header.  After
   receiving the reply, the PSI Master queries the Reactor for it's
   channel types and data types, using PSI_NO_FM_CTREQ and
   PSI_NO_FM_DTREQ, respectively.
   When these are known, the Reactor is initialized and can be used.  In
   Redundancy Mode, the PSI Master will send several messages per second
   to the Reactor, containing the data it is supposed to use.  The
   sentence type to be used is the one that was received in reply to the
   PSI_NO_FM_DTREQ flag; because the example Reactor (see below) expects
   PSI_Word_DatumU8, that will be PSI_ST_FM_WDU8.  To tell the Reactor
   that it new values shall be set, the PSI Master sets the
   PSI_SO_FM_VSET flag in the sentence header (see Section 3.5.3).

   Note that the PSI Master will never cease sending Discovery messages,
   so Reactors can be added at any time and immediately become usable
   without user interaction.

4.2.  Reactor

   Upon startup, a Reactor joins the Discovery multicast group (see
   Section 3.8.1), so that it can keep track of all PSI Masters within
   the Nexus.  Whenever it receives a Discovery message, it will look up
   the sending PSI Master in this list.  If the PSI Master is not in the
   list, it's IP address and IN are added the PSI Master is marked as
   new.  In this case, or if the PSI Master already is in the list and
   it's status is "new", the Reactor will send a single Discovery
   message in reply.  If the PSI Master's status is not "new", then no
   action will be taken.
   When the Reactor receives an acknowledgement message, it looks up the
   sending PSI Master in it's list and changes it's status to
   "acknowledged".  As mentioned above, it will not react to Discovery
   messages from that PSI Master afterwards.
   The Reactor will then receive queries for Reactor type and channel
   counts (see Section 3.8.2), and then for it's channel types and data
   formats.  The most common Reactor type, Output, will send a sentence



Ertl                      Expires May 26, 2012                 [Page 84]

Internet-Draft                     PSI                     November 2011


   of type PSI_ST_TM_W_N_S with the flag PSI_SO_TM_RTINFO set in the
   sentence header (see Section 3.5.3), containing a single Word of type
   PSI_Word_Node_Specification with the "node specification" set to
   PSI_RT_OUTPUT.  On the other hand, a sentence of type PSI_ST_TM_WCC
   with a single word of type PSI_Word_Channel_Count conveys the channel
   counts (one Output, no InOut and no Input for example).
   In reply to the channel type request, a sentence of type
   PSI_ST_TM_W_C_S with the flag PSI_SO_TM_CTINFO set is sent that
   contains as many words of type PSI_Word_Channel_Specification as
   there are channels.  In this example, there will be a single word,
   containing channel number 0 and the "channel specification" set to
   PSI_CT_OUTPUT.  Because there only is a single channel, 8 bit suffice
   for the channel number size, so the flag PSI_SO_TM_CN8 is set.
   Setting the proper flag for the channel number size is required so
   that the receiver can correctly calculate the number of words from
   the sentence length.
   Finally, in reply to the request for the data types, the Reactor
   sends a sentence of type PSI_ST_TM_W_C_S with the flag
   PSI_SO_TM_DTINFO set.  The example Reactor's Output channel expects
   to be fed PSI_Word_DatumU8 from the master, so it sets the "channel
   specification" to PSI_ST_FM_WDU8.

5.  Routing Considerations

   In normal environments, the presence of routers is neither required
   nor recommended.  If routers are employed, this protocol's reliance
   on multicasts for specific functions must be kept in mind.
   In any case, the PSI is not intended to be used directly on the
   internet, as it lacks congestion control and similar features.

6.  Security Considerations

   This protocol is intended for use in a tightly controlled environment
   without publicly accessible connection points only.  If a connection
   to external networks like the Internet exists, it is expected to be
   protected by appropriate measures like firewalling, that block all
   PSI related traffic in both directions.  This assumption is
   reasonable given that the control wiring (rigging) is done outside of
   the audience's reach, and it may be assumed that the personnel with
   access to the rigging is reasonably trusted.  Likewise, operations
   using this type of installation have no need for external
   connectivity on the production devices.
   Similarly, the environment described is a low-risk target that would
   neither yield sensitive information when penetrated nor allow
   significant damage to be dealt when taken over or sabotaged.
   Additionally, implementing security measures, even as simple as plain
   text passwords, would impair quick installation, exchanging of
   devices and automatic discovery, that are central features of the



Ertl                      Expires May 26, 2012                 [Page 85]

Internet-Draft                     PSI                     November 2011


   PSI.  The cost of adding such security measures would therefore be
   unacceptably high compared to the rather low risk of attacks.
   Therefore, no provisions are made for confidentiality, authentication
   or other security measures.  An attacker might overflow the Reactor's
   list of PSI Masters by posing as more PSI Masters than it can hold.
   This requires reception of the Discovery messages however, so due to
   the routing restrictions listed in Section 5 the attacker would
   normally need to be situated on the same network.
   Should this protocol be required to span an unsafe network, existing
   security technologies like IPSec must be used.  Depending on the
   actual security technology employed, the routing considerations in
   Section 5 may or may not apply in this case.

   While the Safety Sequence capability of the PSI requires an attacker
   to be able to receive messages in order to maliciously activate the
   devices, it is not intended to safeguard against attacks; it is meant
   to protect against transmission errors, hardware or software failure,
   and misconfiguration.  It is further noted that current controllers
   for this application may, in theory, be compromised as well, though
   the general availability of compatible networking devices, that is
   one of the strengths of this protocol, and the expected proliferation
   of unobserved connection points creates a much easier target than the
   comparatively direct wiring of a conventional controller.

   In addition, the MIME handling capabilities of a PSI implementation
   are in theory exposed to the same risks as an email client handling
   the same types.  An attacker could send messages containing fake VSI
   replies containing malicious MIME content, if they know the IN and
   address of at least one node.  However, given that disruption can
   likely be achieved more easily, and also that MIME capabilities will
   be much more limited in a PSI implementation, and finally that the
   potential gain of compromising even the PSI Master is rather low,
   this does not seem to be a likely occurrence.

7.  IANA Considerations

   This protocol requires the assignment of two port numbers: one for
   the default PSI Master discovery reception port and one for the
   Reactor discovery reception port.  Two distinct ports are necessary
   so that both PSI Master and Reactor may run as separate applications
   on the same IP address.

   The ports assigned must be above 1023 so that the PSI does not
   require special privileges to be used.  While only UDP is used on the
   Reactor side, the corresponding TCP port might be assigned as well so
   that the management / control protocol that may be created at a later
   date will not require a new assignment.  The inter-master
   communication runs across TCP so this port is required.  Currently,



Ertl                      Expires May 26, 2012                 [Page 86]

Internet-Draft                     PSI                     November 2011


   ports 7911 (short name: PSI\Reactor, long name: Protocol for Stage
   Illumination (Reactor)) and 4919 (short name: PSI\Master, long name:
   Protocol for Stage Illumination (Master)) are used.

   Additionally, for IPv6, the lowest-numbered unicast-prefix-based
   multicast group as per RFC3306 is used for discoveries, group and
   cluster messages, while with IPv4, the multicast group 225.0.0.0 is
   used for that purpose.  It may be desirable to assign dedicated
   multicast groups instead.

8.  References

8.1.  Normative References

   [CORBA-CDR]  Object Management Group, OMG., "Common Object Request
                Broker Architecture (CORBA) Specification, Version 3.1 -
                Part 2: CORBA Interoperability, section 9.3: CDR
                Transfer Syntax", January 2008.

   [RFC2045]    Freed, N. and N. Borenstein, "Multipurpose Internet Mail
                Extensions (MIME) Part One: Format of Internet Message
                Bodies", RFC 2045, November 1996.

   [RFC2119]    Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
                Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC3306]    Haberman, B. and D. Thaler, "Unicast-Prefix-based IPv6
                Multicast Addresses", RFC 3306, August 2002.

   [RFC3629]    Yergeau, F., "UTF-8, a transformation format of ISO
                10646", STD 63, RFC 3629, November 2003.

8.2.  Informative References

   [DMX512-A]   ESTA, ESTA., "Entertainment Technology - USITT DMX512-A
                - Asynchronous Serial Digital Data Transmission Standard
                for Controlling Lighting Equipment and Accessories",
                2004.

   [RFC4506]    Eisler, M., "XDR: External Data Representation
                Standard", STD 67, RFC 4506, May 2006.

   [RFC6034]    Thaler, D., "Unicast-Prefix-Based IPv4 Multicast
                Addresses", RFC 6034, October 2010.

   [TAO]        Schmidt, D., "The Ace Orb Home Page", June 2007,
                <http://www.cs.wustl.edu/~schmidt/TAO.html>.




Ertl                      Expires May 26, 2012                 [Page 87]

Internet-Draft                     PSI                     November 2011


Author's Address

   Marcus Ertl
   An Peschbenden 13
   47906 Kempen, NRW
   DE

   EMail: marcus.ertl@gmx.net











































Ertl                      Expires May 26, 2012                 [Page 88]

