


Network Working Group                                       M. Boucadair
Internet-Draft                                              C. Jacquenet
Intended status: Informational                            France Telecom
Expires: August 22, 2013                               February 18, 2013


     Large scale Measurement of Access network Performance (LMAP):
      Requirements and Issues from a Network Provider Perspective
                 draft-boucadair-lmap-considerations-00

Abstract

   This document raises several points related to the ongoing LMAP
   (Large scale Measurement of Access network Performance) effort.  The
   goal is to contribute to define a scope for LMAP and its expected
   contribution.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 22, 2013.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.



Boucadair & Jacquenet    Expires August 22, 2013                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft            LMAP: Considerations             February 2013


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Discussion  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
     2.1.  Service-Specific Measurement  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
     2.2.  Distorting Measurement Results  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
     2.3.  On the Impact of Policies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
     2.4.  Classes of Service  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
     2.5.  Pending Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   3.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   4.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   5.  Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   6.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8





































Boucadair & Jacquenet    Expires August 22, 2013                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft            LMAP: Considerations             February 2013


1.  Introduction

   Service Assurance & Fulfilment is a critical component in the service
   management environment.  Within ISP organizations, dedicated
   organizational and functional structures are implemented to
   efficiently monitor and assess the overall quality of deployed
   services and also the service quality as perceived by end-users.

   As such, appropriate actions can be taken to solve encountered
   problems and put any disrupted service back to normal operation.
   Various tools (e.g., probes, reporting tools, etc.) are deployed to
   continuously provide feedback on the status of running services and
   notify managers about operational issues.

   For the sake of efficient day-to-day operations, an ISP should
   implement the Service Fulfilment functions that are responsible for
   checking if the services delivered to the users are consistent with
   what has been subscribed and possibly negotiated.  These functions
   may also be used as inputs to Service Assurance related functions.

   The ISP should be able to continuously (preferably in real-time)
   measure and control the level of quality associated to the services
   delivered to its customers.  Indeed, network anomalies such as node
   outage, link failures, routing disruption and the subsequent overall
   service performance degradation should be dynamically reported to
   appropriate management structures (like a Network Operations Center).

   Ideally, any issue should be solved (or at least detected and handled
   as quick as possible) before receiving the complaints from customers.
   Improvement of current practices should be investigated to enhance
   the quality of experience as perceived by end-users and also to speed
   up repair processes whenever a network or service anomaly is
   detected.

   Within this context, the introduction of a high level of automation
   in the global service delivery and operation chains is promising.
   This does not mean zero-fault networking: automation is rather meant
   to optimize communication between the different actors of the service
   delivery chain and also to guarantee the overall consistency between
   the different management tools.

   Customers should have the ability to check the fulfilment of the
   Connectivity Provisioning Profile (CPP,
   [I-D.boucadair-connectivity-provisioning-profile]) they have
   subscribed to (and possibly negotiated with the service provider).
   They could thus evaluate how the Service Provider has delivered the
   service as a function of what has been defined in the service
   agreement.  Customer- or service-specific indicators and related



Boucadair & Jacquenet    Expires August 22, 2013                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft            LMAP: Considerations             February 2013


   performance metrics should be accessed by customers so that they can
   appreciate the level of quality associated to the services they have
   subscribed to.  These data should be updated on a regular basis to
   adequately reflect the actual status of any service.  These
   indicators (including a combination thereof) should be described and
   listed in the agreement (see Section 2.13 of
   [I-D.boucadair-connectivity-provisioning-profile]).

   The Large scale Measurement of Access network Performance (LMAP)
   effort can be defined as a tool supported by the Service Assurance
   functional block provided to customers to assess whether the services
   they have subscribed comply with what has been defined in the service
   level agreement (including the technical parameters exposed in a CPP
   template, for example).

   As discussed in [I-D.boucadair-connectivity-provisioning-profile],
   performance metrics are not the only relevant indicators to
   characterize the connectivity service delivered to the customer;
   other important technical clauses (e.g., reachability scope, traffic
   conformance, availability, etc.) need also to be taken into account.

   Providing customers with tools that can help them better characterize
   the level of quality associated to the delivery of any service (or a
   combination thereof) they have subscribed to is likely to enhance
   their overall quality of experience.  As a consequence, such tools
   would also optimize the overall efficiency of service operation
   (e.g., by reducing the number of calls placed to online support
   whenever a problem is pro-actively reported to the customer).

   This document discusses several questions to be considered when
   designing such tools.

   This document makes use of the terms defined in
   [I-D.morton-ippm-lmap-path].


2.  Discussion

2.1.  Service-Specific Measurement

   Various service offerings (e.g., IPTV, VoD, Internet, VoIP, etc.) can
   be delivered to the same customer.  All these services rely upon
   devices that are involved the forwarding of the corresponding
   service-specific traffic.

   These services are not restricted to the basic IP connectivity
   service but also include advanced features.  The technical clauses
   that document the IP connectivity service component of these services



Boucadair & Jacquenet    Expires August 22, 2013                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft            LMAP: Considerations             February 2013


   may vary one from the other (e.g., a global reachability can be
   provided for the Internet service while IP connectivity service is
   restricted to the first SBE/DBE (Session Border Element/Data Border
   Element) for VoIP services.

   Furthermore, some of these services may be delivered over dedicated
   "virtual" channels (e.g., distinct VCs or addresses can be used for
   each service).

   Assessing whether the delivered service complies with what has been
   subscribed by the customer or not suggests that measurement actions
   should be specific to the communication facilities (forwarding paths,
   virtual channels, tunnels, etc.) used to deliver the service to the
   customer.

2.2.  Distorting Measurement Results

   Some services may rely on several components provided by distinct
   administrative entities.  For instance, the DNS service may not be
   provided by the same operator that provides the IP connectivity.  The
   level of quality associated to the delivery of a service may
   therefore be affected (e.g., because DNS resolution takes longer than
   expected) even if traffic performance clauses are honored by the
   network provider.

   The LMAP system should be designed to accommodate such deployment
   scenario.

2.3.  On the Impact of Policies

   Issues can be experienced when a customer tries to reach a subset of
   destinations.  These issues may not be necessarily due to performance
   degradation in the local network but to some policies enforced in the
   destination networks, at the risk of being unable to deliver the
   service to some networks (e.g., some government contents cannot be
   accessed from some networks, because of a security policy enforced by
   the government).

   The measurement system should be designed to accommodate such
   contexts.

2.4.  Classes of Service

   Prioritization is used to deliver some services; as such,
   measurements should be bound to the QoS class used for a given
   service.

   In some networks, DSCP marking inheritance mechanisms are used to



Boucadair & Jacquenet    Expires August 22, 2013                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft            LMAP: Considerations             February 2013


   make sure customers cannot injects traffic that belongs to an
   unauthorized or unsupported class of service.  The proposed
   measurement framework should be designed to handle such designs.

2.5.  Pending Questions

   Additional considerations should be taken into account as per the
   following questions:
   Q1:   How to determine the measurement scope?  How to characterize a
         measurement scope?
   Q2:   Should inter-domain measurement be in the scope?
   Q3:   If so, which inter-domain paths should be used to conduct
         measurement campaigns?  Paths used for measurement may not be
         those used to forward service data.
   Q4:   Which metrics to use?  How contributing agents negotiate the
         metric to be used?  What measurement methodology (e.g.,
         frequency of measurement requests)?  What methodology to
         aggregate results?  What approach to follow if a metric is not
         returned from a given network segment?  How to accommodate the
         use of metrics that may not be supported by all devices along
         the whole forwarding path?
   Q5:   How measurement and testing methodology are shared between
         involved parties (e.g., between two service providers)?  Should
         respective responsibilities be negotiated?
   Q6:   How to ensure time synchronization?
   Q7:   How can a measurement system dynamically discover the measuring
         entities of a single domain?  Across several domains?
   Q8:   How to detect a network is LMAP-compliant?  How to configure a
         LMAP client with LMAP server information?
   Q9:   How to guarantee the accuracy of collected data?
   Q10:  How to control access to measurement results?  How to prevent
         revealing measurement results to external parties?
   Q11:  How to map collected data with technical clauses included in a
         contract/agreement (e.g., CPP)?
   Q12:  Flash crowd issues: to what extent measurement traffic can
         impact the delivered service during a crisis (e.g., an overload
         situation in some regions of the LMAP domain, where a LMAP
         domain is an administrative entity that is composed of LMAP-
         capable nodes operated by a single structure)?
   Q13:  How to make sure that the entities involved in measurement do
         not dramatically affect the accuracy of the measurement (as per
         Heisenberg principle)?  Which procedure to apply to control the
         reliability of LMAP agents?
   Q14:  How to make sure measurement data is not impacted by the home
         network itself or the machine embedding the measurement agent?






Boucadair & Jacquenet    Expires August 22, 2013                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft            LMAP: Considerations             February 2013


   Q15:  How can a network provider instruct a LMAP agent to hold its
         requests to prevent network congestion situations (e.g., to
         avoid link overload)?
   Q16:  How to make sure measurement data accurately reflect the
         network performance and not the policies enforced in that
         network?
   Q17:  The LMAP system can be used to assess the level of delivered
         connectivity service to customers?  The system can be embedded
         in robots enabled in the access segment to emulate the behavior
         of connected device.  How LMAP can accommodate such deployment
         use case?
   Q18:  To what extent conducting a set of measurement actions at T0
         will reelect the actual traffic performance to be experienced
         when invoking the subscribed service?
   Q19:  How path diversity impacts measurements?
   Q20:  How the system is designed to ensure topology hiding?


3.  Security Considerations

   TBC.


4.  IANA Considerations

   This document does not require any action from IANA.


5.  Acknowledgments

   TBC.


6.  Informative References

   [I-D.boucadair-connectivity-provisioning-profile]
              Boucadair, M., Jacquenet, C., and N. Wang, "IP/MPLS
              Connectivity Provisioning Profile",
              draft-boucadair-connectivity-provisioning-profile-02 (work
              in progress), September 2012.

   [I-D.morton-ippm-lmap-path]
              Bagnulo, M., Burbridge, T., Crawford, S., Eardley, P., and
              A. Morton, "A Reference Path and Measurement Points for
              LMAP", draft-morton-ippm-lmap-path-00 (work in progress),
              January 2013.





Boucadair & Jacquenet    Expires August 22, 2013                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft            LMAP: Considerations             February 2013


Authors' Addresses

   Mohamed Boucadair
   France Telecom
   Rennes,   35000
   France

   Email: mohamed.boucadair@orange.com


   Christian Jacquenet
   France Telecom
   Rennes,   35000
   France

   Email: christian.jacquenet@orange.com



































Boucadair & Jacquenet    Expires August 22, 2013                [Page 8]

