


WisdomTaskForce.org                                            N. Bollow
Internet-Draft                                             July 15, 2013
Intended status: Informational
Expires: January 16, 2014


                 Plan to Establish a Wisdom Task Force
                    draft-bollow-wisdomtaskforce-07

Abstract

   This memo calls for the creation of a new governance forum named
   "Wisdom Task Force" (WisdomTF).  The main purpose of the WisdomTF is
   to facilitate consensus-seeking strategy-oriented discussions
   regarding governance actions that may be decided by national
   parliaments.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 16, 2014.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.






Bollow                  Expires January 16, 2014                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft              Wisdom Task Force                  July 2013


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     1.1.  Avoidance of Requirements Language . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   2.  Start-up process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   3.  Draft Scope Statement for WisdomTF . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   4.  Draft Working Directives for WisdomTF  . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     4.1.  Fundamental Values . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     4.2.  WG Working Procedures  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     4.3.  "E-gathering" electronic communication infrastructure  . . 10
       4.3.1.  Software freedom requirements  . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
       4.3.2.  Accessibility and compatibility requirements . . . . . 10
     4.4.  Request For Balance (RFB) Publication Procedures . . . . . 11
     4.5.  Overall Rough Consensus Endorsement  . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     4.6.  WG Creation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
       4.6.1.  Initial Informal Discussion  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
       4.6.2.  Terms of Reference Endorsement . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
       4.6.3.  Secretariat Actions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     4.7.  WG Termination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
       4.7.1.  WG Dissolution by Rough Consensus  . . . . . . . . . . 13
       4.7.2.  WG Dissolution due to Disendorsement . . . . . . . . . 13
       4.7.3.  WG Dissolution due to Dysfunction  . . . . . . . . . . 14
     4.8.  Sustaining Members and the Secretariat . . . . . . . . . . 14
       4.8.1.  Categories of Sustaining Membership  . . . . . . . . . 14
         4.8.1.1.  Country Members  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
         4.8.1.2.  International Organization Members . . . . . . . . 14
         4.8.1.3.  Sustaining Industry Members  . . . . . . . . . . . 15
         4.8.1.4.  Sustaining Civil Society Members . . . . . . . . . 15
       4.8.2.  Committee of Sustaining Members  . . . . . . . . . . . 15
       4.8.3.  Secretariat Funding  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
       4.8.4.  Changes to the WisdomTF Working Directives . . . . . . 17
       4.8.5.  Further Responsibilities of the Secretariat  . . . . . 17
   5.  Draft Terms of Reference for Some Initial Working-Groups . . . 18
     5.1.  WG on limiting greenhouse gas emissions  . . . . . . . . . 18
     5.2.  WG on privacy protection in the context of information
           and communication technologies.  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
     5.3.  WG on the roles of the Internet in anti-poverty
           strategies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
     5.4.  WG on standing documents on the deliberative process . . . 19
     5.5.  WG on framework for democratic governance of global
           matters  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
     5.6.  Internet Rights and Principles WG  . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
     5.7.  WG on Government Activities to Further Sustainable
           Digital Culture  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
     5.8.  WG on a framework for regulation of online identity
           systems  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
     5.9.  WG on a framework for regulation of online payment
           systems  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20



Bollow                  Expires January 16, 2014                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft              Wisdom Task Force                  July 2013


     5.10. WG on a framework for regulation of DRM systems  . . . . . 20
     5.11. WG on a framework for guarantee systems  . . . . . . . . . 20
     5.12. WG on a framework for addressing the problem of spam . . . 20
     5.13. WG on a framework for addressing the problem of
           illegal content  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
     5.14. WG on a framework for addressing the problem of
           indecent online content  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
     5.15. Directives WG  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
   6.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
     6.1.  Inappropriate Usage  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
     6.2.  Denial of Service  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
     6.3.  Bullying . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
     6.4.  Human Rights . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
   7.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
   8.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
   9.  Endorsements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
   10. Request For Comments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
   11. Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
   Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
































Bollow                  Expires January 16, 2014                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft              Wisdom Task Force                  July 2013


1.  Introduction

   While local and national political challenges remain important,
   global challenges of humanity are now increasingly recognized as
   being at least equally important.

   These include:

   o  The need to limit the emission of greenhouse gases in an effective
      manner.

   o  Privacy protection in the context of information and communication
      technologies.

   o  Ensuring international fairness in regard to economic development,
      especially concerning poor communities and empowerment to overcome
      poverty.

   o  Shaping information societies according to human needs, see
      [WSIS-CS] and the Internet-related working group topics in section
      Section 5.

   The present proposal provides a practical mechanism that is designed
   for effectively addressing such global challenges.  The fundamental
   idea is to enhance the existing decision-making processes of
   democratic parliaments by means of developing relevant information
   and strategy documents.  The mechanism for developing these documents
   is inspired by how solutions to global technical challenges related
   to the Internet are developed in the Internet Engineering Task Force
   (IETF, see http://ietf.org/), and by the practices and philosophy of
   the Free Software and Open Source movements.

   Analogous to the name "Internet Engineering Task Force", but
   reflecting the different area of subject matter (policy topics as
   opposed to topics of technical engineering related to the Internet),
   the name "Wisdom Task Force", or "WisdomTF" for short, can be used by
   the group of people developing these information and strategy
   documents.

   Naturally, for any policy question there are different ways in which
   it can be framed.  Such different framings correspond to different
   perspectives on how the question should be addressed, and in many
   cases people's views on what is a reasonable answer to a question
   depend very much on this framing.  Furthermore, there are always
   difficult questions in regard to how the interests and unrealized
   human rights of those who are disadvantaged by the status quo should
   be balanced relative to the interests and economic and human rights
   of those who benefit from the status quo.  The Wisdom Task Force will



Bollow                  Expires January 16, 2014                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft              Wisdom Task Force                  July 2013


   not attempt to be the decision-making forum for these questions.
   Rather, the goal of the Wisdom Task Force is to work out policy
   options and supporting documentation, in order to empower national
   parliaments to make good, well-informed decisions on what is a
   reasonable balance between the various legitimate interests.

   As practiced by the Internet Engineering Task Force, everyone is
   welcome to join the Wisdom Task Force, without any formalities
   whatsoever.  It is a key goal to enable effective participation of
   all stakeholders, including interested citizens who are not subject
   matter experts.  At the same time, it is also a key goal to structure
   the deliberative processes so that at least a significant percentage
   of subject matter experts consider participation a reasonably good
   use of their time.

   One significant difference to the practices of the Internet
   Engineering Task Force is that in the Wisdom Task Force, all
   substantive work is conducted electronically via the Internet.  This
   is important to ensure that all participants, including those who do
   not have the financial means to travel to in-person meetings, are
   able to participate fully effectively.

   Furthermore, "machine translation" technologies are used to support
   inter-language inter-comprehension, in order to facilitate the
   effective participation of people who do not have strong skills in a
   working-group's primary language, see section Section 4.3.

   Like in the Internet Engineering Task Force and in the Free Software
   and Open Source movements, the key success factor for work in the
   Wisdom Task Force is to work by means of genuine deliberative
   processes rather than by means of some kind of power politics.

   Such deliberative processes can make use of techniques for strategy
   development and reasoning in complex systemic contexts by means of
   logic trees, as described e.g. in [Dettmer].

   Even more important is that all working-groups which develop one or
   more documents needs good chairpersons or coordinators who facilitate
   the deliberative and consensus and (where applicable) rough consensus
   processes.  In this context, "consensus" does not mean a requirement
   for full and absolute agreement of every participant in the working-
   group.  Rather, the definition of consensus which is applicable here
   is "absence of sustained opposition", where the only kind of
   opposition that matters is opposition which is sustained by means of
   valid and legitimate arguments.  When necessary, the criteria for
   accepting text can be further relaxed to "rough consensus".

   Similarly to how in the Free Software and Open Source movements, the



Bollow                  Expires January 16, 2014                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft              Wisdom Task Force                  July 2013


   power of the maintainers of software is balanced by everyone having
   the right to "fork" (which means to change the name of a copy of the
   software and then to start publicly maintaining that "forked" version
   of the software), in the Wisdom Task Force it is allowed and
   reasonably easy to "fork" a working-group and the documents which it
   develops.

   In this way, it is possible for different substantive viewpoints to
   lead to competing policy recommendation documents, each of which will
   be published in the same way by the Wisdom Task Force, provided that
   a minimal threshold of interest among the so-called "sustaining
   members" of the Wisdom Task Force is satisfied.  This rule about the
   minimal threshold of interest is designed to minimize the risk of
   damaging the reputation of the body of documents of the Wisdom Task
   Force as a whole, which would happen in the absence of a mechanism to
   prevent the publication of documents of poor quality.

   Also, working-groups may develop recommendation documents that
   describe several possible policy choices and the respective
   advantages and disadvantages.

   In any case, it is ultimately the responsibility of parliaments to
   make the hard decisions that choose between policy options.

   What the Wisdom Task Force can provide is:

   o  An international perspective, based on a broad logic-based
      deliberative process, to help ensure that those decisions will be
      well-informed.

   o  International coordination to the extent possible while
      maintaining the freedom of each national parliament to make
      substantive policy choices.

   The Wisdom Task Force is in many ways analogous, though
   complementary, to how inter-governmental cooperation can also benefit
   from enhancement through international multistakeholder dialogue, see
   [ECTF].

   While it may appear audacious to attempt a reform of international
   cooperation by means of a private initiative, this is justified by
   the urgent need for an effective process to develop solutions for the
   important global challenges.  International treaty-making processes
   are not only too slow, but they are also not likely to succeed in
   developing solutions that differ significantly from the status quo of
   current practice.





Bollow                  Expires January 16, 2014                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft              Wisdom Task Force                  July 2013


1.1.  Avoidance of Requirements Language

   This memo requests and recommends actions, but it does not define
   requirements.  The use of the keywords of [RFC2119] describing
   requirement levels is therefore deliberately avoided.

   The participants in the start-up process Section 2 should not
   consider themselves bound by any of the text in this memo, but rather
   they should feel free to reconsider and revise all of these
   recommendations.


2.  Start-up process

   The Wisdom Task Force will be initiated by means of a relatively
   informal process in which the draft rules as described below are
   tried out and potentially modified before they are formally adopted.

   One possible start-up strategy is to start with just three
   substantive working groups on the topics "limiting greenhouse gas
   emissions", "privacy protection in the context of information and
   communication technologies", and "the roles of the Internet in anti-
   poverty strategies", together with supporting working-groups
   developing and maintaining the needed standing documents as well as
   the directives.

   It will be necessary to work on movement-building in parallel to the
   work on establishing WisdomTF as an institutional framework.


3.  Draft Scope Statement for WisdomTF

   WisdomTF's scope of work shall be to empower national parliaments to
   make good, well-informed decisions on information society issues, and
   on global issues of any kind.


4.  Draft Working Directives for WisdomTF

   This section provides a draft set of rules that should be carefully
   considered and revised during the start-up process, with the goal of
   creating a good initial Working Directives document for WisdomTF.
   During the start-up process, the draft working directives are not
   formally in force, but when they are not not followed, the reasons
   for acting differently should be carefully documented, and the
   discrepancy between the draft working directives and actual practice
   should be resolved as quickly as reasonably possible.  In this way,
   the start-up process provides an initial test of how the draft



Bollow                  Expires January 16, 2014                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft              Wisdom Task Force                  July 2013


   directives work in practice, and any unreasonably burdensome rules
   can be recognized and fixed quickly.

4.1.  Fundamental Values

   The fundamental values of the WisdomTF are the vision for shaping
   information societies for human needs [WSIS-CS] and that the human
   rights, as defined in the various international human rights
   treaties, shall be upheld and implemented in every way possible.

   Evidence-based arguments on how these objectives can be best achieved
   shall be given precedence over more speculative arguments.  WisdomTF
   has a number of Standing Documents providing guidance for the
   deliberative process; these shall be treated as incorporated by
   reference into these Directives.

   WisdomTF Working-Groups shall seek to provide, by means of the
   Request For Balance documents that they publish, the best possible
   information input to the decision-making processes of national
   parliaments.  The Working-Groups shall seek to collect, by means of a
   balanced multistakeholder process, information about needs, concerns,
   cause-effect relationships, and available evidence, and to process
   all this to the extent possible into recommendations.  The Working-
   Groups shall particularly pay attention to any relevant proceedings
   at existing fora for global policy dialogue, such as the Internet
   Governance Forum (IGF) for Internet governance topics.  At the very
   least, every Working-Group should be able to reach rough consensus on
   recommendations of the form "Public policy regarding topic X should
   take into consideration the following needs and concerns... ."
   Ideally (but with greater difficulty of reaching rough consensus)
   specific proposals for laws and others kinds of public policy
   decisions should be developed in a form that explicitly suggests a
   choice of options for possible choices of the balance between
   conflicting legitimate interests, together with information on what
   is known about the advantages and disadvantages (from the public
   interest perspective) of the different options.

4.2.  WG Working Procedures

   WisdomTF Working-Groups are generally free to define their own
   working procedures subject to the constraints that everyone without
   restriction must be welcome to participate as long as they
   participate constructively, and that disagreements must be addressed
   by means of consensus-seeking deliberative processes.

   Unless foreseen differently in the Terms of Reference of a Working
   Group, or the Working-Group decides otherwise, the WisdomTF
   Secretariat (see Section 4.8) shall use its discretion in setting up



Bollow                  Expires January 16, 2014                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft              Wisdom Task Force                  July 2013


   electronic communication infrastructure for the Working-Group (see
   section Section 4.3 below), and in reminding participants, when this
   may be necessary, of the principles of professionally respectful
   conduct, or of international human rights law, or of the section on
   fundamental values in these directives (section Section 4.1), or of
   the Terms of Reference of the particular Working-Group.

   If and only if such reminders prove ineffective, the Secretariat
   shall request the Committee (see Section 4.8.2) to decide an
   appropriate sanction which may take the form of barring specific
   persons from participation in WisdomTF for a specific amount of time.
   The Committee can decide to impose such sanctions only by consensus
   or rough consensus but not by majority voting.

   In regard to enforcing the principles of professionally respectful
   conduct, it is possible that policies which differ from the above may
   be included in the terms of reference of a WG, or may be decided by
   the WG.  Possible measures include for example the appointment of a
   team of "moderators" who could issue warnings about violations of the
   rules of conduct, and who might in cases where warnings prove
   ineffective have the authority to put specific participants "on
   moderation" in the sense that their contributions to the deliberative
   processes will be distributed to the other participants only after
   one of the moderators has reviewed the message for conformance to the
   rules of conduct and approved it.  Such measures can be used only if
   an appeals process, whereby decisions of the moderators are reviewed
   independently and potentially reversed, is available.

   Regardless of whether a WG's terms of reference assign any
   responsibility to the Secretariat in regard to enforcement of rules
   of conduct in general, bullying in any form (including mobbing, which
   is defined as an individual or a small group being subjected to
   bullying by a larger group) may be brought to the attention of the
   Secretariat.  Provided that the resources to evaluate claims of
   bullying are available, the Secretariat shall do so.  In doing so,
   the Secretariat shall be extremely careful to ensure that accusations
   of bullying can not be used as a means of bullying.  If claims of
   bullying are found to be verifiably true, the Secretariat shall
   immediately suspend the bully or bullies (in the sense of barring
   from participation in WisdomTF), with the duration of the suspension
   to be decided by the Committee by consensus or rough consensus or if
   necessary by majority voting.  The decision about the duration of a
   suspension on grounds of bullying shall be made within one month of
   the Secretariat's decision to suspend the bully or bullies.  If, in
   the case of mobbing, a clear ring-leader of the group of bullies has
   been identified, the term of suspension of the ring-leader shall not
   be less than three years.




Bollow                  Expires January 16, 2014                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft              Wisdom Task Force                  July 2013


   All substantive discussion and decision-making of the Working-Groups
   shall be conducted exclusively via the Internet, in order to ensure
   fairness of participation also of people who do not have funding for
   international travel.

   All WisdomTF Working-Groups shall seek to interact with the broader
   professional community for the respective governance topics by active
   participation in the relevant global policy fora, such as the
   Internet Governance Forum (IGF) for Internet governance topics.

   All WG documents and draft documents shall be licensed under a
   Creative Commons license with a note that a link to
   http://wisdomtaskforce.org/ suffices as attribution.  Textual
   components which are developed as a joint effort by WisdomTF
   participants using the consensus-seeking processes of WisdomTF
   working-groups are licensed under a simple Creative Commons
   Attribution license, while WisdomTF documents may also include
   textual components from external sources which are licensed under a
   more restrictive Creative Commons license.  (In that case, the
   compound document as a whole will also be under the more restrictive
   Creative Commons license.)

4.3.  "E-gathering" electronic communication infrastructure

   The Secretariat shall provide WisdomTF working-groups with electronic
   communication infrastructure which provides functionality similar to
   that of a an email mailing list, but with added functionality to make
   use of "machine translation" technologies to support inter-language
   inter-comprehension, in order to facilitate the effective
   participation of people who do not have strong skills in a working-
   group's primary language.

   This kind of an enhanced variants of an email mailing lists is
   referred to as an "e-gathering".

4.3.1.  Software freedom requirements

   With the possible exception of "machine translation" technologies
   sourced from outside providers, the software for the "e-gathering"
   electronic communication infrastructure shall be publicly available
   for download free of charge under a license which makes it Free and
   Open Source Software (FOSS).

4.3.2.  Accessibility and compatibility requirements

   All electronic communication infrastructure used in WisdomTF shall
   fulfill all of the following requirements:




Bollow                  Expires January 16, 2014               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft              Wisdom Task Force                  July 2013


   o  It shall be fully accessible using a variety of computer operating
      systems.

   o  It shall be fully accessible using Free and Open Source Software
      (FOSS).

   o  It shall be fully accessible using assistive technologies for
      persons with disabilities.

4.4.  Request For Balance (RFB) Publication Procedures

   The Secretariat shall process requests for publication of draft
   documents as Request For Balance documents as follows:

   o  Unless the Working-Group made the decision to publish the draft as
      a Request For Balance documents in the presence of a
      representative of the Secretariat, the Secretariat shall make
      reasonable inquiries to ensure that this decision has indeed been
      made by consensus or rough consensus and in accordance with the
      Terms of Reference of the Working-Group.

   o  The Secretariat shall verify that the Working-Group which made the
      request has Active status.  (All Working-Groups have Active status
      initially, this status can change to Inactive in case of
      Sustaining Member disendorsements, see Section 4.7.2.)

4.5.  Overall Rough Consensus Endorsement

   The Working-Group which has made the decision to publish a Request
   For Balance document may instruct the Secretariat to issue a
   Consensus Call for Overall Rough Consensus Endorsement by WisdomTF.

   In this case the Secretariat shall communicate to all WisdomTF
   participants a request to review that Request For Balance document
   and communicate any objections within 90 days.

   If any objections are received, the Working-Group shall review the
   objections and decide whether it wants to revise the Request For
   Balance document.

   If no objections are received, or if the Working-Group otherwise
   decides not to revise the Request For Balance document, it may ask
   for a determination whether there is Overall Rough Consensus of
   WisdomTF.  Overall Rough Consensus means that there must be rough
   consensus among each of the major stakeholder categories:
   Governments, civil society and industry.  The determination of
   Overall Rough Consensus is made by the Committee of Sustaining
   Members, see Section 4.8.2 below.



Bollow                  Expires January 16, 2014               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft              Wisdom Task Force                  July 2013


   If it is determined that there is overall Overall Rough Consensus,
   the Secretariat shall add information to this effect to the concerned
   Request For Balance document.  Furthermore, the Secretariat shall in
   this case issue a press release.

4.6.  WG Creation

   This section outlines the process for the formation of new WisdomTF
   Working-Groups.  The objective of these rules is to make it as easy
   as reasonably possible to create such Working-Groups as soon as there
   is sufficient interest, while avoiding the creation of Working-Groups
   that would violate WisdomTF's fundamental values (see Section 4.1) or
   that would not attract a sufficient number and variety of
   participants that output documents of high quality can be achieved.

4.6.1.  Initial Informal Discussion

   The WisdomTF Secretariat (see Section 4.8) shall make "e-gathering"
   electronic communication infrastructure (see Section 4.3) available
   for the purpose of informal discussion of ideas for new WisdomTF
   Working-Groups.

   The Secretariat shall use its discretion in reminding participants,
   when this may be necessary, of the values of WisdomTF including the
   principles of professionally respectful conduct and international
   human rights law.

   If such reminders prove insufficient for achieving a reasonably
   pleasant working atmosphere, the Secretariat shall request the
   Committee (see Section 4.8.2) to decide an appropriate sanction which
   may take the form of barring specific persons from participation in
   WisdomTF for a specific amount of time.  The Committee can decide to
   impose such sanctions only by consensus or rough consensus but not by
   majority voting.

4.6.2.  Terms of Reference Endorsement

   After at least one month has elapsed since an idea has been initially
   proposed for information discussion, a WisdomTF Working-Group can be
   formed by three or more Sustaining Members endorsing Terms of
   Reference for the new Working-Group.  The Terms of Reference shall
   specify objectives and guiding principles for the Working-Group.

4.6.3.  Secretariat Actions

   The Secretariat shall verify that the Terms of Reference for the new
   Working-Group do not violate WisdomTF's fundamental values (see
   Section 4.1), and that the Terms of Reference uphold these values at



Bollow                  Expires January 16, 2014               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft              Wisdom Task Force                  July 2013


   least as well as any other Working-Group addressing a very similar
   topic area for which the required Endorsement has been received
   earlier or up to two days later.  For any Terms of Reference document
   which fails this test, the corresponding Working-Group shall not be
   created.  The purpose of this rule is to ensure that if different
   groups of Sustaining Members propose different frameworks to address
   the same problem, so that one of them is clearly better from a human
   rights perspective, then precedence is appropriately given to the
   better framework.

   When it has been decided that establishment of the Working-Group is
   appropriate, the Secretariat shall set up the "e-gathering"
   communication infrastructure (see Section 4.3) and add the new
   Working-Group to the list of WisdomTF Working-Groups, with Active
   status.  Furthermore, the Secretariat shall inform about the new
   Working-Group all registered participants including the sustaining
   members, as well as the general public, and all known civil society
   organizations with relevant expertise.

4.7.  WG Termination

   This section outlines the procedures for closing down a Working-
   Group.  These procedures are intended to be used not only when the
   tasks of a Working-Group have been completed, but also if it becomes
   clear that progress is only possible by creating a new Working-Group
   on essentially the same topic but with Terms of Reference that
   provide more specific guidance which makes it easier to reach rough
   consensus.

4.7.1.  WG Dissolution by Rough Consensus

   A Working-Group has the power of making the decision to dissolve
   itself.

4.7.2.  WG Dissolution due to Disendorsement

   Sustaining Members which have endorsed a Working-Group can at any
   time withdraw their endorsement.  If this causes the number of
   Sustaining Members which endorse a particular Working-Group to drop
   below three, the status of the Working-Group changes to Inactive; as
   long as a Working-Group has Inactive status, it cannot decide to
   publish Request For Balance documents.  The status changes to Active
   again if the number of endorsing Sustaining Members again increases
   to three or more.

   A Working-Group which has Inactive status for a continuous period of
   six months or more is dissolved.




Bollow                  Expires January 16, 2014               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft              Wisdom Task Force                  July 2013


4.7.3.  WG Dissolution due to Dysfunction

   As outlined in Section 4.8.5, the Secretariat will if necessary take
   corrective action if a Working-Groups fails to function.  In such a
   situation, a Working-Group may be dissolved if no-one is willing to
   serve as chairperson.

4.8.  Sustaining Members and the Secretariat

   A Secretariat for the WisdomTF shall be established with seat in
   Zurich, Switzerland.  A host country agreement shall be established
   with the country of Switzerland which ensures that if the Secretariat
   should not act fairly and diligently according to its various
   responsibilities, injunctions to correct the behavior of the
   Secretariat can be obtained from Swiss courts of law.  Any natural or
   legal person, internationally, without restriction, shall have
   standing to sue for an injunction for correction of the behavior of
   the Secretariat.

   The WisdomTF Secretariat shall be funded, and decisions of budget and
   staffing of the WisdomTF Secretariat shall be made by a Committee of
   Sustaining Members, as described in Section 4.8.2 below.  In
   addition, Sustaining Members have a special role in regard to
   Working-Group formation (see Section 4.6.2) and dissolution (see
   Section 4.7.2).

4.8.1.  Categories of Sustaining Membership

   This section defines categories of Sustaining Membership and
   corresponding eligibility criteria.  All Sustaining Members have
   equal rights in regard to the endorsement of Working-Groups (see
   Section 4.6.2).  The categories differ only in regard to the
   responsibilities for funding the WisdomTF Secretariat, and in regard
   to representation on the Committee of Sustaining Members.

4.8.1.1.  Country Members

   Any country which is recognized by the UN as a country may become a
   Country Member of the WisdomTF.

4.8.1.2.  International Organization Members

   Any membership organization of which at least three members are
   recognized by the UN as countries may become an International
   Organization Member of the WisdomTF.  Alternatively, any organ or
   other subentity of such an international organization may become an
   International Organization Member of the WisdomTF.




Bollow                  Expires January 16, 2014               [Page 14]

Internet-Draft              Wisdom Task Force                  July 2013


4.8.1.3.  Sustaining Industry Members

   As long as WisdomTF is not funded by Country Members, it is possible
   that funding may be provided by organizations which thereby become
   Sustaining Industry Members.  This process is described in detail in
   Section 4.8.3.

   There are no Sustaining Industry Members when this mechanism is not
   used.

4.8.1.4.  Sustaining Civil Society Members

   Individuals and civil society organizations will upon request be
   recognized as Sustaining Civil Society Members if they fulfill all of
   the following three conditions:

   o  They provide proof of their identity.

   o  They provide a credible assurance of seeking to promote the public
      interest.

   o  They have participated constructively in the WisdomTF since its
      beginning or for the past two years.

   The Secretariat checks whether these conditions are satisfied.

4.8.2.  Committee of Sustaining Members

   Decisions of budget and staffing of the WisdomTF Secretariat shall be
   made by a Committee of Sustaining Members, as follows: From each of
   the four categories of Sustaining Members, up to five representatives
   may be delegated to the Committee, so that in total the committee
   consists of up to twenty persons.

   When in any category of Sustaining Members there are five or less
   Sustaining Members in the category, they shall each be invited to
   delegate a person to the Committee.

   When in any category of Sustaining Members there are more than five
   Sustaining Members, they shall attempt to agree among themselves on a
   way of selecting five representatives (for example by adopting a
   system of rotation).  If they cannot agree and more than five want to
   be on the Committee, the Secretariat shall randomly choose, for a
   two-year term, five from among those who want to be on the Committee.

   The Committee shall attempt to make decisions by consensus or rough
   consensus.  If this fails, decisions regarding the Secretariat may be
   taken at a meeting at which decision making by majority vote is



Bollow                  Expires January 16, 2014               [Page 15]

Internet-Draft              Wisdom Task Force                  July 2013


   allowed, which may be convened no earlier than 16 hours after the
   rough consensus process has failed.

   The Committee shall review any proposed changes to the WisdomTF
   Working Directives before publication as a Request For Balance
   document.  It shall communicate any concerns to the Working-Group
   which is proposing changes to the Working Directives.

   The Committee is also responsible for the determination of Overall
   Rough Consensus, see Section 4.5.  The decision of determination of
   Overall Rough Consensus needs to be reached by rough consensus of the
   Committee; if the Committee fails to reach rough consensus, the
   Request For Balance document in question shall not be considered to
   have attained Overall Rough Consensus.  This applies also to the
   Consensus Call in the context of changes to the WisdomTF Working
   Directives (see Section 4.8.4 the difference being only that that
   Consensus Call involves only the Sustaining Members.

4.8.3.  Secretariat Funding

   Organizations which are interested in being Sustaining Industry
   Members shall make, for a specific number of years, a commitment that
   they are willing to contribute to funding the costs of the
   secretariat up to a specific amount.

   If this commitment is actually called upon (see below), a maximal set
   of Sustaining Industry Members is chosen so that the yearly
   commitment limit of each Sustaining Industry Members is greater or
   equal than the budget of WisdomTF divided by the number of Sustaining
   Industry Members.

   The Country Members as a group have the right to organize a way of
   funding WisdomTF which is independent of the mechanism outlined above
   that involves Sustaining Industry Members.  In that case the
   commitments of the organizations interested Sustaining Industry
   Members are not called upon.

   Unless the Country Members make use of this right, the Secretariat
   and the Committee shall seek to ensure adequate funding by means of
   one or more of the following sources of funds: Voluntary
   contributions, grants from foundations and/or other grant-giving
   institutions, calling upon the Sustaining Industry Members to each
   contribute an equal amount.

   If there are no Sustaining Industry Members and the operations of the
   Secretariat have also not been adequately funded otherwise, the
   Secretariat shall have the authority to suspend some of its
   operations, according to its sole discretion.



Bollow                  Expires January 16, 2014               [Page 16]

Internet-Draft              Wisdom Task Force                  July 2013


   If the Committee intends to increase the budget of the Secretariat,
   the Committee shall, before making the decision to do so, secure
   commitments that sufficient funding will be made available.
   Furthermore, the Committee shall regularly assess the risk of
   available funding potentially dropping below the level of the current
   budget, and appropriate contingency plans shall be made.

   As long as there is neither funding from Country Members nor from
   Sustaining Industry Members, the founder of WisdomTF may seek funding
   from other sources, including from charitable foundations and/or by
   means of funding from a company which he owns in whole or in part,
   and which would thereby gain (for the duration of this sponsorship)
   the exclusive right to advertise on the WisdomTF website this
   sponsorship, together with the fact that it is the company of the
   founder of WisdomTF.

4.8.4.  Changes to the WisdomTF Working Directives

   If a WisdomTF Working-Group proposes a new version of the Directives,
   the Secretariat shall organize a Consensus Call among all Sustaining
   Members.  If and only if there is rough consensus among each category
   of Sustaining Members for adoption of the revised Directives (as
   determined by the Committee, see Section 4.8.2), the Secretariat
   shall put them in force by publishing a Request For Balance document
   that gives the details about how the new version was adopted, and
   requests the new version of the Directives to be followed from now
   on.

   As ECTF Standing Documents are treated as incorporated by reference
   into these Directives, see Section 4.1, the same requirement for a
   Consensus Call among all Sustaining Members applies also any changes
   to the set of Standing Documents.

   Country Members or International Organization Members may propose to
   make WisdomTF part of the UN or another existing or new treaty-based
   international organization.  Such a proposal needs to be approved in
   the same way by rough consensus of all sustaining members of
   WisdomTF, in addition to whatever other steps may be required to
   create a new umbrella organization for WisdomTF.

4.8.5.  Further Responsibilities of the Secretariat

   The Secretariat shall seek to ensure an official presence at the
   Internet Governance Forum (IGF), for example by means of a booth.

   The Secretariat shall provide guidance to WisdomTF Working-Groups on
   how to self-organize on the basis of the principle of rough consensus
   decision-making.



Bollow                  Expires January 16, 2014               [Page 17]

Internet-Draft              Wisdom Task Force                  July 2013


   If it is brought to the attention of the Secretariat that a WisdomTF
   Working-Group has, for an continuous period of three or more months,
   failed to self-organize or otherwise failed to make any substantive
   progress towards its objectives, the Secretariat shall take the
   following steps: First the Secretariat shall verify that this is
   indeed the case.  If yes, the Secretariat shall solicit nominations
   and self-nominations from among the Working-Group members of
   potential chairpersons who could organize the work of the Working-
   Group.  If at least one person is nominated, the Secretariat shall
   appoint a chairperson.  If no-one is nominated, the Secretariat shall
   dissolve the Working-Group.

   Working-Groups may also by means of a rough consensus decision
   request and empower the Secretariat to execute this process of
   chairperson appointment.  The Secretariat shall honor such requests.

   Provided that the resources to do so are available, the Secretariat
   shall organize the appointment of an independent appeals team that
   will be available to address disputes within Working-groups,
   including in particular disputes in regard to actions of moderators,
   see section Section 4.2.


5.  Draft Terms of Reference for Some Initial Working-Groups

   This section provides draft Terms of Reference statements for some
   possible WisdomTF Working-Groups (WGs).

5.1.  WG on limiting greenhouse gas emissions

   This WG shall develop strategy and information documents that empower
   national parliaments to make decisions which create appropriate
   global incentives to avoid greenhouse gas emissions.

5.2.  WG on privacy protection in the context of information and
      communication technologies.

   This WG shall develop strategy and information documents that empower
   national parliaments to make decisions which will, in synergy with
   the actions of other countries that make similar decisions, result in
   effective action to ensure privacy protection in the context of
   information and communication technologies.

5.3.  WG on the roles of the Internet in anti-poverty strategies

   The WSIS Declaration of Principles, "Building the Information Society
   - a Global Challenge in the New Millennium" [WSIS-2003], states that
   "under favorable conditions", ICTs can "be a powerful instrument,



Bollow                  Expires January 16, 2014               [Page 18]

Internet-Draft              Wisdom Task Force                  July 2013


   increasing productivity, generating economic growth, job creation and
   employability and improving the quality of life of all."  That is
   especially important in the context of economic development of poor
   communities, where the goal is empowerment to overcome poverty.

   This WG shall develop strategy and information documents addressing
   the following questions:

   o  What roles can the Internet play in anti-poverty strategies?

   o  What are the relevant "favorable conditions" under which Internet-
      based technologies, services and/or community tools provide
      significant empowerment to overcome poverty?

5.4.  WG on standing documents on the deliberative process

   This WG shall maintain the standing documents which explain the
   deliberative processes used in WisdomTF, including in particular
   logic trees and consensus and rough consensus processes.

5.5.  WG on framework for democratic governance of global matters

   This WG shall maintain an explanatory document about how, together
   with what national parliaments can do, WisdomTF provides a framework
   for democratic governance of global matters.

5.6.  Internet Rights and Principles WG

   This WG shall compare and discuss the various existing statements of
   Internet rights and principles (see for example the list of links on
   the website of the Civil Society Internet Governance Caucus [Links]),
   and publish, as a Request For Balance document, a consolidated
   version which provides reasonably detailed guidance on interpretation
   of human rights in the Internet context and on guiding principles for
   Internet governance to further human rights.

   Rationale: The current situation with so many independently developed
   statements of Internet rights and principles is not very helpful in
   practice.

5.7.  WG on Government Activities to Further Sustainable Digital Culture

   This WG shall follow up on the Workshop on Standards for Sustainable
   Digital Culture taking place at the 2012 IGF in Baku, see [Culture].
   The WG shall publish, in the form of one or more Request For Balance
   documents, appropriate recommendations regarding government
   activities aimed at the furtherance of culture.




Bollow                  Expires January 16, 2014               [Page 19]

Internet-Draft              Wisdom Task Force                  July 2013


   Rationale: As outlined in the Background Paper for that workshop, see
   [Bollow], this is important in regard to the human rights of artists
   and the general public.

5.8.  WG on a framework for regulation of online identity systems

   Online identity systems are expected to become increasingly
   important, for example as a foundation for online payment systems
   (see below).  There may be a need for regulation.  This WG will
   develop a framework document on which national legislatures and
   regulatory agencies can draw in order to minimize incompatibilities
   between regulation in various countries.

5.9.  WG on a framework for regulation of online payment systems

   Online payment systems are expected to become increasingly important.
   There may be a need for regulation.  This WG will develop a framework
   document on which national legislatures and regulatory agencies can
   draw in order to minimize incompatibilities between regulation in
   various countries.

5.10.  WG on a framework for regulation of DRM systems

   If DRM (Digital Rights Management / Digital Restrictions Management)
   systems become more widely used, there may be a need for regulation
   in order to prohibit the use of such systems in ways that have
   negative social effects.  This WG will develop a framework document
   on which national legislatures and regulatory agencies can draw in
   order to minimize incompatibilities between regulation in various
   countries.

5.11.  WG on a framework for guarantee systems

   Guarantee systems could provide a viable basis for addressing
   problems like spam, illegal online content and indecent online
   content (see below).  There may be a need for regulation.  This WG
   will develop a framework document which can help inform technical
   standardization work about various policy concerns, and on which
   national legislatures and regulatory agencies can draw in order to
   minimize incompatibilities between regulation in various countries.

5.12.  WG on a framework for addressing the problem of spam

   This WG will develop a framework document which can help inform
   technical standardization work about various policy concerns in
   relation to addressing the problem of spam on the basis of a
   guarantee system, and which also serves to inform governmental
   stakeholders who are concerned about the problem of spam.



Bollow                  Expires January 16, 2014               [Page 20]

Internet-Draft              Wisdom Task Force                  July 2013


5.13.  WG on a framework for addressing the problem of illegal content

   This WG will develop a framework document which can help inform
   technical standardization work about various policy concerns in
   relation to addressing the problem of illegal content on the basis of
   a guarantee system together with an appropriate legal system, and on
   which national legislatures and regulatory agencies can draw in order
   to minimize incompatibilities between regulation in various
   countries.

5.14.  WG on a framework for addressing the problem of indecent online
       content

   This WG will develop a framework document which can help inform
   technical standardization work about various policy concerns in
   relation to addressing the problem of indecent online content on the
   basis of a guarantee system, and which also serves to inform
   governmental stakeholders who are concerned about the problem of
   indecent online content.

5.15.  Directives WG

   This WG shall continually observe the progress of the work of
   WisdomTF, in particular in view of the need for progress in regard to
   practical realization of human rights, and discuss any suggestions
   for changes to the Working Directives.  Whenever the WG has rough
   consensus that a change to the Working Directives may be desirable,
   the WG shall publish a Request For Balance document with revised
   Working Directives and an appendix that explains the rationale for
   the changes.  This document shall not be phrased as definitely
   containing the new Working Directives, but rather as a request to the
   body of Sustaining Members of WisdomTF to adopt the proposed new
   Working Directives.  (Adoption of such a revised Working Directives
   document is done by rough consensus among the Sustaining Members of
   WisdomTF.)

   Rationale: Every organization needs to observe its own performance,
   and to take corrective action when necessary.


6.  Security Considerations

   Similarly to security considerations for technical systems (see
   RFC 3552 [RFC3552]), governance fora and processes need to be
   designed for robustness against attempts of "inappropriate usage" and
   "denial of service".  In addition, the integrity of WisdomTF work
   with regard to human rights needs to be safeguarded.




Bollow                  Expires January 16, 2014               [Page 21]

Internet-Draft              Wisdom Task Force                  July 2013


6.1.  Inappropriate Usage

   Clearly WisdomTF needs rules governing the interaction between
   participants.  In the absence of appropriate rules, participation in
   WisdomTF cannot be expected to be effective, time-efficient and a
   pleasant experience.

   These rules need to be designed so that bona fide well-intentioned
   newcomers with reasonably good communication skills will be able to
   quickly learn how to participate effectively, while on the other hand
   there need to be effective disincentives that discourage and penalize
   disruptive and non-constructive behavior.

6.2.  Denial of Service

   It is particularly important to avoid vulnerability of WisdomTF and
   its working-groups to the political equivalent of what is called
   "denial of service" attacks in the technical realm: It must not be
   possible for beneficiaries of the status quo (who may fear a
   potential loss of power) to disrupt discussions that could against
   their specific particular interests.

6.3.  Bullying

   It is especially important to ensure that WisdomTF participants are
   not regularly subjected to bullying by those who (for reasons of
   specific particular interests) might wish to prevent the effective
   participation of their political opponents or competitors.

6.4.  Human Rights

   The rules of WisdomTF need to ensure that all recommendations
   published by its working-groups are designed to uphold the
   fundamental principles which are internationally recognized as human
   rights, and to improve as much as possible the practical ability of
   people everywhere to enjoy their human rights.


7.  IANA Considerations

   This memo includes no request to IANA.


8.  Acknowledgements

   This memo has been inspired significantly by postings on the mailing
   list of the Civil Society Internet Governance Caucus [IGC] from
   various participants, including Bertrand de La Chapelle, Avri Doria,



Bollow                  Expires January 16, 2014               [Page 22]

Internet-Draft              Wisdom Task Force                  July 2013


   William Drake, Anriette Esterhuysen, Andrea Glorioso, Michael
   Gurstein, Wolfgang Kleinwaechter, Jeremy Malcolm, Lee W McKnight,
   Parminder Jeet Singh, and Roland Perry.  This acknowledgment of
   inspiration is not intended to imply that any of the named persons
   endorse the contents of this memo.


9.  Endorsements

   Endorsements will be solicited at a later stage.


10.  Request For Comments

   Comments and other feedback of any kind regarding this Internet-Draft
   are requested in the form of postings to the mailing list of the
   Civil Society Internet Governance Caucus [IGC] (preferred) or in the
   form of personal communications to the author.


11.  Informative References

   [Bollow]   Bollow, N., "Standards for Sustainable Digital Culture
              (Background Paper)", 2012,
              <http://bollow.ch/papers/SustainableDigitalCulture.pdf>.

   [Culture]  Bollow, N., "IGF Workshop: Standards for Sustainable
              Digital Culture", 2012,
              <http://wsms1.intgovforum.org/node/21>.

   [Dettmer]  Dettmer, H W., "The Logical Thinking Process", ISBN 978-0-
              87389-723-5, 2008.

   [ECTF]     Bollow, N., "Request For Action to Establish an Enhanced
              Cooperation Task Force", Work in progress , 2013,
              <http://enhanced-cooperation.org/RFA/1>.

   [IGC]      Civil Society Internet Governance Caucus, "Mailing list",
              <http://igcaucus.org/membership>.

   [Links]    Civil Society Internet Governance Caucus, "Links",
              <http://igcaucus.org/links>.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC3552]  Rescorla, E. and B. Korver, "Guidelines for Writing RFC
              Text on Security Considerations", BCP 72, RFC 3552,



Bollow                  Expires January 16, 2014               [Page 23]

Internet-Draft              Wisdom Task Force                  July 2013


              July 2003.

   [WSIS-2003]
              UN World Summit on the Information Society, "Declaration
              of Principles. Building the Information Society: a global
              challenge in the new Millennium.", 2003,
              <http://www.itu.int/wsis/docs/geneva/official/dop.html>.

   [WSIS-CS]  Civil Society, "Declaration to the World Summit on the
              Information Society", 2003, <http://www.itu.int/wsis/docs/
              geneva/civil-society-declaration.pdf>.


Author's Address

   Norbert Bollow
   Weidlistrasse 18
   CH-8624 Gruet,
   Switzerland

   Phone: +41 44 972 20 59
   Email: nb@bollow.ch
   URI:   http://bollow.ch/




























Bollow                  Expires January 16, 2014               [Page 24]

