


WisdomTaskForce.org                                            N. Bollow
Internet-Draft                                          February 8, 2013
Intended status: Informational
Expires: August 12, 2013


                 Plan to Establish a Wisdom Task Force
                    draft-bollow-wisdomtaskforce-00

Abstract

   This memo calls for the creation of a new governance forum named
   "Wisdom Task Force" (WisdomTF).  The main purpose of the WisdomTF is
   to facilitate consensus-seeking strategy-oriented discussions
   regarding governance actions that may be decided by national
   parliaments.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 12, 2013.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.






Bollow                   Expires August 12, 2013                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft              Wisdom Task Force              February 2013


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.1.  Avoidance of Requirements Language . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.  Preparatory Working-Group  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   3.  Draft Scope Statement for WisdomTF . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   4.  Draft Working Directives for WisdomTF  . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     4.1.  Fundamental Values . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     4.2.  WG Working Procedures  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     4.3.  Accessibility and compatibility requirements . . . . . . .  7
     4.4.  Request For Balance (RFB) Publication Procedures . . . . .  7
     4.5.  Overall Rough Consensus Endorsement  . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     4.6.  WG Creation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
       4.6.1.  Initial Informal Discussion  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
       4.6.2.  Terms of Reference Endorsement . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
       4.6.3.  Secretariat Actions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     4.7.  WG Termination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
       4.7.1.  WG Dissolution by Rough Consensus  . . . . . . . . . . 10
       4.7.2.  WG Dissolution due to Disendorsement . . . . . . . . . 10
       4.7.3.  WG Dissolution due to Dysfunction  . . . . . . . . . . 10
     4.8.  Sustaining Members and the Secretariat . . . . . . . . . . 10
       4.8.1.  Categories of Sustaining Membership  . . . . . . . . . 11
         4.8.1.1.  Country Members  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
         4.8.1.2.  International Organization Members . . . . . . . . 11
         4.8.1.3.  Sustaining Industry Members  . . . . . . . . . . . 11
         4.8.1.4.  Sustaining Civil Society Members . . . . . . . . . 11
       4.8.2.  Committee of Sustaining Members  . . . . . . . . . . . 11
       4.8.3.  Secretariat Funding  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
       4.8.4.  Changes to the WisdomTF Working Directives . . . . . . 13
       4.8.5.  Further Responsibilities of the Secretariat  . . . . . 13
   5.  Draft Terms of Reference for Some Initial Working-Groups . . . 14
     5.1.  Internet Rights and Principles WG  . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
     5.2.  WG on Government Activities to Further Sustainable
           Digital Culture  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
     5.3.  Directives WG  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   6.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
     6.1.  Inappropriate Usage  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
     6.2.  Denial of Service  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
     6.3.  Human Rights . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   7.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   8.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   9.  Endorsements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   10. Request For Comments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
   11. Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
   Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17






Bollow                   Expires August 12, 2013                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft              Wisdom Task Force              February 2013


1.  Introduction

   In the context of World Summit on the Information Society, the
   various participating Civil Society organizations jointly formulated
   a vision for shaping information societies for human needs [WSIS-CS].
   That was in 2003.  Since then, not much has happened to implement
   this vision.  That needs to change now, because the situation is
   truly outrageous, see [Outrage].  Human society, the way in which
   people interact with each other, is more and more shaped by
   technology.  However the decisions that shape this technology, and
   thereby our societies, are made mostly by a relatively narrow group
   of technologists and business interests without any significant
   consideration of global fairness or of the public interest.  This
   violates the human right to democratic self-government of the
   peoples.

   The present proposal provides a practical mechanism to address these
   problems.

   Furthermore, it provides a way to realize the potential of
   information society to collaboratively develop strategies to address
   the pressing global challenges of humanity such as to effectively
   limit greenhouse gas emissions and to empower people everywhere to
   overcome poverty.  With regard to these challenges, the main problem
   is not that they are hard to solve.  In fact there are good methods
   for strategy development available, see e.g.  [Dettmer].  Rather, the
   problem is that our socioeconomic systems create strong incentives
   for corporations and governments to prioritize the pursuit of rather
   short-term economic goals.  This is the same mechanism which also
   causes concerns of international fairness and human rights to be
   largely ignored in technology development.

   The solution proposed here is based on providing national parliaments
   with the necessary information for making good and strategically
   sound decisions.

   Parliaments already have the democratic legitimacy and the power to
   create legislation that imposes principles of conduct and creates
   incentives and disincentives.

   In addition, parliaments are well-designed for handling the hard task
   of seeking an appropriate balance between the various legitimate
   interests.

   Drawing inspiration from how the Internet Engineering Task Force
   (IETF) works, the present memo proposes a Wisdom Task Force with the
   purpose to develop, through an international multistakeholder rough
   consensus process, informative documents that empower national



Bollow                   Expires August 12, 2013                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft              Wisdom Task Force              February 2013


   parliaments to make good, well-informed decisions on information
   society issues, and other global issues that can effectively be
   addressed by means of information society methods and principles.

   The Wisdom Task Force is in many ways analogous, though
   complementary, to how inter-governmental cooperation can also benefit
   from enhancement through international multistakeholder dialogue, see
   [ECTF].

   Here are some significant properties of the Wisdom Task Force
   proposal:

   o  The WisdomTF proposal provides a way to implement coordinated
      global action independent of any intergovernmental negotiations.
      The mechanism for achieving this to determine, by means of rough
      consensus processes, possible action strategies that can be
      beneficial with regard to global public interest concerns.
      WisdomTF works to document what is known and what can plausibly be
      expected to be true about the advantages and disadvantages of
      different possible action strategies.  In this way, WisdomTF
      empowers national parliaments to make well-informed decisions.

   o  WisdomTF is designed to complement existing fora for global policy
      dialogue, such as the Internet Governance Forum (IGF), and IGF and
      benefit from synergies with these fora.

   o  The IETF principles of great inclusiveness of participation and
      decision-making by rough consensus are built upon to minimize the
      risks of powerful stakeholders gaining undue influence.

   o  In the realm of strategy development for global concerns it is not
      immediately obvious whether a good analogue for the IETF principle
      of "running code" exists.  The WisdomTF proposal is inspired by
      the idea that an operationalized emphasis on human rights and on
      the vision for shaping information societies for human needs
      [WSIS-CS], together with the principle of evidence based decision
      making might provide similarly valuable guidance to how IETF
      technical standardization work is guided by the "running code"
      principle.

1.1.  Avoidance of Requirements Language

   This memo requests and recommends actions, but it does not define
   requirements.  The use of the keywords of [RFC2119] describing
   requirement levels is therefore deliberately avoided.

   The Preparatory Working-Group described in Section 2 should not
   consider itself bound by any of the text in this memo, but rather it



Bollow                   Expires August 12, 2013                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft              Wisdom Task Force              February 2013


   should feel free to reconsider and revise all of these
   recommendations.


2.  Preparatory Working-Group

   A Preparatory Working-Group of diverse stakeholders who all agree
   with the vision for shaping information societies for human needs
   [WSIS-CS] shall be convened to review and revise the contents of this
   memo.

   The work of this Preparatory Working-Group could begin with an in-
   person kick-off meeting which might be a one-day pre-event for the
   2013 Internet Governance Forum.


3.  Draft Scope Statement for WisdomTF

   WisdomTF's scope of work shall be to empower national parliaments to
   make good, well-informed decisions on information society issues, and
   other global issues that can effectively be addressed by means of
   information society methods and principles.


4.  Draft Working Directives for WisdomTF

   This section provides a draft set of rules that should be carefully
   considered and revised by the WisdomTF Preparatory Working-Group,
   with the goal of creating a good initial Working Directives document
   for WisdomTF.  The Preparatory Working-Group should at all times
   conduct its activities in accordance with what the current draft
   Working Directives say about how a WisdomTF Working-Group conducts
   its work.  In this way, the Preparatory Working-Group will be
   conducting an initial test of how the draft directives work in
   practice, and any unreasonably burdensome rules can be recognized and
   fixed quickly.

4.1.  Fundamental Values

   The fundamental values of the WisdomTF are the vision for shaping
   information societies for human needs [WSIS-CS] and that the human
   rights, as defined in the various international human rights
   treaties, shall be upheld and implemented in every way possible.

   Evidence-based arguments on how these objectives can be best achieved
   shall be given precedence over more speculative arguments.

   WisdomTF Working-Groups shall seek to provide, by means of the



Bollow                   Expires August 12, 2013                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft              Wisdom Task Force              February 2013


   Request For Balance documents that they publish, the best possible
   information input to the decision-making processes of national
   parliaments.  The Working-Groups shall seek to collect, by means of a
   balanced multistakeholder process, information about needs, concerns,
   cause-effect relationships, and available evidence, and to process
   all this to the extent possible into recommendations.  The Working-
   Groups shall particularly pay attention to any relevant proceedings
   at existing fora for global policy dialogue, such as the Internet
   Governance Forum (IGF) for Internet governance topics.  At the very
   least, every Working-Group should be able to reach rough consensus on
   recommendations of the form "Public policy regarding topic X should
   take into consideration the following needs and concerns... ."
   Ideally (but with greater difficulty of reaching rough consensus)
   specific proposals for laws and others kinds of public policy
   decisions should be developed in a form that explicitly suggests a
   choice of options for possible choices of the balance between
   conflicting legitimate interests, together with information on what
   is known about the advantages and disadvantages (from the public
   interest perspective) of the different options.

4.2.  WG Working Procedures

   WisdomTF Working-Groups are generally free to define their own
   working procedures subject to the constraints that everyone without
   restriction must be welcome to participate as long as they
   participate constructively, and that decisions are made by the
   principle of rough consensus.

   Unless foreseen differently in the Terms of Reference of a Working
   Group, or the Working-Group decides otherwise, the WisdomTF
   Secretariat (see Section 4.8) shall use its discretion in setting up
   electronic communication infrastructure (such as an email mailing
   list) for the Working-Group, and in organizing in-person meetings,
   and in reminding participants, when this may be necessary, of the
   principles of professionally respectful conduct, or of international
   human rights law, or of the Terms of Reference of the particular
   Working-Group.

   If and only if such reminders prove ineffective, the Secretariat
   shall request the Committee (see Section 4.8.2) to decide an
   appropriate sanction which may take the form of barring specific
   persons from participation in WisdomTF for a specific amount of time.
   The Committee can decide to impose such sanctions only by consensus
   or rough consensus but not by majority voting.

   All substantive discussion and decision-making of the Working-Groups
   shall be conducted exclusively via the Internet, in order to ensure
   fairness of participation also of people who do not have funding for



Bollow                   Expires August 12, 2013                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft              Wisdom Task Force              February 2013


   international travel.

   All WisdomTF Working-Groups shall seek to interact with the broader
   professional community for the respective governance topics by active
   participation in the relevant global policy fora, such as the
   Internet Governance Forum (IGF) for Internet governance topics.

   All WG documents and draft documents shall be licensed under a
   Creative Commons Attribution license with a note that a link to
   http://enhanced-cooperation.org/ suffices as attribution.

4.3.  Accessibility and compatibility requirements

   All electronic communication infrastructure shall fulfill all of the
   following requirements:

   o  It shall be fully accessible using a variety of computer operating
      systems.

   o  It shall be fully accessible using Free and Open Source Software
      (FOSS).

   o  It shall be fully accessible using assistive technologies for
      persons with disabilities.

4.4.  Request For Balance (RFB) Publication Procedures

   The Secretariat shall process requests for publication of draft
   documents as Request For Balance documents as follows:

   o  Unless the Working-Group made the decision to publish the draft as
      a Request For Balance documents in the presence of a
      representative of the Secretariat, the Secretariat shall make
      reasonable inquiries to ensure that this decision has indeed been
      made by rough consensus and in accordance with the Terms of
      Reference of the Working-Group.

   o  The Secretariat shall verify that the Working-Group which made the
      request has Active status.  (All Working-Groups have Active status
      initially, this status can change to Inactive in case of
      Sustaining Member disendorsements, see Section 4.7.2.)

4.5.  Overall Rough Consensus Endorsement

   The Working-Group which has made the decision to publish a Request
   For Balance document may instruct the Secretariat to issue a
   Consensus Call for Overall Rough Consensus Endorsement by WisdomTF.




Bollow                   Expires August 12, 2013                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft              Wisdom Task Force              February 2013


   In this case the Secretariat shall communicate to all WisdomTF
   participants a request to review that Request For Balance document
   and communicate any objections within 90 days.

   If any objections are received, the Working-Group shall review the
   objections and decide whether it wants to revise the Request For
   Balance document.

   If no objections are received, or if the Working-Group otherwise
   decides not to revise the Request For Balance document, it may ask
   for a determination whether there is Overall Rough Consensus of
   WisdomTF.  Overall Rough Consensus means that there must be rough
   consensus among each of the major stakeholder categories:
   Governments, civil society and industry.  The determination of
   Overall Rough Consensus is made by the Committee of Sustaining
   Members, see Section 4.8.2 below.

   If it is determined that there is overall Overall Rough Consensus,
   the Secretariat shall add information to this effect to the concerned
   Request For Balance document.  Furthermore, the Secretariat shall in
   this case issue a press release.

4.6.  WG Creation

   This section outlines the process for the formation of new WisdomTF
   Working-Groups.  The objective of these rules is to make it as easy
   as reasonably possible to create such Working-Groups as soon as there
   is sufficient interest, while avoiding the creation of Working-Groups
   that would violate WisdomTF's fundamental values (see Section 4.1) or
   that would not attract a sufficient number and variety of
   participants that output documents of high quality can be achieved.

4.6.1.  Initial Informal Discussion

   The WisdomTF Secretariat (see Section 4.8) shall make electronic
   communication infrastructure (such as an email mailing list)
   available for the purpose of informal discussion of ideas for new
   WisdomTF Working-Groups.

   The Secretariat shall use its discretion in reminding participants,
   when this may be necessary, of the values of WisdomTF including the
   principles of professionally respectful conduct and international
   human rights law.

   If such reminders prove insufficient for achieving a reasonably
   pleasant working atmosphere, the Secretariat shall request the
   Committee (see Section 4.8.2) to decide an appropriate sanction which
   may take the form of barring specific persons from participation in



Bollow                   Expires August 12, 2013                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft              Wisdom Task Force              February 2013


   WisdomTF for a specific amount of time.  The Committee can decide to
   impose such sanctions only by consensus or rough consensus but not by
   majority voting.

4.6.2.  Terms of Reference Endorsement

   After at least one month has elapsed since an idea has been initially
   proposed for information discussion, a WisdomTF Working-Group can be
   formed by three or more Sustaining Members endorsing Terms of
   Reference for the new Working-Group.  The Terms of Reference shall
   specify objectives and guiding principles for the Working-Group.

4.6.3.  Secretariat Actions

   The Secretariat shall verify that the Terms of Reference for the new
   Working-Group do not violate WisdomTF's fundamental values (see
   Section 4.1), and that the Terms of Reference uphold these values at
   least as well as any other Working-Group addressing a very similar
   topic area for which the required Endorsement has been received
   earlier or up to two days later.  For any Terms of Reference document
   which fails this test, the corresponding Working-Group shall not be
   created.  The purpose of this rule is to ensure that if different
   groups of Sustaining Members propose different frameworks to address
   the same problem, so that one of them is clearly better from a human
   rights perspective, then precedence is appropriately given to the
   better framework.

   When it has been decided that establishment of the Working-Group is
   appropriate, the Secretariat shall set up appropriate communications
   infrastructure and add the new Working-Group to the list of WisdomTF
   Working-Groups, with Active status.  Furthermore, the Secretariat
   shall inform about the new Working-Group all registered participants
   including the sustaining members, as well as the general public, and
   all known civil society organizations with relevant expertise.

4.7.  WG Termination

   This section outlines the procedures for closing down a Working-
   Group.  These procedures are intended to be used not only when the
   tasks of a Working-Group have been completed, but also if it becomes
   clear that progress is only possible by creating a new Working-Group
   on essentially the same topic but with Terms of Reference that
   provide more specific guidance which makes it easier to reach rough
   consensus.







Bollow                   Expires August 12, 2013                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft              Wisdom Task Force              February 2013


4.7.1.  WG Dissolution by Rough Consensus

   A Working-Group has the power of making the decision to dissolve
   itself.

4.7.2.  WG Dissolution due to Disendorsement

   Sustaining Members which have endorsed a Working-Group can at any
   time withdraw their endorsement.  If this causes the number of
   Sustaining Members which endorse a particular Working-Group to drop
   below three, the status of the Working-Group changes to Inactive; as
   long as a Working-Group has Inactive status, it cannot decide to
   publish Request For Balance documents.  The status changes to Active
   again if the number of endorsing Sustaining Members again increases
   to three or more.

   A Working-Group which has Inactive status for a continuous period of
   six months or more is dissolved.

4.7.3.  WG Dissolution due to Dysfunction

   As outlined in Section 4.8.5, the Secretariat will if necessary take
   corrective action if a Working-Groups fails to function.  In such a
   situation, a Working-Group may be dissolved if no-one is willing to
   serve as chairperson.

4.8.  Sustaining Members and the Secretariat

   A Secretariat for the WisdomTF shall be established with seat in
   Zurich, Switzerland.  A host country agreement shall be established
   with the country of Switzerland which ensures that if the Secretariat
   should not act fairly and diligently according to its various
   responsibilities, injunctions to correct the behavior of the
   Secretariat can be obtained from Swiss courts of law.  Any natural or
   legal person, internationally, without restriction, shall have
   standing to sue for an injunction for correction of the behavior of
   the Secretariat.

   The WisdomTF Secretariat shall be funded, and decisions of budget and
   staffing of the WisdomTF Secretariat shall be made by a Committee of
   Sustaining Members, as described in Section 4.8.2 below.  In
   addition, Sustaining Members have a special role in regard to
   Working-Group formation (see Section 4.6.2) and dissolution (see
   Section 4.7.2).







Bollow                   Expires August 12, 2013               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft              Wisdom Task Force              February 2013


4.8.1.  Categories of Sustaining Membership

   This section defines categories of Sustaining Membership and
   corresponding eligibility criteria.  All Sustaining Members have
   equal rights in regard to the endorsement of Working-Groups (see
   Section 4.6.2).  The categories differ only in regard to the
   responsibilities for funding the WisdomTF Secretariat, and in regard
   to representation on the Committee of Sustaining Members.

4.8.1.1.  Country Members

   Any country which is recognized by the UN as a country may become a
   Country Member of the WisdomTF.

4.8.1.2.  International Organization Members

   Any membership organization of which at least three members are
   recognized by the UN as countries may become an International
   Organization Member of the WisdomTF.  Alternatively, any organ or
   other subentity of such an international organization may become an
   International Organization Member of the WisdomTF.

4.8.1.3.  Sustaining Industry Members

   Any company or industry organization which is willing and able to
   fulfill the financial obligations outlined in Section 4.8.3) below
   may become a Sustaining Industry Member.

4.8.1.4.  Sustaining Civil Society Members

   Individuals and civil society organizations will upon request be
   recognized as Sustaining Civil Society Members if they fulfill both
   of the following conditions:

   o  They provide a credible assurance of seeking to promote the public
      interest.

   o  They have participated constructively in the WisdomTF since its
      beginning or for the past two years.

   The Secretariat checks whether these conditions are satisfied.

4.8.2.  Committee of Sustaining Members

   Decisions of budget and staffing of the WisdomTF Secretariat shall be
   made by a Committee of Sustaining Members, as follows: From each of
   the four categories of Sustaining Members, up to five representatives
   may be delegated to the Committee, so that in total the committee



Bollow                   Expires August 12, 2013               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft              Wisdom Task Force              February 2013


   consists of up to twenty persons.

   When in any category of Sustaining Members there are five or less
   Sustaining Members in the category, they shall each be invited to
   delegate a person to the Committee.

   When in any category of Sustaining Members there are more than five
   Sustaining Members, they shall attempt to agree among themselves on a
   way of selecting five representatives (for example by adopting a
   system of rotation).  If they cannot agree and more than five want to
   be on the Committee, the Secretariat shall randomly choose, for a
   two-year term, five from among those who want to be on the Committee.

   The Committee shall attempt to make decisions by rough consensus.  If
   this fails, decisions regarding the Secretariat may be taken at a
   meeting at which decision making by majority vote is allowed, which
   may be convened no earlier than 16 hours after the rough consensus
   process has failed.

   The Committee shall review any proposed changes to the WisdomTF
   Working Directives before publication as a Request For Balance
   document.  It shall communicate any concerns to the Working-Group
   which is proposing changes to the Working Directives.

   The Committee is also responsible for the determination of Overall
   Rough Consensus, see Section 4.5.  The decision of determination of
   Overall Rough Consensus needs to be reached by rough consensus of the
   Committee; if the Committee fails to reach rough consensus, the
   Request For Balance document in question shall not be considered to
   have attained Overall Rough Consensus.  This applies also to the
   Consensus Call in the context of changes to the WisdomTF Working
   Directives (see Section 4.8.4 the difference being only that that
   Consensus Call involves only the Sustaining Members.

4.8.3.  Secretariat Funding

   Organizations which are interested in being Sustaining Industry
   Members shall make, for a specific number of years, a commitment that
   they are willing to contribute to funding the costs of the
   secretariat up to a specific amount.

   Independently of whether this commitment is actually called upon (see
   below) a maximal set of Sustaining Industry Members is chosen so that
   the yearly commitment limit of each Sustaining Industry Members is
   greater or equal than the budget of WisdomTF divided by the number of
   Sustaining Industry Members.

   The Country Members as a group have the right to organize a way of



Bollow                   Expires August 12, 2013               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft              Wisdom Task Force              February 2013


   funding WisdomTF which is independent of the Sustaining Industry
   Members.  In that case the commitments of the Sustaining Industry
   Members are not called upon.

   Unless the Country Members make use of this right, the Secretariat
   and the Committee shall seek to ensure adequate funding by means of
   one or more of the following sources of funds: Voluntary
   contributions, grants from foundations and/or other grant-giving
   institutions, calling upon the Sustaining Industry Members to each
   contribute an equal amount.

   If there are no Sustaining Industry Members and the operations of the
   Secretariat have also not been adequately funded otherwise, the
   Secretariat shall have the authority to suspend some of its
   operations, according to its sole discretion.

   If the Committee intends to increase the budget of the Secretariat,
   the Committee shall, before making the decision to do so, secure
   commitments that sufficient funding will be made available.
   Furthermore, the Committee shall regularly assess the risk of
   available funding potentially dropping below the level of the current
   budget, and appropriate contingency plans shall be made.

4.8.4.  Changes to the WisdomTF Working Directives

   If a WisdomTF Working-Group proposes a new version of the Directives,
   the Secretariat shall organize a Consensus Call among all Sustaining
   Members.  If and only if there is rough consensus among each category
   of Sustaining Members for adoption of the revised Directives (as
   determined by the Committee, see Section 4.8.2), the Secretariat
   shall put them in force by publishing a Request For Balance document
   that gives the details about how the new version was adopted, and
   requests the new version of the Directives to be followed from now
   on.

   Country Members or International Organization Members may propose to
   make WisdomTF part of the UN or another existing or new treaty-based
   international organization.  Such a proposal needs to be approved in
   the same way by rough consensus of all sustaining members of
   WisdomTF, in addition to whatever other steps may be required to
   create a new umbrella organization for WisdomTF.

4.8.5.  Further Responsibilities of the Secretariat

   The Secretariat shall seek to ensure an official presence at the
   Internet Governance Forum (IGF), for example by means of a booth.

   The Secretariat shall provide guidance to WisdomTF Working-Groups on



Bollow                   Expires August 12, 2013               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft              Wisdom Task Force              February 2013


   how to self-organize on the basis of the principle of rough consensus
   decision-making.

   If it is brought to the attention of the Secretariat that a WisdomTF
   Working-Group has, for an continuous period of three or more months,
   failed to self-organize or otherwise failed to make any substantive
   progress towards its objectives, the Secretariat shall take the
   following steps: First the Secretariat shall verify that this is
   indeed the case.  If yes, the Secretariat shall solicit nominations
   and self-nominations from among the Working-Group members of
   potential chairpersons who could organize the work of the Working-
   Group.  If at least one person is nominated, the Secretariat shall
   appoint a chairperson.  If no-one is nominated, the Secretariat shall
   dissolve the Working-Group.

   Working-Groups may also by means of a rough consensus decision
   request and empower the Secretariat to execute this process of
   chairperson appointment.  The Secretariat shall honor such requests.


5.  Draft Terms of Reference for Some Initial Working-Groups

   This section provides draft Terms of Reference statements for some
   possible WisdomTF Working-Groups (WGs).

   The WisdomTF Preparatory Working-Group should consider and revise
   these texts in order to ensure that when WisdomTF is created, it will
   be easy to quickly also establish some worthwhile Working-Groups.

   The Preparatory Working-Group will not itself create these Working-
   Groups; rather it should publish, in addition to a Request For
   Balance document with recommended Working Directives, also a Request
   For Balance document recommending Terms of Reference for some
   Working-Groups.  It should then be easy to create such Working-Groups
   by means of the procedure for WG Creation in the Working Directives
   (see Section 4.6).

5.1.  Internet Rights and Principles WG

   This WG shall compare and discuss the various existing statements of
   Internet rights and principles (see for example the list of links on
   the website of the Civil Society Internet Governance Caucus [Links]),
   and publish, as a Request For Balance document, a consolidated
   version which provides reasonably detailed guidance on interpretation
   of human rights in the Internet context and on guiding principles for
   Internet governance to further human rights.

   Rationale: The current situation with so many independently developed



Bollow                   Expires August 12, 2013               [Page 14]

Internet-Draft              Wisdom Task Force              February 2013


   statements of Internet rights and principles is not very helpful in
   practice.

5.2.  WG on Government Activities to Further Sustainable Digital Culture

   This WG shall follow up on the Workshop on Standards for Sustainable
   Digital Culture taking place at the 2012 IGF in Baku, see [Culture].
   The WG shall publish, in the form of one or more Request For Balance
   documents, appropriate recommendations regarding government
   activities aimed at the furtherance of culture.

   Rationale: As outlined in the Background Paper for that workshop, see
   [Bollow], this is important in regard to the human rights of artists
   and the general public.

5.3.  Directives WG

   This WG shall continually observe the progress of the work of
   WisdomTF, in particular in view of the need for progress in regard to
   practical realization of human rights, and discuss any suggestions
   for changes to the Working Directives.  Whenever the WG has rough
   consensus that a change to the Working Directives may be desirable,
   the WG shall publish a Request For Balance document with revised
   Working Directives and an appendix that explains the rationale for
   the changes.  This document shall not be phrased as definitely
   containing the new Working Directives, but rather as a request to the
   body of Sustaining Members of WisdomTF to adopt the proposed new
   Working Directives.  (Adoption of such a revised Working Directives
   document is done by rough consensus among the Sustaining Members of
   WisdomTF.)

   Rationale: Every organization needs to observe its own performance,
   and to take corrective action when necessary.


6.  Security Considerations

   Similarly to security considerations for technical systems (see
   RFC 3552 [RFC3552]), governance fora and processes need to be
   designed for robustness against attempts of "inappropriate usage" and
   "denial of service".  In addition, the integrity of WisdomTF work
   with regard to human rights needs to be safeguarded.

6.1.  Inappropriate Usage

   Clearly WisdomTF needs rules governing the interaction between
   participants.  In the absence of appropriate rules, participation in
   WisdomTF cannot be expected to be effective, time-efficient and a



Bollow                   Expires August 12, 2013               [Page 15]

Internet-Draft              Wisdom Task Force              February 2013


   pleasant experience.

   These rules need to be designed so that bona fide well-intentioned
   newcomers with reasonably good communication skills will be able to
   quickly learn how to participate effectively, while on the other hand
   there need to be effective disincentives that discourage and penalize
   disruptive and non-constructive behavior.

6.2.  Denial of Service

   It is particularly important to avoid vulnerability of WisdomTF and
   its working-groups to the political equivalent of what is called
   "denial of service" attacks in the technical realm: It must not be
   possible for beneficiaries of the status quo (who may fear a
   potential loss of power) to disrupt discussions that could lead to
   new forms of enhanced cooperation.

6.3.  Human Rights

   The rules of WisdomTF need to ensure that all recommendations
   published by its working-groups are designed to uphold the
   fundamental principles which are internationally recognized as human
   rights, and to improve as much as possible the practical ability of
   people everywhere to enjoy their human rights.


7.  IANA Considerations

   This memo includes no request to IANA.


8.  Acknowledgements

   This memo has been inspired significantly by postings on the mailing
   list of the Civil Society Internet Governance Caucus [IGC] from
   various participants, including Bertrand de La Chapelle, Avri Doria,
   William Drake, Anriette Esterhuysen, Andrea Glorioso, Michael
   Gurstein, Wolfgang Kleinwaechter, Jeremy Malcolm, Lee W McKnight,
   Parminder Jeet Singh, and Roland Perry.  This acknowledgment of
   inspiration is not intended to imply that any of the named persons
   endorse the contents of this memo.


9.  Endorsements

   Endorsements will be solicited at a later stage.





Bollow                   Expires August 12, 2013               [Page 16]

Internet-Draft              Wisdom Task Force              February 2013


10.  Request For Comments

   Comments and other feedback of any kind regarding this Internet-Draft
   are requested in the form of postings to the mailing list of the
   Civil Society Internet Governance Caucus [IGC] (preferred) or in the
   form of personal communications to the author.


11.  Informative References

   [Bollow]   Bollow, N., "Standards for Sustainable Digital Culture
              (Background Paper)", 2012,
              <http://bollow.ch/papers/SustainableDigitalCulture.pdf>.

   [Culture]  Bollow, N., "IGF Workshop: Standards for Sustainable
              Digital Culture", 2012,
              <http://wsms1.intgovforum.org/node/21>.

   [Dettmer]  Dettmer, H W., "The Logical Thinking Process", ISBN 978-0-
              87389-723-5, 2008.

   [ECTF]     Bollow, N., "Request For Action to Establish an Enhanced
              Cooperation Task Force", Work in progress , 2013,
              <http://enhanced-cooperation.org/RFA/1>.

   [IGC]      Civil Society Internet Governance Caucus, "Mailing list",
              <http://igcaucus.org/membership>.

   [Links]    Civil Society Internet Governance Caucus, "Links",
              <http://igcaucus.org/links>.

   [Outrage]  Bollow, N., "Digital-Age.Info Declaration of Outrage",
              2013, <http://digital-age.info/>.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC3552]  Rescorla, E. and B. Korver, "Guidelines for Writing RFC
              Text on Security Considerations", BCP 72, RFC 3552,
              July 2003.

   [WSIS-CS]  Civil Society, "Declaration to the World Summit on the
              Information Society", 2003, <http://www.itu.int/wsis/docs/
              geneva/civil-society-declaration.pdf>.







Bollow                   Expires August 12, 2013               [Page 17]

Internet-Draft              Wisdom Task Force              February 2013


Author's Address

   Norbert Bollow
   Weidlistrasse 18
   CH-8624 Gruet,
   Switzerland

   Phone: +41 44 972 20 59
   Email: nb@bollow.ch
   URI:   http://bollow.ch/









































Bollow                   Expires August 12, 2013               [Page 18]

