A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3376
                 
        Title:      Internet Group Management Protocol, Version 3
        Author(s):  B. Cain, S. Deering, I. Kouvelas, B. Fenner,
                    A. Thyagarajan
        Status:     Standards Track
        Date:       October 2002
        Mailbox:    deering@cisco.com, fenner@research.att.com,
                    kouvelas@cisco.com
        Pages:      53
        Characters: 119726
        Obsoletes:  2236

        I-D Tag:    draft-ietf-idmr-igmp-v3-11.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3376.txt


This document specifies Version 3 of the Internet Group Management
Protocol, IGMPv3.  IGMP is the protocol used by IPv4 systems to report
their IP multicast group memberships to neighboring multicast routers.
Version 3 of IGMP adds support for "source filtering", that is, the
ability for a system to report interest in receiving packets *only*
from specific source addresses, or from *all but* specific source
addresses, sent to a particular multicast address.  That information
may be used by multicast routing protocols to avoid delivering
multicast packets from specific sources to networks where there are no
interested receivers.

This document obsoletes RFC 2236.

This document is a product of the Inter-Domain Multicast Routing
Working Group of the IETF.

This is now a Proposed Standard Protocol.

This document specifies an Internet standards track protocol for the
Internet community, and requests discussion and suggestions for
improvements.  Please refer to the current edition of the "Internet
Official Protocol Standards" (STD 1) for the standardization state
and status of this protocol.  Distribution of this memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.
