
Network Working Group                  Joseph                                       
Internet Draft                         (Juniper Networks)
Intended Status: Proposed Standard     August 19, 2009
Expiration Date: February 2010          
                                       

                  Experience with rsvp-te p2mp based mvpn

                  draft-joseph-p2mp-mvpn-experience-00.txt


Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.


Copyright and License Notice

   Copyright (c) 2009 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors. All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents in effect on the date of
   publication of this document (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info).
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.

   This document may contain material from IETF Documents or IETF
   Contributions published or made publicly available before November
   10, 2008. The person(s) controlling the copyright in some of this
   material may not have granted the IETF Trust the right to allow
   modifications of such material outside the IETF Standards Process.



Joseph                                                         [Page 1]
 
Internet Draft  draft-joseph-p2mp-mvpn-experience-00.txt       August 2009


   Without obtaining an adequate license from the person(s) controlling
   the copyright in such materials, this document may not be modified
   outside the IETF Standards Process, and derivative works of it may
   not be created outside the IETF Standards Process, except to format
   it for publication as an RFC or to translate it into languages other
   than English.


Abstract

   Multicast based VPNs have been deployed for a while now, based on the 
   Draft Rosen solution. In today's scenario, network deployments are moving 
   towards a choice Label Switched Multicast, primarily to garner some of the 
   advantages that a Label Switched Network can offer. In short, the 
   requirement is to achieve more optimal multicast replication and in other 
   words achieve better and effective bandwidth savings. This document describes 
   some of the experiences gained from the implementation and deployment of 
   Label Switched multicast using the RSVP-TE P2MP Label Switched Path approach, 
   and such is information only. The intent is to translate the experiences 
   gained into valuable practices for the Service Provider and Enterprise community 
   who intend to deploy this class of mVPNs. Information based on "Hierarchical 
   Multicast Trees" and "Aggregated P Tunnels" have not been included, and will 
   follow in the next version of this draft.
   
   
Specification of Requirements

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].


1. Introduction

   Draft Rosen based mVPN deployments did not impose any mVPN awareness 
   on the Provider routers, since it used overlay GRE based PIM siganlling 
   between PE routers in order to build indiviual and customer specific 
   Multicast Domains. Going back into a little bit of history, RFC4364
   originally RFC 2547bis (and draft-ietf-l3vpn-rfc2547bis), has not 
   described a mechanism to provide multicast signaling and multicast 
   data delivery through the service provider network for Layer 3 VPN 
   service. Thus, a number of solutions were discussed and various 
   architectures were implemented based on a given vendor. 
   Currently, the Layer 3 VPN working group has two drafts in 
   draft-ietf-l3vpn-2547bis-mcast-07.txt (we use the term [LSM-MVPN-DP] 
   to refer to this draft and draft-ietf-l3vpn-2547bis-mcast-bgp-05.txt 
   (We use the term [LSM-MVPN-CP] to refer to this draft.

   The draft-ietf-l3vpn-2547bis-mcast document is a superset of 
   previous solutions and provides many approaches as options 
   without mandating any of the them. In other words it forms a framework 
   for a more detailed specification of each option. One of the options 
   available is RSVP-TE. So when we refer to the term "LSM-MVPN-DP", we 
   are actually referring to the option of using RSVP-TE. 

   The draft "ietf-l3vpn-2547bis-mcast-bgp-05.txt" defines the control 
   plane signalling using MP-BGP for exchanging Customer Multicast 
   routes within the Provider network. 

   In this document, we describe some of the lessons learnt from 
   implementing and deploying Multicast VPN using the P2MP RSVP-TE 
   approach. We hope it will benefit service providers and network 
   operators looking to deploy this mVPN services based on this approach.



Joseph                                                         [Page 2]
 
Internet Draft  draft-joseph-p2mp-mvpn-experience-00.txt       August 2009


2. Implementation

   As of writing, there are two known implementations in IOS-XR 
   from Cisco and JunOS from Juniper Networks. Contact these vendors 
   for implementation details beyond what is provided in this draft. 
   In the following sections, we describe some of lessons we learnt 
   during implementation and early interoperability testing stage.


3. ASM vs. SSM

   One of the most common questions asked or assessed while deploying 
   mVPN, especially while deploying Draft Rosen mVPNs. In this case, the 
   SSM Model offers two options namely "I-PMSI" which indeed replicates 
   the ASM model to a large extent, followed by the "S-PMSI" model which 
   is purely source based. In other words, the S-PMSI model ensures that 
   traffic only reaches PE routers for a given mVPN that has interested 
   receivers, which is indicated by the Receiver PE using a Type 7 
   Multicast route advertisement. The I-PMSI model is similar to the ASM 
   approach as mentioned earlier in this section - as multicast traffic 
   is sent to all PEs within a given mVPN. However Receiver PEs that do 
   not have interested receivers drop the traffic at that point. 
   So in reality the choice here can directly rule out the ASM Model, and 
   instead focus on the two SSM alternates available. Before we answer 
   this question, let us look at the following sections for certain 
   considerations first.


4. RSVP Scalability

   One of the points to be considered is RSVP Scalability. Looking at a 
   scenario where we have 1 Source PE and 3 Receiver PEs physically 
   connected via a single Provider router, we would have the following:
   Based on the BGP A-D received from the leaf nodes (Receiver PEs), 
   the Source PE signals RSVP-PATH messages to each Leaf Node, which is 
   reciprocated with RSVP-RESV messages. In this case, we are talking 
   about 6 PATH/RESV messages and state for 3 LSPs in total. The number 
   of messages increases at the Provider router, which is the point 
   of replication for the Sub-LSPs to each Lead Node, as it creates 
   a P2MP LSP which results in 2 PATH/RESV message to each leaf node. 
   Therefore the core router forwards/receives 12 PATH/RESV messages 
   and maintains state for 3 LSPs in total. 



Joseph                                                         [Page 3]
 
Internet Draft  draft-joseph-p2mp-mvpn-experience-00.txt       August 2009


5. BGP Scalability

   It is recommended to use BGP Route Reflectors for scalability reasons. 
   It is very common to see operators deploy dedicated Reflectors per 
   address family to simplify administrations, and operations and also to 
   provide scalability. Therefore it may be a good idea to look at 
   deploying Route Reflectors per address family. Certain hardware vendors 
   do offer the capability of dedicating Routing Engines/Route Processors 
   within a single chassis to serve each address family. This could also 
   be an option, since it would offer better consolidation, and provide 
   a cost effective solution. 


6. Resiliency and Convergence within the Provider Core 

   At the time of writing this document, RSVP-TE supports Fast Re-route 
   Facility backup/Link Protection for sub-second convergence. Therefore 
   traffic from a failed link can be switched over to a bypass path even 
   before the Routing Protocol process is aware of the failure. 
   In addition, we recommend tuning the IGP to achieve Fast Convergence, 
   in order for the local PE router to be aware of a remote link failure. 
   IGP fast convergence only has an impact on the time taken for the 
   headend router to signal a failed LSP over an alternate path and 
   therefore does not directly have a bearing on the switchover time 
   for RSVP-TE. The most common IGP parameters tuned for quick 
   convergence are; initial delay for generating Link State updates 
   upon a failure - which should be set to take effect immediately, 
   and SPF calculation which should also be set to the best minimum 
   possible as per the hardware vendor's recommendation.

   Node failures in certain cases caused recovery times to increase
   upto 180 seconds, and the use of BFD in the context of an LSP
   reduced the convergence times, and is recommended.

   It is also important to quickly detect a failure. It has been found 
   that - interface dampening, at times can result in the physical status 
   of the link being suppressed. This  would have an impact on the 
   convergence. Certain hardware has default timers set for Gigabit 
   Ethernet interfaces which are referred as "Carrier-Delay". It is 
   recommended that this value be set to "0", in order to enforce 
   an immediate link-down trigger in the event of a link failure. 

   Both Juniper and Cisco support BGP Fast convergence features that avoid 
   long and cumbersome re-writes of the FIB tables in the event of a path 
   to a given Next-Hop changes. Therefore no special or additional 
   configuration is required.
  


Joseph                                                         [Page 4]
 
Internet Draft  draft-joseph-p2mp-mvpn-experience-00.txt       August 2009


7. Resiliency End-to-End

   Assuming there is more than one Source available for a given group. 
   Two options have been evaluated. The first is to use Anycast RP for 
   two multicast sources for instance, and the address with the longest 
   prefix match automatically becomes the preferred primary source. 

   The second approach is using separate unicast IP addresses - let 
   us assume we are using two sources. In this case, two separate 
   PIM joins are sent to both the sources (Let us say PIM joins 
   are sent to both S1 and S2). Therefore we may have (S1,G1) and 
   (S2,G2). It is also possible to have a single source multi-homed 
   to the ingress PE and achieve link level resilliency at the 
   sending site (between the CE and PE). In this case, something 
   similar to the illustration provided below was tested. 
   Two streams are delivered to the Leaf PE, however using two VRFs:    
              

            +-----------+          +-----------+
            | in PE     |          | LeafPE    |
          __|__,-----.  | ,-------.|  ,-----.__|_____
  ,---.  /  | ( VRF1  )..( M-VPN1  ... VRF1  ) |     \  ,---.
 /     \/   |  `-----'  | `-------'|  `-----'  |      \/ Dest\
(SOURCE |   |           |          |           |      (   CE  )
 \     /\___|__,-----.  | ,-------.|  ,-----.  |      /\     /
  `---'     | ( VRF2  )... M-VPN2  ... VRF2  )_|_____/  `---'
            |  `-----'  | `-------'|  `-----'  |
            +-----------+          +-----------+
   
   The former is subject to network convergence, which includes 
   IGP, and BGP and RSVP (in case S-PMSI) is used. The reason 
   here is that [LSM-mVPN-DP] chooses a single UMH 
   (Upstream Multicast Hop) for forwarding.

   The later adds more burden on the Provider network, since 
   two copies are being simultaneously forwarded in the network 
   for the same set of groups. In other words one copy is 
   redundant. However failover in this case, is much quicker 
   than the first option - since the application can 
   re-converge to the redundant/second copy in the event of 
   the primary copy being un-available. Moreover there is 
   no re-synchronization at any control plane protocols 
   needed to achieve failover. Many operators can choose option-1 
   for standard service offerings, and option-2 may be offered 
   as a premium - for the simple fact that provider bandwidth 
   usage is being doubled.



Joseph                                                         [Page 5]
 
Internet Draft  draft-joseph-p2mp-mvpn-experience-00.txt       August 2009


8. Recommendations for the Type of Source Trees 

   In the section above we discussed some of the details in 
   regard to convergence and scalability, and now let us 
   address some recommendations based on experience. The 
   goal of a network designer evolves around achieving an 
   acceptable and optimal level of multicast forwarding in the 
   provider core. By virtue of being acceptable, firstly we 
   recommend that as far as possible traffic should only be 
   forwarded to PEs that have interested receivers for a given 
   group. Secondly while in the backbone, No more than one 
   copy a packet traverses any link. Thirdly, if bandwidth 
   utilization needs to be optimized within the 
   backbone, then a minimum cost tree should be followed 
   rather than a shortest path tree. The number of states 
   in a core network is proportional to the following:
     + Inclusive P-tunnel: number of VRF members of all 
       MVPNs in the network.
     + Selective P-tunnels: total Number of multicast flows 
       ((C-S, C-G)) of all MVPNs.

   It is found that I-PMSI tunnels work well for most 
   implementations, and can tuned with a threshold rate for 
   multicast traffic flows - which will force traffic to 
   switch to a S-PMSI tunnels. We have found that if the 
   ratio between number of member PEs vs. number of receiver 
   PEs for a given mVPN is low - it is more than obvious 
   than the I-PMSI tunnel approach would be recommended, 
   since Selective Tunnels do not help in bandwidth savings. 
   This will have a saving on the state information, since 
   lesser trees are used in the provider network. We have 
   seen convergence being directly proportionate to the amount 
   of state information the network carries.

   S-PMSI tunnels can be used within an mVPN on a per group 
   basis, for high bandwidth sessions on an individual 
   basis - if needed. This could be a typical requirement 
   for an operator for whom bandwidth savings is more important 
   than scalability. 



Joseph                                                         [Page 6]
 
Internet Draft  draft-joseph-p2mp-mvpn-experience-00.txt       August 2009


9. PHP

   The egress PE device does not maintain any multicast state 
   information with the core, similar to the mode used in 
   Draft Rosen. There is no PIM relationship, nor any GRE tunnels 
   with the Provider and Provider Edge devices. The only 
   binding fact, is the MPLS Multicast Tree and its respective 
   label association (which is based on a combination of incoming 
   interface and label space). Therefore, the packet needs to have 
   the labels intact in order to associate the respective multicast 
   tree and egress interface (CE Facing). Therefore PHP is not used 
   in this case. This typically is the default behavior and no 
   additional configuration should be required to enable this.


10. QoS

    Classification and queuing is based on MPLS EXP bits. 
    The recommendation is to have multicast traffic not subject 
    to early drops such as WRED/RED and provide temporal buffering 
    within the queue that carries multicast traffic, in order to 
    ensure that the latency/jitter is predictable. 


11. MTU

   No special requirements for handling Label Switched mVPN traffic. 
   However it is recommended to have the largest MTU value supported 
   on the entire network, set.


12. IANA Considerations

   This document introduces no new IANA Considerations.


13. Security Considerations

   This document introduces no new Security Considerations.


14. Acknowledgements


15. Normative References

   [RFC2119] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
   Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [MVPN] E. Rosen, R. Aggarwal [Editors], "Multicast in MPLS/BGP IP
   VPNs", draft-ietf-l3vpn-2547bis-mcast, work in progress

   [MVPN-BGP], R. Aggarwal, E. Rosen, T. Morin, Y. Rekhter, "BGP
   Encodings for Multicast in MPLS/BGP IP VPNs", draft-ietf-
   l3vpn-2547bis-mcast-bgp, work in progress





Joseph                                                         [Page 7]
 
Internet Draft  draft-joseph-p2mp-mvpn-experience-00.txt       August 2009


16. Non-normative References


17. Author Information

   Joseph
   Juniper Networks, Inc.
   e-mail: vjoseph@juniper.net

   

























Joseph                                                           [Page 8]


