


Network Working Group                                          JM. Valin
Internet-Draft                                                   Mozilla
Intended status: Informational                                S. Borilin
Expires: January 30, 2012                                     SPIRIT DSP
                                                                  K. Vos
                                                 Skype Technologies S.A.
                                                           C. Montgomery
                                                     Xiph.Org Foundation
                                                                 R. Chen
                                                    Broadcom Corporation
                                                           July 29, 2011


          Guidelines for the Codec Development Within the IETF
                     draft-ietf-codec-guidelines-03

Abstract

   This document provides general guidelines for work on developing and
   specifying a codec within the IETF.  These guidelines cover the
   development process, evaluation, requirements conformance, and
   intellectual property issues.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 30, 2012.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of



Valin, et al.           Expires January 30, 2012                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft              Codec Guidelines                   July 2011


   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Development Process  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Evaluation, Testing, and Characterization  . . . . . . . . . .  7
   4.  Specifying the Codec . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   5.  Intellectual Property  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   6.  Relationship with Other SDOs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   7.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   8.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   9.  Acknowledgments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
   10. References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
     10.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
     10.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19




























Valin, et al.           Expires January 30, 2012                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft              Codec Guidelines                   July 2011


1.  Introduction

   This document describes a suggested process for work at the IETF on
   standardization of a codec that is optimized for use in interactive
   Internet applications and that can be widely implemented and easily
   distributed among application developers, service operators, and end
   users.












































Valin, et al.           Expires January 30, 2012                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft              Codec Guidelines                   July 2011


2.  Development Process

   The process outlined here is intended to make the work on a codec
   within the IETF transparent, predictable, and well organized.  Such
   work might involve development of a completely new codec, adaptation
   of an existing codec to meet the requirements of the working group,
   or integration between two or more existing codecs that results in an
   improved codec combining the best aspects of each.  To enable such
   procedural transparency, the contributor of an existing codec must be
   willing to cede change control to the IETF and should have sufficient
   knowledge of the codec to assist in the work of adapting it or
   applying some of its technology to the development or improvemnet of
   other codecs.  Furthermore, contributors need to be aware that any
   codec that results from work within the IETF is likely to be
   different from any existing codec that was contributed to the
   Internet Standards Process.

   Work on codec development is expected to proceed as follows:

   1.  IETF participants will identify the requirements to be met by an
       Internet codec, in the form of an Internet-Draft.

   2.  Interested parties are encouraged to make contributions proposing
       existing or new codecs, or elements thereof, to the codec WG as
       long as these contributions are within the scope of the WG.
       Ideally, these contributions should be in the form of Internet
       Drafts, although other forms of contributions are also possible,
       as discussed in [PROCESS].

   3.  Given the importance of IPR to the activities of the working
       group, any IPR disclosures must be made in a timely way.
       Contributors are required, as described in [IPR], to disclose any
       known IPR, both first and third party.  Timely disclosures are
       particularly important, since those disclosures may be material
       to the decision process of the working group.

   4.  As contributions are received and discussed within the working
       group, the group should gain a clearer understanding of what is
       achievable within the design space.  As a result, the authors of
       the requirements document should iteratively clarify and improve
       their document to reflect the emerging working group consensus.
       This is likely to involve collaboration with IETF working groups
       in other areas, such as collaboration with working groups in the
       Transport area to identify important aspects of packet
       transmission over the Internet and to understand the degree of
       rate adaptation desirable, and with working groups in the RAI
       area to ensure that information about and negotiation of the
       codec can be easily represented at the signaling layer.  In



Valin, et al.           Expires January 30, 2012                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft              Codec Guidelines                   July 2011


       parallel with this work, interested parties should evaluate the
       contributions at a higher level to see which requirements might
       be met by each codec.

   5.  Once a sufficient number of proposals has been received, the
       interested parties will identify the strengths, weaknesses, and
       innovative aspects of the contributed codecs.  This step will
       consider not only the codecs as a whole, but also key features of
       the individual algorithms (predictors, quantizers, transforms,
       etc.).

   6.  Interested parties are encouraged to collaborate together and
       combine the best ideas from the various codec contributions into
       a consolidated codec definition, representing the merging of some
       of the contributions.  Through this iterative process, the number
       of proposals will reduce and consensus will generally form around
       one of them.  At that point, the working group should adopt that
       document as a working group item, forming a baseline codec.

   7.  IETF participants should then attempt to iteratively add to or
       improve each component of the baseline codec reference
       implementation, where by "component" we mean individual
       algorithms such as predictors, transforms, quantizers, and
       entropy coders.  The participants should proceed by trying new
       designs, applying ideas from the contributed codecs, evaluating
       "proof of concept" ideas, and using their expertise in codec
       development to improve the baseline codec.  Any aspect of the
       baseline codec might be changed (even the fundamental principles
       of the codec) or the participants might start over entirely by
       scrapping the baseline codec and designing a completely new one.
       The overriding goal shall be to design a codec that will meet the
       requirements defined in the requirements document.  Given the
       IETF's open standards process, any interested party will be able
       to contribute to this work, whether or not they submitted an
       Internet-Draft for one of the contributed codecs.  The codec
       itself should be normatively specified with code in an Internet-
       Draft.

   8.  In parallel with work on the codec reference implementation,
       developers and other interested parties should perform evaluation
       of the codec as described under Section 3, IETF participants
       should define (within the AVT Working Group) the codec's payload
       format for use with the Real-time Transport Protocol [RTP].
       Ideally, application developers should test the codec by
       implementing it in code and deploying it in actual Internet
       applications.  Unfortunately, developers will frequently wait
       until RFC or until a stable bitstream is guaranteed before
       deployment.  As such, this is a nice-to-have and not a



Valin, et al.           Expires January 30, 2012                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft              Codec Guidelines                   July 2011


       requirement for this process.  Lab implementations are certainly
       encouraged.

   9.  As the developed codec stabilizes and the group feels no more
       changes are needed, the testing done to date is taken, along with
       any additional testing required to give confidence that the codec
       meets the requirements.  The process of testing is described
       under Section 3.











































Valin, et al.           Expires January 30, 2012                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft              Codec Guidelines                   July 2011


3.  Evaluation, Testing, and Characterization

   Lab evaluation of the codec being developed should happen throughout
   the development process because it will help ensure that progress is
   being made toward fulfillment of the requirements.  There are many
   ways in which continuous evaluation can be performed.  For minor,
   uncontroversial changes to the codec it should usually be sufficient
   to use objective measurements (e.g., PESQ, PEAQ, and SegSNR)
   validated by informal subjective evaluation.  For more complex
   changes (e.g., when psychoacoustic aspects are involved) or for
   controversial issues, internal testing should be performed.  An
   example of internal testing would be to have individual participants
   rate the decoded samples using one of the established testing
   methodologies, such as ITU-R BS.1534 (MUSHRA).

   Throughout the process, it will be important to make use of the
   Internet community at large for real-world distributed testing.  This
   will enable many different people with different equipment and use
   cases to test the codec and report any problems they experience.  In
   the same way, third-party developers will be encouraged to integrate
   the codec into their software (with a warning about the bit-stream
   not being final) and provide feedback on its performance in real-
   world use cases.

   Characterization of the final codec must be based on the reference
   implementation only (and not on any "private implementation").  This
   can be performed by independent testing labs or, if this is not
   possible, using the testing labs of the organizations that contribute
   to the Internet Standards Process.  Packet loss robustness should be
   evaluated using actual loss patterns collected from use over the
   Internet, rather than theoretical models.  The goals of the
   characterization phase are to:

   o  ensure that the requirements have been fulfilled

   o  guide the IESG in its evaluation of the resulting work

   o  assist application developers in understanding whether the codec
      is suitable for a particular application

   The exact methodology for the characterization phase can be
   determined the working group.  Because the IETF does not have testing
   resources of its own, it has to rely on the resources of its
   participants.  For this reason, even if the group agrees that a
   particular test is important, if no one volunteers to do it, or if
   volunteers do not complete it in a timely fashion, then that test
   should be discarded.  This ensures that only important tests be done,
   and in particular those tests which are important to participants.



Valin, et al.           Expires January 30, 2012                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft              Codec Guidelines                   July 2011


4.  Specifying the Codec

   Specifying a codec requires careful consideration around what is
   required vs. what is left to the implementation.  The following text
   provides suggestions for consideration by the working group:

   1.  Any codec specified by the IETF must include source code for a
       normative software implementation, documented in an Internet
       Draft destined for standards track RFC.  This implementation will
       be used to verify conformance of an implementation.  Although a
       text description of the algorithm should be provided, its use
       should be limited to helping the reader in understanding the
       source code.  Should the description contradict the source code,
       the latter shall take precedence.  For convenience, the source
       code may be provided in compressed form, with base64 encoding.

   2.  Because of the size and complexity of most codecs, it is possible
       that even after publishing the RFC, bugs will be found in the
       reference implementation, or differences between the
       implementation and the text description.  An errata of the RFC
       should be maintained, along with a public software repository
       containing the current reference implementation.

   3.  It is the intention of the group to allow the greatest possible
       choice of freedom in implementing the specification.
       Accordingly, the number of binding RFC2119 keywords will be the
       minimum that still allows interoperable implementations.  In
       practice this generally means that only the decoder needs to be
       normative, so that the encoder can improve over time.  This also
       enables different trade-offs between quality and complexity.

   4.  To reduce the risk of bias towards certain CPU/DSP architectures,
       ideally the decoder specification should not require "bit-exact"
       conformance with the reference implementation.  In that case, the
       output of a decoder implementation should only be "close enough"
       to the output of the reference decoder and a comparison tool
       should be provided along with the codec to verify objectively
       that the output of a decoder is likely to be perceptually
       indistinguishable from that of the reference decoder.  An
       implementation may still wish to produce an output that is bit-
       exact with the reference implementation to simplify the testing
       procedure.

   5.  To ensure freedom of implementation, decoder-side only error
       concealment does not need to be specified, although the reference
       implementation should include the same PLC algorithm as used in
       the testing phase.  Is it up to the working group to decide
       whether minimum requirements on PLC quality will be required for



Valin, et al.           Expires January 30, 2012                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft              Codec Guidelines                   July 2011


       compliance with the specification.  Obviously, any information
       signaled in the bitstream intended to aid PLC needs to be
       specified.

   6.  An encoder implementation should not be required to make use of
       all the "features" (tools) in the bit-stream definition.
       However, the codec specification may require that an encoder
       implementation be able to generate any possible bit-rate.  Unless
       a particular "profile" is defined in the specification, the
       decoder must be able to decode all features of the bit-stream.
       The decoder must also be able to handle any combination of bits,
       even combinations that cannot be generated by the reference
       encoder.  It is recommended that the decoder specification shall
       define how the decoder should react to "impossible" packets (e.g.
       reject, consider as valid).  However, an encoder must never
       generate such packets that do not conform to the bit-stream
       definition.

   7.  Compressed test vectors should be provided as a means to verify
       conformance with the decoder specification.  These test vectors
       should be designed to exercise as much of the decoder code as
       possible.

   8.  While the exact encoder will not be specified, it is recommended
       to specify objective measurement targets for an encoder, below
       which use of a particular encoder implementation is not
       recommended.  For example, one such specification could be: "the
       use of an encoder whose PESQ MOS is better than 0.1 below the
       reference encoder in the following conditions is not
       recommended".





















Valin, et al.           Expires January 30, 2012                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft              Codec Guidelines                   July 2011


5.  Intellectual Property

   Producing an unencumbered codec is desirable for the following
   reasons:

   o  It is the experience of a wide variety of application developers
      and service providers that encumbrances such as licensing and
      royalties make it difficult to implement, deploy, and distribute
      multimedia applications for use by the Internet community.

   o  It is beneficial to have low-cost options whenever possible,
      because innovation - the hallmark of the Internet - is hampered
      when small development teams cannot deploy an application because
      of usage-based licensing fees and royalties.

   o  Many market segments are moving away from selling hard-coded
      hardware devices and toward freely distributing end-user software;
      this is true of numerous large application providers and even
      telcos themselves.

   o  Compatibility with the licensing of typical open source
      applications implies the need to avoid encumbrances, including
      even the requirement to obtain a license for implementation,
      deployment, or use (even if the license does not require the
      payment of a fee).

   Therefore, a codec that can be widely implemented and easily
   distributed among application developers, service operators, and end
   users is preferred.  Many existing codecs that might fulfill some or
   most of the technical attributes listed above are encumbered in
   various ways.  For example, patent holders might require that those
   wishing to implement the codec in software, deploy the codec in a
   service, or distribute the codec in software or hardware need to
   request a license, enter into a business agreement, pay licensing
   fees or royalties, or adhere to other special conditions or
   restrictions.  Because such encumbrances have made it difficult to
   widely implement and easily distribute high-quality codecs across the
   entire Internet community, the working group prefers unencumbered
   technologies in a way that is consistent with BCP 78 and BCP 79.  In
   particular, the working group shall heed the preference stated in BCP
   79: "In general, IETF working groups prefer technologies with no
   known IPR claims or, for technologies with claims against them, an
   offer of royalty-free licensing."  Although this preference cannot
   guarantee that the working group will produce an unencumbered codec,
   the working group shall follow BCP 79, and adhere to the spirit of
   BCP 79.  The working group cannot explicitly rule out the possibility
   of adopting encumbered technologies; however, the working group will
   try to avoid encumbered technologies that require royalties or other



Valin, et al.           Expires January 30, 2012               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft              Codec Guidelines                   July 2011


   encumbrances that would prevent such technologies from being easy to
   redistribute and use.

   When considering license terms for technologies with IRP claims
   agains them, some members of the working group have expressed their
   preference for license terms which:

   o  are available to all, worldwide, whether or not they are working
      group participants

   o  extend to all essential claims owned or controlled by the licensor

   o  do not require payment of royalties, fees or other consideration

   o  do not require licensees to adhere to restrictions on usage
      (though, licenses which apply only to implementation of the
      standard are acceptable)

   o  do not otherwise impede the ability of the codec to be implemented
      in open-source software projects

   The following guidelines will help to maximize the odds that the
   codec will be unencumbered:

   1.  In accordance with BCP 79 [IPR], contributed codecs should
       preferably use technologies with no known IPR claims or
       technologies with an offer of royalty-free (RF) licensing.

   2.  As described in BCP 79, the working group should use technologies
       that are perceived by the participants to be safer with regard to
       IPR issues.

   3.  Contributors must disclose IPR as specified in BCP 79.

   4.  In cases where no RF license can be obtained regarding a patent,
       BCP 79 suggests that the working group consider alternative
       algorithms or methods, even if they result in lower quality,
       higher complexity, or otherwise less desirable characteristics.

   5.  In accordance with BCP 78 [TRUST], the source code for the
       reference implementation must be made available under a BSD-style
       license (or whatever license is defined as acceptable by the IETF
       Trust when the Internet-Draft defining the reference
       implementation is published).

   Many IPR licenses specify that a license is granted only for
   technologies which are adopted by the IETF as a standard.  While
   reasonable, this has the unintended side-effect of discouraging



Valin, et al.           Expires January 30, 2012               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft              Codec Guidelines                   July 2011


   implementation prior to RFC status.  Real-world implementation is
   beneficial for evaluation of the codec.  As such, entities making IPR
   license statements are encouraged to use wording which permits early
   implementation and deployment.

   IETF participants should be aware that, given the way patents work in
   most countries, the resulting codec can never be guaranteed to be
   free of patent claims because some patents may not be known to the
   contributors, some patent applications may not be disclosed at the
   time the codec is developed, and only courts of law can determine the
   validity and breadth of patent claims.  However, these observations
   are no different within the Internet Standards Process than they are
   for standardization of codecs within other SDOs (or development of
   codecs outside the context of any SDO), and furthermore are no
   different for codecs than for other technologies worked on within the
   IETF.  In all these cases, the best approach is to minimize the risk
   of unknowingly incurring encumbrance on existing patents.  Despite
   these precautions, participants need to understand that, practically
   speaking, it is nearly impossible to _guarantee_ that implementers
   will not incur encumbrance on existing patents.































Valin, et al.           Expires January 30, 2012               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft              Codec Guidelines                   July 2011


6.  Relationship with Other SDOs

   It is understood that other SDOs are also involved in the codec
   development and standardization, including but not necessarily
   limited to:

   o  The Telecommunication Standardization Sector (ITU-T) of the
      International Telecommunication Union (ITU), in particular Study
      Group 16

   o  The Moving Picture Experts Group (MPEG) of the International
      Organization for Standardization and International
      Electrotechnical Commission (ISO/IEC)

   o  The European Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI)

   o  The 3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP)

   o  The 3rd Generation Partnership Project 2 (3GPP2)

   It is important to ensure that such work does not constitute
   uncoordinated protocol development, of the kind described in
   [UNCOORD] in the following principle:

      [T]he IAB considers an essential principle of the protocol
      development process that only one SDO maintains design authority
      for a given protocol, with that SDO having ultimate authority over
      the allocation of protocol parameter code-points; defining the
      intended semantics, interpretation, and actions associated with
      those code-points.

   The work envisioned by this guidelines document is not uncoordinated
   in the sense described in the foregoing quote, since the intention of
   this process is that two possible outcomes might occur:

   1.  The IETF adopts an existing codec, and specifies that it is the
       "anointed" IETF Internet codec.  In such a case, codec ownership
       lies entirely with the SDO which produced the codec, and not with
       the IETF, OR

   2.  The IETF produces a new codec.  Even if this codec uses concepts,
       algorithms, codepoints, or even source code from a codec produced
       by another SDO, the IETF codec is a specification unto itself and
       under complete control of the IETF.  Any changes or enhancements
       made by the original SDO to the codecs whose components the IETF
       used are not applicable to the IETF codec.  Such changes would be
       incorporated as a consequence of a revision or extension of the
       IETF RFC.



Valin, et al.           Expires January 30, 2012               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft              Codec Guidelines                   July 2011


   Although there is already sufficient codec expertise available among
   IETF participants to complete the envisioned work, additional
   contributions are welcome within the framework of the Internet
   Standards Process, in the following ways:

   o  Individuals who are technical contributors to codec work within
      other SDOs can participate directly in codec work within the IETF.

   o  Other SDOs can contribute their expertise (e.g., codec
      characterization and evaluation techniques) and thus facilitate
      the testing of a codec produced by the IETF.

   o  Any SDO can provide input to IETF work through liaison statements.

   However, it is important to note that final responsibility for the
   development process and the resulting codec will remain with the IETF
   as governed by BCP 9 [PROCESS].

   Finally, there is precedent for the contribution of codecs developed
   elsewhere to the ITU-T (e.g., AMR Wideband was standardized
   originally within 3GPP).  This is a model to explore as the IETF
   coordinates further with the ITU-T in accordance with the
   collaboration guidelines defined in [COLLAB].




























Valin, et al.           Expires January 30, 2012               [Page 14]

Internet-Draft              Codec Guidelines                   July 2011


7.  Security Considerations

   The procedural guidelines for codec development do not have security
   considerations.  However, the resulting codec needs to take
   appropriate security considerations into account, for example as
   outlined in [DOS] and [SECGUIDE].













































Valin, et al.           Expires January 30, 2012               [Page 15]

Internet-Draft              Codec Guidelines                   July 2011


8.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no actions for IANA.
















































Valin, et al.           Expires January 30, 2012               [Page 16]

Internet-Draft              Codec Guidelines                   July 2011


9.  Acknowledgments

   We would like to thank all the other people who contributed directly
   or indirectly to this document, including Jason Fischl, Gregory
   Maxwell, Alan Duric, Jonathan Christensen, Julian Spittka, Michael
   Knappe, Timothy B. Terriberry, Christian Hoene, Stephan Wenger and
   Henry Sinnreich.  We also like to thank Cullen Jennings and Gregory
   Lebovitz for their advice.  Special thanks to Peter Saint-Andre, who
   originally co-authored this document.










































Valin, et al.           Expires January 30, 2012               [Page 17]

Internet-Draft              Codec Guidelines                   July 2011


10.  References

10.1.  Normative References

   [IPR]      Bradner, S., "Intellectual Property Rights in IETF
              Technology", BCP 79, RFC 3979, March 2005.

   [PROCESS]  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision
              3", BCP 9, RFC 2026, October 1996.

   [TRUST]    Bradner, S. and J. Contreras, "Rights Contributors Provide
              to the IETF Trust", BCP 78, RFC 5378, November 2008.

10.2.  Informative References

   [COLLAB]   Fishman, G. and S. Bradner, "Internet Engineering Task
              Force and International Telecommunication Union -
              Telecommunications Standardization Sector Collaboration
              Guidelines", RFC 3356, August 2002.

   [DOS]      Handley, M., Rescorla, E., and IAB, "Internet Denial-of-
              Service Considerations", RFC 4732, December 2006.

   [RTP]      Schulzrinne, H., Casner, S., Frederick, R., and V.
              Jacobson, "RTP: A Transport Protocol for Real-Time
              Applications", STD 64, RFC 3550, July 2003.

   [SECGUIDE]
              Rescorla, E. and B. Korver, "Guidelines for Writing RFC
              Text on Security Considerations", BCP 72, RFC 3552,
              July 2003.

   [UNCOORD]  Bryant, S. and M. Morrow, "Uncoordinated Protocol
              Development Considered Harmful", RFC 5704, November 2009.

















Valin, et al.           Expires January 30, 2012               [Page 18]

Internet-Draft              Codec Guidelines                   July 2011


Authors' Addresses

   Jean-Marc Valin
   Mozilla
   650 Castro Street
   Mountain View, CA  94041
   USA

   Email: jmvalin@jmvalin.ca


   Slava Borilin
   SPIRIT DSP


   Email: borilin@spiritdsp.net


   Koen Vos
   Skype Technologies S.A.
   Stadsgarden 6
   Stockholm,   11645
   Sweden

   Email: koen.vos@skype.net


   Christopher Montgomery
   Xiph.Org Foundation


   Email: xiphmont@xiph.org


   Raymond (Juin-Hwey) Chen
   Broadcom Corporation


   Email: rchen@broadcom.com












Valin, et al.           Expires January 30, 2012               [Page 19]

