


CLUE WG                                                          R. Even
Internet-Draft                                                    Huawei
Intended status: Informational                             June 11, 2012
Expires: December 13, 2012


               CLUE switched and mixed captures use cases
                draft-even-clue-swithed-use-cases-00.txt

Abstract

   This document describes multi stream use cases using switched and
   mixed streams.  This document present the cases when using the
   switched and mixed attributes with Boolean values may not provide the
   best results.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 13, 2012.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2012 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.




Even                    Expires December 13, 2012               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft             Switched use cases                  June 2012


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   3.  Use Cases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   4.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   5.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   6.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   7.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
     7.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
     7.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7







































Even                    Expires December 13, 2012               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft             Switched use cases                  June 2012


1.  Introduction

   The CLUE framework[I-D.ietf-clue-framework] defines "mixed" and
   "composed" attributes for media captures.  Both attributes have a
   Boolean value.  These attributes tell the receiver that the
   advertised media captures are composed or switched and the content is
   based on provider logic.

   using only Boolean values can support basic point to point call
   scenario and basic multipoint calls scenarios.

   For example we may have a Telepresence three camera system
   advertising four Capture Scene Entries (CSE).

   Note: Left, center and right position for media capture is conveyed
   using the point of capture and area of capture attributes.

      (VC1 (Left camera), VC2 (middle Camera), VC3(Right Camera))

      (VC4 (left), VC5(right))

      (VC6 (Composed))

      ( VC7(switched))

   On the consumer side a three monitor system may choose the first
   capture scene entry; a two monitor system may choose the second CSE,
   it may select VC1 and VC2 or even VC6 or VC7; a single monitor system
   may choose VC6 or VC7 or decide to ask for VC2 for example.

   In the centralized multipoint case the MCU may advertise the above
   CSE allowing the consumer to have a similar selection as the point to
   point case except that the first two CSE may have switched attribute
   for all media captures in order to allow the MCU to send views
   according to a defined policy.

   Note : The MCU advertisement may define if MCU will do site switch or
   segment switch using the scene-switch-policy attribute.  In the site
   switch case when the number of the media capturesbetween the source
   and the receivers does not match it is up to the MCU to decide how to
   handle the site switch case.

   The current framework allows this basic set of interoperability.

   Based on these CSEs, the consumer in a point to point call knows who
   the source is (both the endpoint and the spatial information).  In
   the multipoint case the mapping for the mixed and switched media
   captures content to RTP streams should be addressed by the RTP



Even                    Expires December 13, 2012               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft             Switched use cases                  June 2012


   mapping document.  This should allow for a consumer to know whose
   media he is currently receiving in each switched or mixed media
   capture.  The consumer can get a conference roster using the
   conference event package.  BTW: The MCU can add a text description in
   each sub-window of the mixed stream presenting to the user readable
   information about the source.

   The attributes specified in the current
   framework[I-D.ietf-clue-framework] without a capability message
   requires the provider to advertise CSEs that can be used by what he
   considers as typical TP systems (one to three or four camera/monitors
   systems).

   In the above case the consumer cannot control what will be the
   content of the composed or switched media captures.  The
   advertisement will provides partial information that will enable the
   consumer to render mixed views using multiple received streams based
   on consumer logic.

   Note: The current model allows the provider to update previous
   advertisements and the consumer to ask for different configurations
   from the active advertisement using the configure message.  The
   current model does not provide a way for the consumer to provide any
   information about his system hardware and software capabilities (like
   number of monitors, ability to mix multiple streams to render a
   mixed/switched view).  There is a capability message in the current
   framework [I-D.ietf-clue-framework] but it is not specified and it
   seems that there will be a consensus to remove it.


2.  Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC2119[RFC2119] and
   indicate requirement levels for compliant RTP implementations.


3.  Use Cases

   There is an interest from the CLUE WG members to look at advanced
   cases where the consumer wants to get better control over the number
   and content of the media captures.  Some of the examples given

   o  A consumer's system may have more monitors than cameras, these
      monitors can be used each as a single entity or the consumer would
      like to group a couple of them to appear as one.




Even                    Expires December 13, 2012               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft             Switched use cases                  June 2012


   o  The consumer's monitors may not be in a one row left to right
      spatial order.

   o  The consumer wants to render multiple media captures to a single
      or multiple monitors building his preferred layout.

   o  The consumer may have N monitors for main video and M monitors for
      presentation where N+M is fixed while N and M can change for each
      call or during a call.

   The above examples represent part of the possible cases where the
   consumer wants control over the content of the media captures and of
   cases where the consumer provides more information to the provider
   about his hardware and software capabilities.

   The document will try to list such cases.  Some of these cases can be
   merged.

   1.   The provider offers multiple mixed captures.  Currently the only
        attribute has a Boolean value.  The provider would like to
        provide more information about the mixes content allowing the
        consumer to select a relevant one.

   2.   The provider would like to offer only media captures that are
        useful to the consumer.  The simple case is based on the number
        of available monitors for main video.

   3.   The consumer will provide more information about his preferences
        for example the total number of monitors that can be used
        dynamically for all types of media (number of speakers, number
        of monitors for main or presentation video, the number of
        simultaneous video streams that the consumer can decode ...).
        The provider will advertise relevant CSEs that he can support to
        address these preferences.  It may be more than one option.

   4.   The MCU will offer mixed media captures (one or more) in one or
        more CSEs.  The consumer want to select how many sources are in
        each mixed capture and how the layout should look.  This will
        allow each consumer to create a personal layout if the MCU
        allows this functionality.  The MCU is doing the actual mix in
        the case.

   5.   The MCU will offer multiple media captures in one or more CSEs.
        The consumer want to select who will be seen in each mixed
        capture knowing the number of maximum media streams that can
        compose the mix.  This use cases adds to the previous one the
        ability to control the policy by which streams are added or
        removed from a mix.



Even                    Expires December 13, 2012               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft             Switched use cases                  June 2012


   6.   The MCU will offer multiple switched media captures in one or
        more CSEs.  The consumer wants to define a switching policy for
        each of the switched streams.

   7.   The MCU will offer multiple switched and mixed media captures in
        one or more CSEs.  The consumer would like to define the layouts
        topology.

   8.   The MCU will offer multiple switched and mixed media captures in
        one or more CSEs.  The consumer would like to know what the
        available layouts are and optionally define who is in each sub-
        window of the layout by defining policy or by selecting specific
        individuals.

   9.   The consumer would like to get multiple media captures and
        create his own views.  The media capture may be a switched
        stream.  The information available to the consumer should
        include the identity of the stream and its spatial information
        (example left camera from TPRoom1).  The information should be
        available when a switch occurs.

   10.  The consumer would like to define layouts to the provider to be
        used for the media captures.  The consumer accepts a mixed or
        switched stream in each sub-window.  The maximum number of
        switched streams will be the number of sub-windows.  The
        consumer will need to know who is the current stream in a mixed
        capture including his spatial information.

   Things to consider.

   o  Which cases we want to support and why not to support the others.

   o  Are there more use cases.

   o  The current framework talks about adding attributes.  It does not
      talk about adding new message to the call flow.  A new message may
      be needed from the consumer to the provider to address this case
      unless the configure message will be used for it which may require
      adding a child element to the clue-info element from the data
      model individual draft.

   o  These cases require more information from provider to consumer.
      They also require the consumer to provide information to the
      provider.  At the February interim meeting it was suggested to
      have this type of functionality in future extensions.  Is this
      still how we feel about it.





Even                    Expires December 13, 2012               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft             Switched use cases                  June 2012


4.  Acknowledgements

   place holder


5.  IANA Considerations

   TBD


6.  Security Considerations

   TBD.


7.  References

7.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

7.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.ietf-clue-framework]
              Romanow, A., Duckworth, M., Pepperell, A., and B. Baldino,
              "Framework for Telepresence Multi-Streams",
              draft-ietf-clue-framework-05 (work in progress), May 2012.


Author's Address

   Roni Even
   Huawei
   Tel Aviv,
   Israel

   Email: even.roni@huawei.com













Even                    Expires December 13, 2012               [Page 7]

