


MMUSIC WG                                                        R. Even
Internet-Draft                                       Huawei Technologies
Intended status: Informational                                 J. Lennox
Expires: August 21, 2013                                           Vidyo
                                                                   Q. Wu
                                                     Huawei Technologies
                                                       February 17, 2013


              Describing multiple RTP media streams in SDP
               draft-even-mmusic-multiple-streams-02.txt

Abstract

   This document describes issues when describing multiple RTP streams
   in a single RTP session using SDP and considers the different RTP
   topologies that should be supported.  The document looks at current
   solutions and provides paths toward addressing the issues.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 21, 2013.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of



Even, et al.             Expires August 21, 2013                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft         Multiple RTP streams in SDP         February 2013


   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   3.  RTP topologies for CLUE  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   4.  Review of current directions in MMUSIC, AVText and AVTcore . .  7
   5.  Requirements from a solution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   6.  SDP limitations and proposed solution  . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     6.1.  single RTP stream  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     6.2.  One or multiple RTP streams  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   7.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   8.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   9.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   10. References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     10.1. Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     10.2. Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13






























Even, et al.             Expires August 21, 2013                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft         Multiple RTP streams in SDP         February 2013


1.  Introduction

   Communication systems can send and receive multiple RTP media
   streams.  The streams can be multiple video streams from the same
   source/camera representing, for example, different resolutions
   (simulcast, scalable video (SVC)) or repair streams (FEC).  They can
   be different streams from the same endpoint but from different
   cameras, for example a Telepresence system sending two views of the
   room from two different cameras.  They can also be multiple streams
   from separate original endpoints, sent by a middlebox.

   RTP [RFC3550] and [I-D.ietf-avtcore-multi-media-rtp-session] allow
   the multiplexing of multiple media of the same and different types
   (video with video and audio with video] in a single RTP session
   identified by a single transport address.  The RTP streams are
   identified by their synchronization source identifiers (SSRC).

   SIP offer answer [RFC3264] uses SDP [RFC4566] to negotiate RTP
   [RFC3550] media streams.  This document discusses the capabilities
   and limitations of SDP when describing SSRC multiplexed streams.

   When looking at the following offer

   m=video 10000 RTP/AVP 31 32

   a=rtpmap:31 H261/90000

   a=rtpmap:32 MPV/90000

   What does it mean one RTP session is offered with H.261 or MPV codecs
   for the same content, or one RTP session is offered with H.261 and
   MPV codecs each with different content?

   This offer should really mean "arbitrarily many streams, with
   potentially different content, any of which could use either H.261 or
   MPV, potentially switching dynamically between them."  Now how do we
   provide enough information in SDP to allow the receiver to get a
   better understanding of what the offer is.

   Reading some text from RFC3264 it may look like a Media stream is
   defined as a single media instance

   "The offer will contain zero or more media streams (each media stream
   is described by an "m=" line and its associated attributes)."

   "In all cases, the formats in the "m=" line MUST be listed in order
   of preference, with the first format listed being preferred.  In this
   case, preferred means that the recipient of the offer SHOULD use the



Even, et al.             Expires August 21, 2013                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft         Multiple RTP streams in SDP         February 2013


   format with the highest preference that is acceptable to it."

   "For each "m=" line in the offer, there MUST be a corresponding "m="
   line in the answer.  The answer MUST contain exactly the same number
   of "m=" lines as the offer.  This allows for streams to be matched up
   based on their order"

   Since SDP and [RFC3264] offer/answer describe RTP sessions, SDP's
   term "media stream" is poorly chosen.  Careful reading reveals that a
   single SDP "media stream" can be used by arbitrarily many RTP
   streams.  (Indeed, historically this was the case in SAP, the first
   usage of SDP, which was used to describe loosely-coupled RTP
   multicast sessions with arbitrarily many participants.)

   The logic of RFC3264 about the preference does not work if you have
   multiple RTP streams in the same m-line unless the same preference
   applies to all the RTP streams.  So when we look at solution we will
   also need to clarify the text in RFC3264 and most probably will need
   to have the right terminology for RTP session, media session across
   the different documents.

   SDP [RFC4566] is used to describe the multimedia session.  The basic
   model uses a two level hierarchy, consisting of session level and
   media level.

   SDP support of multiplexing multiple media streams in one RTP session
   based on the RTP stream SSRC does not provide sufficient capabilities
   to allow each of the multiplexed RTP streams identified by SSRC to
   have unique attributes, for example different bandwidth.
   Furthermore, when an offer has multiple payload type in a single
   media level descriptor (m-line), this is identified as option to
   receive all this payload types multiplexed.

   SDP provides a framework to define grouping relations between SDP
   media streams [RFC5888].  This framework specifies the grouping based
   on the SDP media session and not on RTP stream.

   Some tools for supporting RTP stream level attributes per RTP streams
   as well as support for simulcast were proposed and this document will
   look at them.  It was not a major problem so far since most endpoints
   are using a single audio and video stream and are using SDP media
   level descriptors (m-lines) to describe each of the streams.  Some of
   the existing implementation when offering multiple payload types in a
   single m-line are doing a second offer/answer exchange offering only
   one of the payload types removing the rest in order to indicate that
   they can only receive one media type encoding at a time.  Every
   change of media type requires an offer / answer exchange.




Even, et al.             Expires August 21, 2013                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft         Multiple RTP streams in SDP         February 2013


   Currently both RTCweb and CLUE WGs have interest in better support
   for multiplexing either multiple RTP media streams from the same type
   or different types.  The work in
   [draft-ietf-mmusic-sdp-bundle-negotiation-01] and
   [draft-holmberg-mmusic-sdp-mmt-negotiation-00] provides two different
   directions for initial bundling support options for SDP negotiation
   of multiplexing different media types but the problem of identifying
   different RTP streams with different attributes is still not fully
   solved.  There is a dependency between what will be the bundling
   approach and the solution for describing individual RTP streams
   attributes.

   This document discusses the different RTP topologies and describes
   existing tools and see what they provide and how they can be extended
   to provide better SDP support for SSRC multiplexed RTP streams while
   supporting the different topologies.


2.  Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC2119[RFC2119] and
   indicate requirement levels for compliant RTP implementations.


3.  RTP topologies for CLUE

   The typical RTP topologies used by Telepresence systems specify
   different behaviors for RTP and RTCP distribution.  A number of RTP
   topologies are described in
   [I-D.westerlund-avtcore-rtp-topologies-update].  The CLUE WG
   direction is to be able to support the relevant topologies including
   point-to-point, as well as media mixers, media- switching mixers, and
   source-projection mixers.

   In the point-to-point topology, one peer communicates directly with a
   single peer over unicast.  There can be one or more RTP sessions, and
   each RTP session can carry multiple RTP streams identified by their
   SSRC.  All SSRCs will be recognized by the peers based on the
   information in the RTCP SDES report that will include the CNAME and
   SSRC of the sent RTP streams.  In some cases, a video conferencing
   system with multiple video sources in a point-to-point may
   nonetheless have RTP which is best described by one of the mixer
   topologies below.  For example, it can produce composed or switched
   RTP streams to be used by a receiving system with fewer displays than
   the sender has sources.




Even, et al.             Expires August 21, 2013                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft         Multiple RTP streams in SDP         February 2013


   In the Media Mixer topology, the peers communicate only with the
   mixer.  The mixer provides mixed or composed media streams, using its
   own SSRC for the sent streams.  There are two cases here.  In the
   first case the mixer may have separate RTP sessions with each peer
   (similar to the point to point topology) terminating the RTCP
   sessions on the mixer; this is known as Topo-RTCP-Terminating MCU in
   [I-D.westerlund-avtcore-rtp-topologies-update].  In the second case,
   the mixer can use a conference-wide RTP session similar to
   [I-D.westerlund-avtcore-rtp-topologies-update] Topo-mixer or Topo-
   Video-switching.  The major difference is that for the second case,
   the mixer uses conference-wide RTP sessions, and distributes the RTCP
   reports to all the RTP session participants, enabling them to learn
   all the CNAMEs and SSRCs of the participants and know the
   contributing source or sources (CSRCs) of the original streams from
   the RTP header.  In the first case, the Mixer terminates the RTCP and
   the participants cannot know all the available sources based on the
   RTCP information.  The conference roster information including
   conference participants, endpoints, media and media-id (SSRC) can be
   available using the conference event package [RFC4575] element.

   In the Media-Switching Mixer topology, the peer to mixer
   communication is unicast with mixer RTCP feedback.  It is
   conceptually similar to a composing mixer as described in the
   previous paragraph, except that rather than composing or mixing
   multiple sources, the mixer provides one or more conceptual sources
   selecting one source at a time from the original sources.  The Mixer
   creates a conference-wide RTP session by sharing remote SSRC values
   as CSRCs to all conference participants.

   In the Source-Projection Mixer (SPM) topology, the peer to mixer
   communication is unicast with RTCP mixer feedback.  Every potential
   sender in the conference has a source which is "projected" by the
   mixer into every other session in the conference; thus, every
   original source is maintained with an independent RTP identity to
   every receiver, maintaining separate decoding state and its original
   RTCP SDES information.  However, RTCP is terminated at the mixer,
   which might also perform reliability, repair, rate adaptation, or
   transcoding on the stream.  Senders' SSRCs may be renumbered by the
   mixer.  The sender may turn the projected sources on and off at any
   time, depending on which sources it thinks are most relevant for the
   receiver; this is the primary reason why this topology must act as an
   RTP mixer rather than as a translator, as otherwise these disabled
   sources would appear to have enormous packet loss.  Source switching
   is accomplished through this process of enabling and disabling
   projected sources, with the higher-level semantic assignment of
   reason for the RTP streams assigned externally.

   When looking at SSRC multiplexing we can see that in various



Even, et al.             Expires August 21, 2013                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft         Multiple RTP streams in SDP         February 2013


   topologies, the SSRC behavior may be different:

   1.  The SSRCs are static (assigned by the MCU/Mixer), and there is an
       SSRC for each media capture encoding defined in the CLUE
       protocol.  Source information may be conveyed using CSRC, or, in
       the case of topo-RTCP-Terminating MCU, is not conveyed.

   2.  The SSRCs are dynamic, representing the original source and are
       relayed by the Mixer/MCU to the participants.

   In the source projecting mixer (SPM) topology, the number of sources
   and their SSRCs may change dynamically.  An example is a video
   conference that starts with 4 participants and the (SPM) forwards the
   video RTP streams from 3 of them to all participants.  Later 10 more
   participants join the conference and the SPM will forward 9 video
   sources to each participant.  The projected streams keep their
   original SSRCs and each participant may get different streams relayed
   by the SPM.  The SPM creates a separate RTP session with each
   participant and will convey the origin of the media using RTCP SDES
   information.  In this case the number of RTP streams and the sources
   they are coming from may change dynamically.  This will be a
   challenge if we will need to explicitly provide in the SDP all the
   sources in the initial offer, and change it whenever a party joins or
   leaves.  There is also a scaling issue to explicitly list all the
   sources for large conferences.


4.  Review of current directions in MMUSIC, AVText and AVTcore

   This section provides an overview of the RFCs and drafts that tries
   to provide more information about RTP streams based on their SSRC and
   can be helpful to assign attribute to individual RTP streams that are
   multiplexed to a single transport address.

   When looking at the available tools based on current work in MMUSIC,
   AVTcore and AVText for supporting SSRC multiplexing at the SDP level
   the following documents are considered to be relevant.

   SDP Source attribute [RFC5576] mechanisms to describe specific
   attributes of RTP sources based on their SSRC.  This document defines
   a mechanism to describe RTP sources, identified by their
   synchronization source(SSRC) identifier, in SDP, to associate
   attributes with these sources, and to express relationships among
   individual sources.  It also defines a number of new SDP attributes
   that apply to individual sources ("source-level" attributes),
   describes how a number of existing media stream ("media-level")
   attributes can also be applied at the source level, and establishes
   IANA registries for source-level attributes and source grouping



Even, et al.             Expires August 21, 2013                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft         Multiple RTP streams in SDP         February 2013


   semantics.  This mechanism provides an extensible framework but that
   implies that there will be a need to specify source level attributes
   and probably to change the IANA procedure for attribute registration
   adding the requirement to specify if it is also source level
   attribute ( currently [RFC4566] requires for type of attribute to
   specify (session level, media level, or both))

   [I-D.westerlund-mmusic-max-ssrc] a signaling solution for how to use
   multiple SSRCs within one RTP session.  This document also defines
   two new SDP attributes, "max-send-ssrc" and" max-recv-ssrc".  The
   attributes allows an entity to, for a given media description,
   indicate sending and receiving capabilities of multiple media
   sources, based on codec usage .  Since the number of payload type
   numbers in an SDP m-line specifies that all these payloads can be
   received this draft provides a way to specify how many can be sent
   and received simultaneously.  Still if there are more payload type
   numbers in the m-line it is still implies that a receiver must be
   able to receive any subset at any given time but no more than max-
   ssrc.

   A proposed solution to support simulcast is defined in
   [I-D.westerlund-avtcore-rtp-simulcast].  Simulcast is an application
   usage where multiple media streams derived from the same media source
   may be sent simultaneously.  The document discusses the best way of
   accomplishing this in RTP using a session-based solution.  The
   document describes a solution where each stream from the unicast
   stream will use a separate RTP session.  Section 4.2 of the document
   looks at using a single RTP session using RFC5576 [RFC5576] and the
   proposed source name attribute specified in
   [I-D.westerlund-avtext-rtcp-sdes-srcname].  Another way for a single
   seesion support may be by using a different payload type numbers but
   section 4.1 of [I-D.westerlund-avtcore-rtp-simulcast] discourages
   such usage.

   [I-D.westerlund-avtext-rtcp-sdes-srcname] provides an extension that
   may be send in SDP, as an RTCP SDES information or as an RTP header
   extension that uniquely identifies a single media source.  It defines
   a hierarchical order of the SRCNAME parameter that can be used, for
   example, to describe multiple resolutions from the same source (see
   section 5.1 of [I-D.westerlund-avtcore-rtp-simulcast]).  Still all
   the examples are using RTP session multiplexing and there is no
   description of using a single RTP session.  This can probably be
   addressed using bundle with separate m-line for each resolution.

   Other documents that discusses the media source issue and may be
   required as part of the solution includes:

   [I-D.lennox-mmusic-sdp-source-selection] specifies how participants



Even, et al.             Expires August 21, 2013                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft         Multiple RTP streams in SDP         February 2013


   in a multimedia session can request a specific source from a remote
   party.

   [I-D.westerlund-avtext-codec-operation-point] extends the codec
   control messages by specifying messages that let participants
   communicate a set of codec configuration parameters.

   Negotiation of generic image attributes in SDP [RFC6236] provides the
   means to negotiate the image size.  The image attribute can be used
   to offer different image parameters like size but in order to offer
   multiple RTP streams with different resolutions it does it using
   separate RTP session for each image option.


5.  Requirements from a solution

   When two or more endpoints with multiple sources communicate with
   each other and requires multiplexing multiple media types in the same
   RTP session,the following requirements should be addressed:

   o  It should be possible to group relationships among sources of an
      RTP session

   o  It should be possible to identify streams among sources of an RTP
      session

   o  It should be possible to indicate the maximum number of Sources
      and Receivers

   o  It should be possible to negotiate Codec Configuration parameters

   o  It should be possible to request the transmission of specific
      sources

   o  It should be possible to indicate the priority of transmission of
      sources

   o  It should be possible to indicate support of multiple media type
      multiplexing

   o  It should be possible to support receipt of multiple RTP sources
      without explicit per-source signaling or negotiation.

   o  It must be possible for a multimedia session to use multiple
      transport flows for a given media type where it is considered
      valuable (for example, for distributed media, or differential
      quality-of-service).




Even, et al.             Expires August 21, 2013                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft         Multiple RTP streams in SDP         February 2013


   o  It must be possible for a source to be placed into a switched RTP
      session even if the source is a "late joiner", i.e. was added to
      the conference after the receiver requested the switched source.

   o  It must be possible for a receiver to identify the actual source
      that is currently being mapped to a switched media stream, and
      correlate it with out-of-band information such as rosters.

   o  If a given source is being sent on the same transport flow (media
      track) for more than one reason (e.g. if it corresponds to more
      than one RTCwen Mediastream at once), it should be possible for a
      sender to send only one copy of the source.

   o  On the network, media flows should, as much as possible, look and
      behave like currently-defined usages of existing protocols;
      established semantics of existing protocols must not be redefined.

   o  The solution should seek to minimize the processing burden for
      boxes that distribute media to decoding hardware.

   o  If multiple sources from a single synchronization context are
      being sent simultaneously, it must be possible for a receiver to
      associate and synchronize them properly.


6.  SDP limitations and proposed solution

   As the default behavior, Group relationship among sources of an RTP
   session can be indicated by extending the Session Description
   Protocol (SDP) Grouping Framework [RFC5888].  However the Session
   Description Protocol (SDP) Grouping Framework is limited to one media
   description per SFP m-line and does not support multiplexing multiple
   media types in one RTP session.  Alternatively, Group relationship
   among sources of an RTP session can be implicitly indicated using
   hierarchical order of the SRCNAME parameter defined in
   [I-D.westerlund-avtext-rtcp-sdes-srcname].

   Normally each RTP stream in the multiplexed RTP streams is identified
   by its SSRC.  However in some cases, one media stream may include
   multiple sub-stream sharing the same properties, e.g., scalable
   media.  In such cases, the capability to identify each sub-stream
   among sources of an RTP session is required.
   [I-D.westerlund-avtext-codec-operation-point] provides a means for
   sub-stream identification.  However such means are too much codec
   specific and used together with codec control messages.

   It is clear that the current SDP does not provide enough tools to
   address all requirements.  There are a couple of options to represent



Even, et al.             Expires August 21, 2013               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft         Multiple RTP streams in SDP         February 2013


   multiple media streams, The major two options are:

   o  Use multiple m-line each describing a single RTP stream

   o  Use multiple m-lines each describing one or multiple RTP streams.

6.1.  single RTP stream

   When using a single RTP stream in each m-line provides an easy way to
   describe the streams.  This solution requires that all RTP media
   streams MUST be declared explicitly in the initial offer or in a
   later one before they can be used.  As discussed above this solution
   does not scale well when doing a multipoint conference using the
   Source Projecting Mixer when the conference include multiple
   participants and each participant may get a different subset of all
   streams.  Supporting this use case may require a lot of SIP re-
   invites.

6.2.  One or multiple RTP streams

   For this option each m-line will specify the maximum number of SSRC
   that can be sent or received using this m-line.  So similar streams
   can be added or removed implicitly without requiring more signaling.
   The solution will use the maxssrc attribute to specify how many RTP
   streams can be sent or received.  If there is no maxssrc parameter it
   will imply a single RTP stream is specified.  This option allows the
   SDP to use a single RTP stream per m-line if there is a need to
   specify specific attribute that cannot be described in a single
   m-line and bundle the m-lines.


7.  Acknowledgements

   Place Holder


8.  IANA Considerations

   TBD


9.  Security Considerations

   TBD.


10.  References




Even, et al.             Expires August 21, 2013               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft         Multiple RTP streams in SDP         February 2013


10.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

10.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.ietf-avtcore-multi-media-rtp-session]
              Westerlund, M., Perkins, C., and J. Lennox, "Multiple
              Media Types in an RTP Session",
              draft-ietf-avtcore-multi-media-rtp-session-01 (work in
              progress), October 2012.

   [I-D.lennox-mmusic-sdp-source-selection]
              Lennox, J. and H. Schulzrinne, "Mechanisms for Media
              Source Selection in the Session Description Protocol
              (SDP)", draft-lennox-mmusic-sdp-source-selection-04 (work
              in progress), March 2012.

   [I-D.westerlund-avtcore-rtp-simulcast]
              Westerlund, M., Burman, B., Lindqvist, M., and F. Jansson,
              "Using Simulcast in RTP sessions",
              draft-westerlund-avtcore-rtp-simulcast-01 (work in
              progress), July 2012.

   [I-D.westerlund-avtcore-rtp-topologies-update]
              Westerlund, M. and S. Wenger, "RTP Topologies",
              draft-westerlund-avtcore-rtp-topologies-update-01 (work in
              progress), October 2012.

   [I-D.westerlund-avtext-codec-operation-point]
              Westerlund, M., Burman, B., and L. Hamm, "Codec Operation
              Point RTCP Extension",
              draft-westerlund-avtext-codec-operation-point-00 (work in
              progress), March 2012.

   [I-D.westerlund-avtext-rtcp-sdes-srcname]
              Westerlund, M., Burman, B., and P. Sandgren, "RTCP SDES
              Item SRCNAME to Label Individual Sources",
              draft-westerlund-avtext-rtcp-sdes-srcname-01 (work in
              progress), July 2012.

   [I-D.westerlund-mmusic-max-ssrc]
              Holmberg, C., Westerlund, M., Burman, B., and F. Jansson,
              "Multiple Synchronization Sources (SSRC) in SDP Media
              Descriptions", draft-westerlund-mmusic-max-ssrc-00 (work
              in progress), September 2012.




Even, et al.             Expires August 21, 2013               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft         Multiple RTP streams in SDP         February 2013


   [RFC3264]  Rosenberg, J. and H. Schulzrinne, "An Offer/Answer Model
              with Session Description Protocol (SDP)", RFC 3264,
              June 2002.

   [RFC3550]  Schulzrinne, H., Casner, S., Frederick, R., and V.
              Jacobson, "RTP: A Transport Protocol for Real-Time
              Applications", STD 64, RFC 3550, July 2003.

   [RFC4566]  Handley, M., Jacobson, V., and C. Perkins, "SDP: Session
              Description Protocol", RFC 4566, July 2006.

   [RFC4575]  Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., and O. Levin, "A Session
              Initiation Protocol (SIP) Event Package for Conference
              State", RFC 4575, August 2006.

   [RFC4796]  Hautakorpi, J. and G. Camarillo, "The Session Description
              Protocol (SDP) Content Attribute", RFC 4796,
              February 2007.

   [RFC5104]  Wenger, S., Chandra, U., Westerlund, M., and B. Burman,
              "Codec Control Messages in the RTP Audio-Visual Profile
              with Feedback (AVPF)", RFC 5104, February 2008.

   [RFC5117]  Westerlund, M. and S. Wenger, "RTP Topologies", RFC 5117,
              January 2008.

   [RFC5285]  Singer, D. and H. Desineni, "A General Mechanism for RTP
              Header Extensions", RFC 5285, July 2008.

   [RFC5576]  Lennox, J., Ott, J., and T. Schierl, "Source-Specific
              Media Attributes in the Session Description Protocol
              (SDP)", RFC 5576, June 2009.

   [RFC5888]  Camarillo, G. and H. Schulzrinne, "The Session Description
              Protocol (SDP) Grouping Framework", RFC 5888, June 2010.

   [RFC6236]  Johansson, I. and K. Jung, "Negotiation of Generic Image
              Attributes in the Session Description Protocol (SDP)",
              RFC 6236, May 2011.












Even, et al.             Expires August 21, 2013               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft         Multiple RTP streams in SDP         February 2013


Authors' Addresses

   Roni Even
   Huawei Technologies
   Tel Aviv,
   Israel

   Email: roni.even@mail01.huawei.com


   Jonathan Lennox
   Vidyo, Inc.
   433 Hackensack Avenue
   Seventh Floor
   Hackensack, NJ  07601
   US

   Email: jonathan@vidyo.com


   Qin Wu
   Huawei Technologies

   Email: bill.wu@huawei.com



























Even, et al.             Expires August 21, 2013               [Page 14]

