


Network Working Group                                        M. Blanchet
Internet-Draft                                                  Viagenie
Intended status: Standards Track                           June 15, 2011
Expires: December 17, 2011


 Delay-Tolerant Networking (DTN) Bundle Protocol Application Framework
          draft-blanchet-dtnrg-bp-application-framework-00.txt

Abstract

   The Bundle Protocol documents specify the syntax of service
   identifiers but do not identify how to make them interoperable.
   Moreover, there are currently no way to map a service identifier to a
   specific Bundle payload format.  This document attempt to address
   these issues.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 17, 2011.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.



Blanchet                Expires December 17, 2011               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft    Bundle Protocol Application Framework        June 2011


Table of Contents

   1.  Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Bundle Protocol Application Framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
     2.1.  Bundle Protocol Application Protocol Specification  . . . . 4
     2.2.  Service Identifier Syntax . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
     2.3.  Coordination with CCSDS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
     2.4.  Bundle Protocol Service Identifiers Registry  . . . . . . . 5
     2.5.  The Bundle Protocol Ping Service  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   3.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   4.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   5.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   6.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6





































Blanchet                Expires December 17, 2011               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft    Bundle Protocol Application Framework        June 2011


1.  Problem Statement

   The Bundle Protocol (BP) [RFC5050] specifies how to carry bundles
   over a delay and disruption tolerant network.  Up to now, the various
   BP implementations have defined their own payload format for the
   applications they support, without any specification.  Therefore,
   between two implementations, there is no garantee that the payloads
   will be properly processed.  This prohibits interoperability between
   application agents of the various implementations.

   The Bundle Protocol [RFC5050] uses Endpoint Identifiers to specify
   the destination of the bundles.  Two types of identifiers have been
   defined: the dtn: uri scheme defined in [RFC5050] and the ipn: scheme
   defined in [RFC6260] using the CBHE extension header.  Both schemes
   syntax carry the service identifier so that the bundle payload is
   sent to the right application agent and it knows how to process it.
   Up to now, no definition of these service identifiers exist,
   therefore, each implementation does not know in a way to which
   application agent it should send the received bundle payload.

   From the point of view of implementations and end-users, the service
   identifier shall be common to both types of identifiers and the
   payload format should be identical for the same service identifiers.
   Therefore, there is a need to normalize the service identifiers as
   well as the payload formats.  This is similar to service and port
   numbers registry for IP protocols and applications protocols
   specifications.

   As with IP application protocols specifications, some applications
   require services at the IP layer, such as IPsec.  In such cases, the
   application specification defines the usage and requirements of IPsec
   for carrying the application packets.  Similarly, Bundle protocol
   applications may require specific bundle protocol services, such as
   custody, security, quality of service or else.

   This document defines a framework by which Bundle Protocol
   applications should be specified, what bundle services they require
   and a registry of service identifiers.  All together, implementations
   will interoperate at the application level, instead of just at the
   bundle forwarding level.  Moreover, deployments will be eased by
   normalized behaviors of applications.


2.  Bundle Protocol Application Framework

   The BP Application framework is specified in the following sections.





Blanchet                Expires December 17, 2011               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft    Bundle Protocol Application Framework        June 2011


2.1.  Bundle Protocol Application Protocol Specification

   A bundle protocol application is defined by a protocol and a bundle
   payload format.  It should be specified in a document with the
   following information:
   o  Bundle payload format
   o  Bundle services and extension headers required, such as security,
      custody or else.  The context in which these services and
      extensions are used must be fully defined to enable
      interoperability between implementations.
   o  Service identifier for the dtn: scheme
   o  Service identifier for the ipn: scheme
   o  Request to register the service identifiers in the registries
      described in this document.

2.2.  Service Identifier Syntax

   While the generic syntax of the dtn: uri is defined, the usage up to
   now in trials, deployments and implementations has been dtn:
   node_identifier/service_identifier.  For the ipn: scheme, the syntax
   is ipn:node_identifier.service_identifier.  This document registers
   the service_identifier part values but makes no recommendation on the
   node identifier part.

2.3.  Coordination with CCSDS

   For the purpose of space networking, the CCSDS SDO xref
   target="http://www.ccsds.org" is creating registries xref
   target="CCSDS-bundle-protocol-book"/ for the node and service
   identifier part of the ipn: scheme, managed by the CCSDS Registry
   Authority, named Space Assigned Number Authority (SANA) xref
   target="http://sanaregistry.org"/.  This registry of node and service
   identifiers is specific to space networks.  However, for
   implementations and for interoperability between various network
   deployments, it is highly preferable that the service identifiers are
   identical for all deployments.

   This document requests IANA to create a registry for the service
   identifiers for both the ipn: and the dtn: space.  The common service
   identifiers will be identical for both schemes and for all
   deployments.

   By way of reserving range of assignments for each SDO, each SDO can
   perform their own specific assignments.







Blanchet                Expires December 17, 2011               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft    Bundle Protocol Application Framework        June 2011


2.4.  Bundle Protocol Service Identifiers Registry

   The IANA is requested to create a "Bundle Protocol Service
   Identifiers" registry with the following requirements.
   o  Structure (aka columns):
      *  dtn: service identifier.  The dtn: service identifier syntax is
         defined in section 4.4 of [RFC5050].
      *  ipn: service identifier.  The ipn: service identifier syntax is
         defined in section 2.1 of [RFC6260].
      *  Specification Reference: The referenced specification should
         describe the bundle payload content.
   o  Service identifiers must be registered for both schemes at the
      same time.  If it can not be done, the specification must detail
      why and the expert should review the rationale before accepting
      that registration.
   o  Registration Policy:
      *  CCSDS book or IETF RFC required.  Any other specification must
         be reviewed by an nominated expert.
      *  For ipn: number space, the XX range is delegated to CCSDS
         registry service (SANA), therefore not allocated by IANA.  In
         the registry, IANA should point this range to the corresponding
         SANA registry.

   The registry should contain the following initial values:
   o  dtn: service identifier "none" shall be assigned.  The semantic is
      described in RFC5050
   o  ipn: service identifier of value "0" shall be assigned for the
      same semantic as dtn:none
   o  Specification Reference: RFC5050
   o  Mandatory Bundle Protocol service: none.

2.5.  The Bundle Protocol Ping Service

   This section is requesting a registration for the above registry.  It
   also serves as a simple example on how registration requests should
   be done.

   The Ping service is similar to the IP ICMP Echo request/reply service
   where a source node sends a simple query to the destination node and
   the destination node replies.  This helps troubleshooting the network
   and knowing if a node is reachable and up.

   The ping service has the following Bundle Protocol payload format:
   TBD.

   This document request the registration of the ping service in the
   above registry as follows:




Blanchet                Expires December 17, 2011               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft    Bundle Protocol Application Framework        June 2011


   o  dtn: service identifier "ping" shall be assigned to the ping
      service.
   o  ipn: service identifier of value "1" shall be assigned to the ping
      service.
   o  Specification Reference: this section of this document which
      describes the payload of the ping service.
   o  Mandatory Bundle Protocol service: none.


3.  Security Considerations

   TBD


4.  IANA Considerations

   IANA is requested to create a registry as specified in this document.


5.  Acknowledgements

   The editor would like to thank the following people who have provided
   comments and suggestions to this document, in no specific order: TBD.


6.  Normative References

   [RFC5050]  Scott, K. and S. Burleigh, "Bundle Protocol
              Specification", RFC 5050, November 2007.

   [RFC6260]  Burleigh, S., "Compressed Bundle Header Encoding (CBHE)",
              RFC 6260, May 2011.


Author's Address

   Marc Blanchet
   Viagenie
   2875 boul. Laurier, suite D2-630
   Quebec, QC  G1V 2M2
   Canada

   Email: Marc.Blanchet@viagenie.ca
   URI:   http://viagenie.ca







Blanchet                Expires December 17, 2011               [Page 6]

