A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        BCP 62
        RFC 3366

        Title:      Advice to link designers on link Automatic Repeat
                    reQuest (ARQ)
        Author(s):  G. Fairhurst, L. Wood
        Status:     Best Current Practice
        Date:       August 2002
        Mailbox:    gorry@erg.abdn.ac.uk, lwood@cisco.com
        Pages:      27
        Characters: 66097
        SeeAlso:    BCP 62

        I-D Tag:    draft-ietf-pilc-link-arq-issues-04.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3366.txt


This document provides advice to the designers of digital
communication equipment and link-layer protocols employing
link-layer Automatic Repeat reQuest (ARQ) techniques.  This document
presumes that the designers wish to support Internet protocols, but
may be unfamiliar with the architecture of the Internet and with the
implications of their design choices for the performance and
efficiency of Internet traffic carried over their links.

ARQ is described in a general way that includes its use over a wide
range of underlying physical media, including cellular wireless,
wireless LANs, RF links, and other types of channel.  This document
also describes issues relevant to supporting IP traffic over
physical-layer channels where performance varies, and where link ARQ
is likely to be used.

This document is a product of the Performance Implications of Link
Characteristics Working Group of the IETF.

This document specifies an Internet Best Current Practices for the
Internet Community, and requests discussion and suggestions for
improvements.  Distribution of this memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.

