A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3135

        Title:      Performance Enhancing Proxies Intended to Mitigate
                    Link-Related Degradations
        Author(s):  J. Border, M. Kojo, J. Griner, G. Montenegro,
                    Z. Shelby 
        Status:     Informational
        Date:       June 2001
        Mailbox:    border@hns.com, kojo@cs.helsinki.fi,
                    jgriner@grc.nasa.gov, gab@sun.com,
                    zach.shelby@ee.oulu.fi 
        Pages:      45
        Characters: 114825
        Updates/Obsoletes/SeeAlso:    None

        I-D Tag:    draft-ietf-pilc-pep-07.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3135.txt


This document is a survey of Performance Enhancing Proxies (PEPs)
often employed to improve degraded TCP performance caused by
characteristics of specific link environments, for example, in
satellite, wireless WAN, and wireless LAN environments.  Different
types of Performance Enhancing Proxies are described as well as the
mechanisms used to improve performance.  Emphasis is put on proxies
operating with TCP.  In addition, motivations for their development
and use are described along with some of the consequences of using
them, especially in the context of the Internet.

This document is a product of the Performance Implications of Link
Characteristics Working Group of the IETF.

This memo provides information for the Internet community.  It does
not specify an Internet standard of any kind.  Distribution of this
memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.