 



Internet Engineering Task Force                                 M. Smith
Internet-Draft                                                      IMOT
Updates: 4861 (if approved)                                      O. Ddin
Intended status: Standards Track            ZeroLag Communications, Inc.
Expires: April 19, 2013                                 October 16, 2012


   Mitigating IPv6 Router Neighbor Cache DoS Using Stateless Neighbor
                               Discovery
             draft-smith-6man-mitigate-nd-cache-dos-slnd-02

Abstract

   The IPv6 neighbor discovery cache is vulnerable to a Denial of
   Service attack that purposely exhausts the state used during the
   neighbor discovery address resolution process.  This attack can be
   very disruptive when the target is a router.  This memo proposes a
   stateless form of neighbor discovery to be used by routers to
   mitigate this attack.  It does not require any changes to hosts.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 16, 2013.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2012 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
 


Smith, Ddin              Expires April 19, 2013                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft        Stateless Neighbor Discovery      October 16, 2012


   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.1.  Requirements Language  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   3.  Stateless Neighbor Discovery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     3.1.  SLND Variables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     3.2.  SLND Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     3.3.  Unhashed SLND  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.4.  Hashed SLND  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   4.  Consequences of Stateless Neighbor Discovery . . . . . . . . .  7
     4.1.  Neighbor Advertisement Validation  . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     4.2.  Optimization Functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   5.  Trusted/Untrusted Discriminator  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     5.1.  Configured Trusted and Untrusted Prefixes  . . . . . . . . 10
     5.2.  Routing Information  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     5.3.  Default to Untrusted . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   6.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   7.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   8.  Change Log [RFC Editor please remove]  . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   9.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     9.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     9.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   Author's Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13




















 


Smith, Ddin              Expires April 19, 2013                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft        Stateless Neighbor Discovery      October 16, 2012


1.  Introduction

   The IPv6 neighbor discovery cache [RFC4861] is vulnerable to a Denial
   of Service attack that purposely exhausts the state used during the
   neighbor discovery address resolution process [RFC3756].

   When a router is the target of this attack, an off-link attacker
   sends traffic towards many non-existent addresses within a prefix
   attached to the router.  This causes the router to create neighbor
   cache state for neighbor solicitations for these non-existent
   addresses.  The denial of service occurs when the router's neighbor
   cache state capacity is exhausted due to too many outstanding
   neighbor solicitations.

   Sizing a prefix proportional to the number of attached hosts, rather
   than using the standard /64 prefix size [RFC4291], would mitigate
   this attack.  However, operational conveniences and benefits such as
   universal fixed length prefixes and interface identifiers, Stateless
   Address Auto configuration (SLAAC) [RFC4862] and privacy addresses
   [RFC4941], and never having to resize the prefix or add secondary
   prefixes to attach more hosts to the link would be lost.

   This memo proposes a stateless form of neighbor discovery to prevent
   this type of DoS attack on a router.  It does not require any changes
   to the operation of neighbor discovery on hosts. It optionally takes
   advantage of hosts' ability to recover from packet loss in the
   network, necessary due to IPv6's best effort nature.  This method can
   be used for unknown or untrusted packet sources, when the router's
   neighbor cache's state capacity reaches a medium to high threshold of
   use, suggesting a neighbor cache DoS attack is occurring.  Trusted
   packet sources would continue to be provided with traditional
   stateful neighbor discovery.

1.1.  Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].


2.  Terminology

   Stateful Neighbor Discovery (SFND): Traditional neighbor discovery,
   as specified in [RFC4861].  This form of neighbor discovery maintains
   per packet destination state for all unresolved destinations during
   the neighbor discovery process.  The neighbor cache's state capacity
   is intentionally exhausted to cause the neighbor cache Denial of
   Service attack.
 


Smith, Ddin              Expires April 19, 2013                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft        Stateless Neighbor Discovery      October 16, 2012


   Stateless Neighbor Discovery (SLND): The form of neighbor discovery
   described in this memo.  This form of neighbor discovery does not
   maintain state for unresolved destinations during the neighbor
   discovery process. SLND has two modes of operation: hashed and
   unhashed. Hashing refers to any computational function which digests
   input into a shorter, unique value.

3.  Stateless Neighbor Discovery

3.1.  SLND Variables

   To perform stateless neighbor discovery, four variables are
   maintained:

   SLND Flag - This flag indicates whether or not the interface will
   perform SLND if necessary.

   SLDN Activate Threshold - This variable specifies the threshold when
   stateless neighbor discovery is activated.  The threshold specifies a
   neighbor cache utilization level.  It is expressed as a percentage,
   with a RECOMMENDED default value of 80%.  It may be either a per-
   interface or router global variable depending on whether the router
   implementation has per-interface neighbor caches or a global neighbor
   cache used by all interfaces.

   SLND Active Flag - This flag indicates whether or not the interface
   is performing SLND for untrusted packet sources.  It is maintained
   for each interface on the router.

   Trusted/Untrusted Discriminator (TUD) - This variable specifies an
   arbitrary discriminator that determines whether a datagram is
   considered trusted or untrusted for the purposes of neighbor
   discovery. a TUD implementation MUST provide for at least per-source
   and per-interface discrimination although this MAY be controlled
   externally such as a packet mark/tag being the basis of the TUD and
   separate processes of the router providing the infrastructure to set
   the value by way of a bitmask.

   SLND Neighbor Solicitation Rate Limit ("SLND NS Rate Limit") - This
   variable specifies a threshold for multicast Neighbor Solicitations
   when the interface is performing SLND, specified in packets per
   second. This limit MUST be configurable on a per-interface basis but
   a router MAY provide for configuring a default or global rate for
   convenience. OPTIONAL granular rate limiting may be achieved by
   maintaining a table of sources, grouped on a large boundary (/48 or
   bigger) in order to achieve weighted rate limiting that has a bigger
   impact on an attacking subnet. If such granular rate limiting is
   implemented, a router MUST NOT exceed the total interface rate
 


Smith, Ddin              Expires April 19, 2013                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft        Stateless Neighbor Discovery      October 16, 2012


   threshold.

   SLND Hash Salt (NDHS) - This is a value that SHOULD be at least 8
   octets in length, known only to the router and MUST change
   periodically to mitigate replay attacks. This value SHOULD NOT change
   more often than the typical time taken for successful resolution and
   it is RECOMMENDED that this value change approximately as often as
   the configured ND timeout.

3.2.  SLND Process

   The stateless neighbor discovery process may occur once a router has
   determined the outgoing interface for a packet, and that the packet's
   destination is on-link.

   If the packet's destination address is present in the neighbor cache,
   and the link-layer address has been resolved, the packet is forwarded
   to it's destination.

   If the packet's destination address is not present in the neighbor
   cache, and the SLND Flag is off, traditional stateful neighbor
   discovery is performed for the packet's destination.

   If the packet's destination address is not present in the neighbor
   cache, and the SLND Flag is on, the TUD is referred to in order to
   ascertain whether the packet is trusted or not.

   If the packet is determined to be trusted, traditional stateful
   neighbor discovery is performed.

   If the packet is determined to be untrusted, stateless neighbor
   discovery is performed.

   A router MUST implement unhashed SLND and MAY also implement hashed
   SLND. Where both SLND modes are implemented, a router MUST allow mode
   selection on a per-interface basis. Defaulting to hashed SLND is
   RECOMMENDED.











 


Smith, Ddin              Expires April 19, 2013                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft        Stateless Neighbor Discovery      October 16, 2012


3.3.  Unhashed SLND

   The unhashed stateless neighbor discovery process is as follows:

   1.  The router determines if sending a multicast neighbor
       solicitation would exceed the SLND NS Rate Limit for the outgoing
       interface.  If the SLND NS Rate Limit would be exceeded, drop the
       packet and do not proceed any further.

   2.  A multicast neighbor solicitation is sent by the router for the
       destination address in the packet. The packet MAY then be
       dropped. If the packet is instead requeued any subsequent dequeue
       of the same packet MUST NOT result in the transmission of another
       solicitation whilst in SLND mode. the packet SHOULD NOT be queued
       indefinitely. if the packet expires, the router MAY send an
       ICMPv6 error to the source but given the likely scenario for the
       activation of SLND, this is not recommended.

   3.  As some later point in time, the router may receive a unicast
       neighbor advertisement, for a previously sent neighbor
       solicitation.

   4.  If the SLND Active Flag is off and there is no stateful entry
       regarding the advertisement, the router ignores the neighbor
       advertisement.

   5.  If the SLND Active Flag is on, the router creates an entry in
       it's neighbor cache using the information received in the unicast
       neighbor advertisement.  Stateless neighbor discovery is now
       complete.

3.4.  Hashed SLND

   The hashed stateless neighbor discovery process is as follows:

   1.  The router determines if sending a multicast neighbor
       solicitation would exceed the SLND NS Rate Limit for the outgoing
       interface.  If the SLND NS Rate Limit would be exceeded, drop the
       packet and do not proceed any further.

   2.  The router performs hash function H(x) where x is the
       concatenation of the IPv6 address to solicit and the NDHS, known
       only to the router. the hash function SHOULD result in a value of
       at least 8 octets in length and subsequently be used to replace
       the lower 8 octets (host portion) of the IPv6 address that would
       have been the source of the solicitation. When applicable to the
       link medium, a router MUST include the ICMPv6 option indicating
       the data-link layer source as part of the solicitation.
 


Smith, Ddin              Expires April 19, 2013                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft        Stateless Neighbor Discovery      October 16, 2012


   3.  As some later point in time, the router may receive a unicast
       neighbor advertisement, for a previously sent neighbor
       solicitation.

   4.  If the SLND Active Flag is off or the neighbor already exists in
       the cache, the router ignores the neighbor advertisement.

   5.  If the SLND Active Flag is on, the router performs hash function
       H(y) where y is the concatenation of the advertised IPv6 address
       and the NDHS. The result of H(x) is then compared to the lower 8
       octets (host portion) of the IPv6 destination address in the
       advertisement. If the result does not match, the advertisement is
       discarded; otherwise the information in the advertisement is used
       to update the neighbor cache.

   The utilization of the neighbor cache has to be measured to determine
   if it crosses the SLND Activate Threshold.  If the utilization
   increases above the SLND Activate Threshold, the SLND Active Flag is
   set, and if it decreases below the SLND Activate Threshold, the SLND
   Active Flag is unset.  Neighbor cache utilization should be measured
   and compared to the SLND Activate Threshold when:

   o  entries are added to the neighbor cache, during either stateful or
      stateless neighbor discovery.

   o  entries are removed from the neighbor cache when NUD discovers the
      neighbor has become unreachable or timed out.


4.  Consequences of Stateless Neighbor Discovery

   During traditional stateful neighbor discovery, state is used to
   perform the following:

   o  ensure a received neighbor advertisement corresponds to a
      previously sent neighbor solicitation

   o  to retransmit a limited number of neighbor solicitations if
      previous solicitations remain unanswered

   o  to store a small number of packets that triggered the neighbor
      discovery process, so that they can be transmitted if neighbor
      discovery completes successfully

   o  to generate an ICMPv6 destination unreachable, address unreachable
      messages back to the packet source, should the neighbor discovery
      process fail

 


Smith, Ddin              Expires April 19, 2013                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft        Stateless Neighbor Discovery      October 16, 2012


   Unhashed stateless neighbor discovery sacrifices these functions and
   the related state to mitigate the neighbor cache DoS attack.

   Hashed stateless neighbor discovery retains much of the robustness of
   stateful ND at a cost of computation time for hash calculation and
   comparison and the minor risk of replay attacks although this is
   largely mitigated by appropriate tuning of the frequency by which the
   NDHS changes. However, the calculated source address may trigger a
   solicited host to attempt neighbor discovery of that address, thus
   creating the cost of some spurious ND traffic for the benefit of
   preventing on-link cache attacks.


4.1.  Neighbor Advertisement Validation

   Ensuring received neighbor advertisements correspond to previously
   sent neighbor solicitations prevents on-link nodes from sending
   unsolicited neighbor advertisements to the router, and then having
   them added to the router's neighbor cache without validation.  This
   would allow on-link hosts to perform a neighbor cache DoS attack, as
   they could send many neighbor advertisements for non-existent
   addresses within the link assigned prefixes, exhausting the neighbor
   cache capacity.

   If neighbor advertisement validation occurs, then the router is
   vulnerable to an off-link sourced neighbor cache DoS attack, but is
   not vulnerable to an on-link sourced neighbor cache DoS attack.  If
   neighbor advertisement validation does not occur, then the router is
   vulnerable to an on-link sourced neighbor cache DoS attack, but is
   now not vulnerable to an off-link sourced neighbor cache DoS attack.

   For best-case performance, Hashed SLND should be performed to provide
   cache protection against both on-link and off-link attacks.


4.2.  Optimization Functions

   The nature of IPv6 is best effort, meaning that there is a
   possibility that packets may be lost as they transit the network, and
   that IPv6 will not make any attempt to recover lost packets.  If an
   application residing on an IPv6 node requires reliable packet
   delivery, it will need to utilize locally implemented reliable upper
   layer protocols such as TCP and SCTP, or implement it's own
   reliability mechanisms.  These reliability mechanisms involve
   retransmitting packets.  Alternatively, the application needs to
   accept the possibility of packet loss.

   The remaining uses of stateful neighbor discovery state are not
 


Smith, Ddin              Expires April 19, 2013                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft        Stateless Neighbor Discovery      October 16, 2012


   assured of success.  The limited number of neighbor solicitation
   retransmissions may not be enough, causing neighbor discovery to fail
   even though the target node exists.  There may be more packets sent
   that trigger neighbor discovery than are stored for transmission when
   neighbor discovery completes successfully, causing them to be
   dropped.  The ICMPv6 destination unreachable message may be dropped
   on the way back to the traffic originating node, perhaps
   intentionally by a network located firewall.

   This means that these functions are useful but not essential
   optimizations.  If necessary, they do not need to be performed, as
   the packet source will retransmit its packets, reinitiating the
   neighbor discovery process, or accept that packet loss has occurred.
   This provides the opportunity to perform a stateless form of neighbor
   discovery if there is evidence that a neighbor cache DoS attack is
   occurring, mitigating the off-link sourced neighbor cache DoS attack.

5.  Trusted/Untrusted Discriminator

   As previously described, the Trusted/Untrusted Discriminator (TUD) is
   used to determine whether a packet is trusted or untrusted, with
   trusted datagrams continuing to trigger traditional stateful neighbor
   discovery services, and untrusted ones receiving stateless neighbor
   discovery services.

   For routers where it may not be operationally convenient or possible
   to implement comprehensive trusted and untrusted datagram selection,
   such as on low-end or embedded devices, it would be acceptable to
   consider all datagram sources untrusted when stateless neighbor
   discovery is active.

   For routers that can support more comprehensive trusted and untrusted
   datagram discrimination, the following information sources are
   suggested for the purposes of configuring a default set of
   discriminators.













 


Smith, Ddin              Expires April 19, 2013                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft        Stateless Neighbor Discovery      October 16, 2012


5.1.  Configured Trusted and Untrusted Prefixes

   The first suggested TUD source is an operator configured list of
   prefixes and their lengths, each with a flag indicating whether
   traffic with source addresses that falls within the specified prefix
   is from a trusted or untrusted source, using the longest-match logic
   that is applied to IPv6 routing decisions.

   This list should have a default entry of the ULA prefix (fc00::/7)
   [RFC4193], flagged as a trusted source.  An implementation must allow
   this entry to be removed. An implementation SHOULD NOT have this
   default entry if reverse path filtering is not possible or where
   spoofing is considered trivial.

5.2.  Routing Information

   The second suggested TUD source is the network's routing information.

   The network's routing information can be used to distinguish trusted
   and untrusted datagram sources.  An advantage of using routing
   information for this purpose is that it will typically be dynamically
   and automatically distributed to all routers within the network, when
   dynamic routing protocols are used.  This avoids individual routers
   in the network having to be manually reconfigured with trusted
   prefixes when subnets are added or removed from the network.

   The contents of a stub network's route table is typically all the
   internal routes for the network, and then a default route used to
   reach the Internet.  The list of internal routes can be used to
   distinguish between trusted and untrusted sources, with datagram
   sources matching internal routes being trusted, and all other
   datagram sources being untrusted.

   In more complex routing environments, such as those using one or more
   IGPs and an EGP such as BGP, there may be other methods available to
   distinguish between trusted and untrusted sources.  For example,
   routes carried in an IGP could be considered trusted, while routes
   carried in BGP are untrusted.  For a network using BGP to carry all
   reachability information, except network transit and loopback
   interface routes, routes may be tagged with one or more BGP
   communities which indicate internal and therefore trusted prefixes.

   A default route SHOULD NOT be used to define a trusted datagram
   source prefix.




 


Smith, Ddin              Expires April 19, 2013                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft        Stateless Neighbor Discovery      October 16, 2012


5.3.  Default to Untrusted

   Finally, should none of the previous trusted or untrusted source
   prefix information sources match the source address of traffic that
   would trigger neighbor discovery, the datagram source should be
   considered untrusted.


6.  Acknowledgements

   Review and comments were provided by Ray Hunter and Matthew Moyle-
   Croft.

   This memo was prepared using the xml2rfc tool and nroff I-D editor.


7.  Security Considerations

   This memo proposes a security mitigation for an off-link sourced
   neighbor cache Denial of Service attack, aimed at a router.

   As discussed in Section 4.1, the unhashed method proposed creates an
   opportunity for an on-link sourced neighbor cache DoS attack, when
   mitigating the off-link sourced neighbor cache DoS.  This is
   considered to be an acceptable security trade-off.

   The hashed method mitigates the above issue at the cost of creating
   some additional unnecessary ND traffic and potentially having a
   window of opportunity for a replay attack. The benefit of Hashed SLND
   is considered to outweigh these concerns.

8.  Change Log [RFC Editor please remove]

   draft-smith-6man-mitigate-nd-cache-dos-slnd-00, initial version,
   2012-09-04

   draft-smith-6man-mitigate-nd-cache-dos-slnd-01, more clarity, 2012-
   10-13

   o  more comprehensive introduction (problem definition) text

   o  make it more obvious that hosts don't need to be changed

   o  low-end/embedded hosts can consider all datagram sources untrusted

   o  misc. minor text updates

   draft-smith-6man-mitigate-nd-cache-dos-slnd-02, major changes, 2012-
 


Smith, Ddin              Expires April 19, 2013                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft        Stateless Neighbor Discovery      October 16, 2012


   10-16

   o  Add definition of Hashed SLND.

   o  Expand optional scope for flexibility of SLND

   o  Address potential security risks

9.  References

9.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

9.2.  Informative References

   [RFC3756]  Nikander, P., Kempf, J., and E. Nordmark, "IPv6 Neighbor
              Discovery (ND) Trust Models and Threats", RFC 3756,
              May 2004.

   [RFC4193]  Hinden, R. and B. Haberman, "Unique Local IPv6 Unicast
              Addresses", RFC 4193, October 2005.

   [RFC4291]  Hinden, R. and S. Deering, "IP Version 6 Addressing
              Architecture", RFC 4291, February 2006.

   [RFC4861]  Narten, T., Nordmark, E., Simpson, W., and H. Soliman,
              "Neighbor Discovery for IP version 6 (IPv6)", RFC 4861,
              September 2007.

   [RFC4862]  Thomson, S., Narten, T., and T. Jinmei, "IPv6 Stateless
              Address Autoconfiguration", RFC 4862, September 2007.

   [RFC4941]  Narten, T., Draves, R., and S. Krishnan, "Privacy
              Extensions for Stateless Address Autoconfiguration in
              IPv6", RFC 4941, September 2007.











 


Smith, Ddin              Expires April 19, 2013                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft        Stateless Neighbor Discovery      October 16, 2012


Author's Addresses

   Mark Smith
   In My Own Time
   PO BOX 521
   HEIDELBERG, VIC  3084
   AU

   Email: markzzzsmith@yahoo.com.au

   Oliver Ddin
   ZeroLag Communications
   289 S. Robertson Blvd #441
   Beverly Hills, CA 90211
   USA

   Email: oliver@zerolag.com


































Smith, Ddin              Expires April 19, 2013                [Page 13]
