


Internet Engineering Task Force                                 M. Smith
Internet-Draft                                                      IMOT
Updates: 4861 (if approved)                            February 20, 2013
Intended status: Standards Track
Expires: August 24, 2013


 Mitigating IPv6 Neighbor Discovery DoS Attack Using Stateless Neighbor
                           Presence Discovery
             draft-smith-6man-mitigate-nd-cache-dos-slnd-06

Abstract

   One of the functions of IPv6 Neighbor Discovery is to discover
   whether a specified neighbor is present.  During the neighbor
   presence discovery process state is created.  A node's capacity for
   this state can be intentionally exhausted to perform a denial of
   service attack, known as the "Neighbor Discovery DoS Attack".  This
   memo proposes a stateless form of neighbor presence discovery to
   prevent this Neighbor Discovery DoS Attack.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 24, 2013.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect



Smith                    Expires August 24, 2013                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft    Stateless Neighbor Presence Discovery    February 2013


   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.1.  Requirements Language  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  The Best Effort Nature of IPv6 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   4.  Opportunities for Stateless Neighbor Presence Discovery  . . .  5
     4.1.  Neighbor Advertisement Validation  . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     4.2.  Optimisation Functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   5.  Stateless Neighbor Presence Discovery  . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     5.1.  SLNPD Variables  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     5.2.  SLNPD Processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     5.3.  Optional Enhancements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
       5.3.1.  Selective SLNPD  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
         5.3.1.1.  Source Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
         5.3.1.2.  Ingress Interface  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   6.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   7.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   8.  Change Log [RFC Editor please remove]  . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   9.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     9.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     9.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14






















Smith                    Expires August 24, 2013                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft    Stateless Neighbor Presence Discovery    February 2013


1.  Introduction

   One of the functions of IPv6 Neighbor Discovery [RFC4861] is to
   discover whether a specified neighbor is present.  Neighbor presence
   discovery occurs when a packet needs to be sent to a specified
   neighbor for which presence hasn't previously been determined.

   During neighbor presence discovery, state is created to support the
   discovery process.  The amount of state created is directly
   proportional to the number of neighbors being discovered at the time.
   The total possible state that can be created is limited to the lower
   of the node's state capacity or the size of the IPv6 address space
   for use by potential neighbors.

   To provide operational convenience and simplicity, most IPv6
   Interface Identifiers are 64 bits in length [RFC4291].  This results
   in a common IPv6 subnet prefix length of 64 bits, covering 2^64
   addresses.  This large IPv6 subnet address space provides an
   opportunity for an attacker to exhaust a node's capacity for state
   created during neighbor presence discovery.  The consequences of this
   state exhaustion attack are likely to be a denial of service.  New
   neighbor presence discovery transactions may fail, despite the
   neighbor existing, and knowledge of existing neighbors' presence may
   be discarded.  This attack is known as the "Neighbor Discovery DoS
   Attack" [RFC3756].

   This memo proposes a stateless form of neighbor presence discovery to
   prevent this Neighbor Discovery DoS Attack.  It takes advantage of
   hosts' ability to recover from packet loss in the network, necessary
   because of IPv6's best effort nature.  This method would be used when
   a node's neighbor presence discovery state capacity reaches a medium
   to high threshold of use, suggesting a Neighbor Discovery DoS Attack
   is occurring.

   This method does not require any changes to neighbors, or changes to
   Neighbor Solicitation or Neighbor Advertisement messages.  An
   optional enhancement for router implementations is to identify a set
   of packet sources as trusted not to conduct the DoS attack, and to
   continue to provide these trusted packet sources with traditional and
   stateful neighbor presence discovery service.

   [RFC4861] calls the neighbor presence discovery function "Address
   Resolution".  This name seems somewhat inaccurate, as it suggests
   that the discovery of the presence of neighbors is only necessary for
   links with link-layer addresses.  Neighbor presence discovery is
   necessary on all types of links, as functions such as generating
   ICMPv6 Destination Unreachable, Address Unreachable messages, or
   Neighbor Unreachability Detection [RFC4861], cannot be performed if



Smith                    Expires August 24, 2013                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft    Stateless Neighbor Presence Discovery    February 2013


   the presence of a neighbor is assumed by implication of a prefix
   length [RFC5942], rather than observed or actively tested.  Address
   resolution, for links that require it, occurs as part of the neighbor
   presence discovery process.

   If approved, this memo updates [RFC4861].

1.1.  Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].


2.  Terminology

   Neighbor Presence Discovery (NPD): Discovery of the presence of a
   specified neighbor.  For link-layers with addresses, address
   resolution is performed as part of the presence discovery process.

   Stateful Neighbor Presence Discovery (SFNPD): Traditional neighbor
   presence discovery specified in [RFC4861].  This form of Neighbor
   Presence Discovery creates state for each potential neighbor for
   which presence is being discovered.

   Stateless Neighbor Presence Discovery (SLNPD): The form of Neighbor
   Presence Discovery described in this memo.  Per-potential neighbor
   state is not created during Neighbor Presence Discovery.

   IGP: Interior Gateway Protocol, such as OSPF [RFC5340].

   EGP: Exterior Gateway Protocol, such as BGP [RFC4271].

   Node: A device that implements Neighbor Presence Discovery.  Both
   hosts and routers are nodes.


3.  The Best Effort Nature of IPv6

   The nature of IPv6 is best effort, meaning that there is a
   possibility that packets may be lost as they transit the network, and
   that IPv6 will not make any attempt to recover from packet loss
   [RFC1958].

   If an application requires reliable packet delivery, it will need to
   utilise locally implemented reliable transport layer protocols such
   as TCP and SCTP, or implement its own reliability mechanisms.  These
   reliability mechanisms will usually involve packet loss detection and



Smith                    Expires August 24, 2013                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft    Stateless Neighbor Presence Discovery    February 2013


   retransmission.  Alternatively, the application needs to accept the
   possibility and consequences of packet loss.


4.  Opportunities for Stateless Neighbor Presence Discovery

   During traditional and stateful NPD, state is used to perform the
   following:

   o  ensure a received Neighbor Advertisement corresponds to a
      previously sent Neighbor Solicitation,

   o  to retransmit a limited number of Neighbor Solicitations if
      previous solicitations remain unanswered,

   o  to store a small number of packets that triggered the neighbor
      presence discovery process, so that they can be sent if the
      neighbor is present,

   o  to generate ICMP Destination Unreachable, Address Unreachable
      messages to the NPD trigger packet(s') origin host(s) should the
      specified neighbor not be present.

   Stateless NPD sacrifices these functions and the related state when a
   Neighbor Discovery DoS Attack appears to be occurring.

4.1.  Neighbor Advertisement Validation

   The purpose of Neighbor Advertisement validation, during NPD, is to
   ensure that the receiver of the Neighbor Advertisement has previously
   been interested in the presence of the neighbor, expressed by sending
   a Neighbor Solicitation.

   Stateless NPD abandons the state used to enforce a Neighbor
   Solicitation/Neighbor Advertisement transaction.  It accepts Neighbor
   Advertisements without being able to ensure that they correspond to a
   previous Neighbor Advertisement.  The received Neighbor Advertisement
   either updates existing neighbor presence information, or creates new
   neighbor presence information.

   Updating nodes' existing neighbor presence information via
   unsolicited multicast Neighbor Advertisements is already permitted by
   [RFC4861].  While operating, Stateless NPD in effect allows
   unsolicited unicast Neighbor Advertisements, as knowledge of sending
   the previous Neighbor Solicitation is abandoned.

   By making the NPD process stateless, hosts and routers would be
   protected against a Neighbor Discovery DoS Attack launched from a



Smith                    Expires August 24, 2013                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft    Stateless Neighbor Presence Discovery    February 2013


   host against itself, or launched from a host against a remote subnet
   on a router.  However, while stateless NPD is operating, hosts and
   routers would now be vulnerable to a DoS attack from their own on-
   link neighbors, as the neighbors could send many unsolicited unicast
   Neighbor Advertisements for non-existent neighbors.  These Neighbor
   Advertisements would be accepted without question, and false neighbor
   presence information would be created.

   Considering that the set of on-link neighbors will be significantly
   limited compared to the set of possible off-link attackers (such as
   those on the wider Internet), may be better known due to geographic
   proximity or link-layer authorisation, and will have a vested
   interest in any on-link routers continuing to operate, sacrificing
   Neighbor Advertisement validation during NPD is a worthwhile
   compromise when a Neighbor Discovery DoS Attack appears to be
   occurring.

4.2.  Optimisation Functions

   The remaining uses of stateful NPD state are not assured of success.
   The limited number of Neighbor Solicitation retransmissions may not
   be enough, causing neighbor discovery to fail even though the target
   node exists.  There may be more packets sent that trigger NPD than
   are stored for transmission when NPD completes successfully, causing
   them to be dropped.  The ICMPv6 Destination Unreachable message may
   be dropped on the way back to the traffic originating node, perhaps
   intentionally by a network located firewall.

   This means that these functions are useful but not essential
   optimisations, as they are not reliable.  They can be sacrificed if
   necessary, as the original packet source will retransmit its packets,
   reinitiating NPD, or accept that packet loss has occurred.  This
   retransmission or acceptance of packet loss provides the opportunity
   to perform a stateless form of Neighbor Presence Discovery, if there
   is evidence that a Neighbor Discovery DoS Attack is occurring.


5.  Stateless Neighbor Presence Discovery

5.1.  SLNPD Variables

   To perform stateless NPD, five variables are maintained:

   SLNPD Flag - This flag indicates whether or not the interface will
   perform SLNPD if necessary.  By default, this flag should be set to
   on.

   SLNPD Activate Threshold - This variable specifies the threshold when



Smith                    Expires August 24, 2013                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft    Stateless Neighbor Presence Discovery    February 2013


   stateless NPD is activated.  The threshold specifies a neighbor cache
   utilisation level.  It is expressed as a percentage, with a default
   value of 80%.  It may either be a per-interface or node global
   variable depending on whether the neighbor discovery implementation
   has per-interface neighbor caches or a global neighbor cache used by
   all interfaces.  In the case of per-interface neighbor caches, for
   convenience, an implementation may maintain a global SLNPD Activate
   Threshold variable, used when the per-interface SLNPD Activate
   Threshold value is set to 0.

   SLNPD Active Flag - This flag indicates whether or not the interface
   is currently performing SLNPD.  It is maintained for each interface
   on the node.

   SLNPD Neighbor Advertisement Acceptance Time ("SLNPD NA Accept.
   Time") - This variable holds the time remaining during which apparent
   or actual unsolicited unicast Neighbor Advertisements will continue
   to be accepted, after SLNPD has become inactive.  It is measured in
   milliseconds, and is used to implement a count-down-to-zero timer.
   It is maintained for each interface on the node.

   SLNPD Neighbor Solicitation Rate Limit ("SLNPD NS Rate Limit") - This
   variable specifies a maximum threshold for multicast Neighbor
   Solicitations when the interface is performing SLNPD, specified in
   packets per second.  It is a per-interface variable, as different
   interfaces may have different thresholds.  The rate value should be
   an appropriate portion of the multicast packet per second
   capabilities of the interface link technology, to ensure multicast
   capacity remains for other uses.  A packet per second rate
   corresponding to 10% of the link's multicast capability would be
   typical.  For convenience, a node may maintain a global SLNPD NS Rate
   Limit that is used when an interface specific SLNPD NS Rate Limit is
   set to 0.

5.2.  SLNPD Processing

   The stateless NPD process may occur once a node has determined the
   outgoing interface for a packet, and that the packet's destination is
   on-link.

   If the packet's destination address is present in the neighbor cache,
   and the link-layer address has been resolved (if necessary for the
   link-layer type), the packet is forwarded out the link-layer
   interface to its destination.

   If the packet's destination address is not present in the neighbor
   cache, and the SLNPD Flag is off, traditional stateful NPD is
   performed for the packet's destination.



Smith                    Expires August 24, 2013                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft    Stateless Neighbor Presence Discovery    February 2013


   If the SLNPD Flag is on, and the SLNPD Active flag is off,
   traditional stateful NPD is performed.

   If the SLNPD Flag is on, and the SLNPD Active flag is on, stateless
   NPD is performed as follows:

   1.  The node determines if sending a multicast Neighbor Solicitation
       would exceed the SLNPD NS Rate Limit for the outgoing interface.
       If the SLNPD NS Rate Limit would be exceeded, discard the packet
       and do not proceed any further.

   2.  A multicast Neighbor Solicitation is sent by the node for the
       destination address in the packet.  The packet is then discarded.
       (An implementation memory optimisation would be to record the
       packet destination address and then discard the packet before
       building and sending the corresponding Neighbor Solicitation).

   3.  As some later point in time, the node is likely to receive a
       unicast Neighbor Advertisement, for a previously sent Neighbor
       Solicitation.

   4.  If the SLNPD Active Flag is on, or the SLNPD Active Flag is off
       and the SLNPD NA Accept.  Time is greater than zero, the node
       either:

   5.

       *  Updates an existing but incomplete neighbor cache entry,
          created as part of a previous stateful NPD transaction.

       *  Creates a new entry in its neighbor cache using the
          information received in the unicast Neighbor Advertisement.
          Stateless NPD is now complete.

   6.  If the SLNPD Active Flag is off and the SLNPD NA Accept.  Time is
       zero, the node performs traditional stateful NPD processing of
       the received Neighbor Advertisement.

   The utilisation of the neighbor cache needs to be measured to
   determine if it crosses the SLNDP Activate Threshold.  If the
   utilisation increases above the SLNDP Activate Threshold, the SLNPD
   Active Flag is switched on, and if it decreases below the SLNDP
   Activate Threshold, the SLNPD Active Flag is switched off.  Neighbor
   cache utilisation should be measured and compared to the SLNDP
   Activate Threshold when:






Smith                    Expires August 24, 2013                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft    Stateless Neighbor Presence Discovery    February 2013


   o  entries are added to the neighbor cache, during either stateful or
      stateless NPD,

   o  entries are removed from the neighbor cache when Neighbor
      Unreachability Detection discovers the neighbor has become
      unreachable.

   When the SLNPD Active Flag is switched from on to off, the SLNPD NA
   Accept.  Time is reset to the value of the node's RETRANS_TIMER value
   [RFC4861] multiplied by the node's MAX_MULTICAST_SOLICIT value
   [RFC4861].  A system timer is then started to decrement SLNPD NA
   Accept.  Time down to zero.  This timer provides the opportunity for
   outstanding SLNPD transactions to complete after SLNPD has become
   inactive.  When the SLNPD Active Flag is switched from off to on, if
   the timer is operating it can be cancelled.

5.3.  Optional Enhancements

5.3.1.  Selective SLNPD

   When a Neighbor Discovery DoS Attack appears to be occurring, it
   could be useful to continue to provide traditional stateful NPD
   service to hosts that are considered unlikely to initiate or
   participate in the DoS attack.  These hosts could be considered
   trusted hosts, while the remaining set of hosts are untrusted.

   The determination of whether a host is trusted or untrusted would
   take place when NPD is determined to be necessary, during the
   stateless NPD process.  The determination of trust is made based on
   attributes of the packets that trigger the NPD process.  If none of
   the packet attributes indicate either a trusted or untrusted host, or
   the value(s) of the packet attribute(s) cannot be trusted, then the
   source host is considered untrusted.

   There are two basic packet attributes that an enhanced implementation
   should provide mechanisms to use to classify a packet source as
   trusted or untrusted:

   o  source address

   o  ingress interface

   An implementation may be able to reuse its existing packet
   classification mechanisms to determine trust, such as those used to
   implement network QoS.  This would mean that other packet attributes,
   such as Traffic Class, Flow Label [RFC6437], the CALIPSO option
   [RFC5570] or MPLS label values [RFC3031], could also be used to
   determine packet source trustworthiness.



Smith                    Expires August 24, 2013                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft    Stateless Neighbor Presence Discovery    February 2013


5.3.1.1.  Source Address

   The source address of the packet that has triggered the NPD process
   can be used to determine the trust level of the origin host.  The
   information used to classify the source address can come from two
   possible sources:

   o  an operator configured prefix list

   o  the network's routing information

5.3.1.1.1.  Operator Configured Prefix List

   An operator configured prefix list consists of a static list of
   prefixes and their lengths, each with a flag indicating whether
   traffic with source addresses that falls within the specified prefix
   is from a trusted or untrusted source.

   How this list is evaluated would be implementation dependent, however
   it is likely to be either sequential from first to last entry, or
   using a longest match algorithm.

   In most cases, this list should have a default entry of the ULA
   prefix (fc00::/7) [RFC4193], flagged as a trusted source.  An
   implementation must allow this entry to be removed.  There may be
   some cases where even packets with ULA source addresses cannot be
   trusted; in these cases the prefix list should be empty by default.
   The likely deployment role for the implementation would be a factor
   in this decision.

5.3.1.1.2.  Routing Information

   The network's routing information can be used to distinguish trusted
   and untrusted packet sources.  An advantage of using routing
   information for this purpose is that it will typically be dynamically
   and automatically distributed to all routers within the network, when
   dynamic routing protocols are used.  This avoids changes to the
   operator configured prefix list on individual routers when trusted
   prefixes are added or removed from the network.

   The contents of a stub network's route table is typically all the
   internal routes for the network, and then a default route used to
   reach the Internet.  The list of internal routes can be used to
   distinguish between trusted and untrusted sources, with packet
   sources matching internal routes being trusted, and all other packet
   sources being untrusted.

   In more complex routing environments, such as those using one or more



Smith                    Expires August 24, 2013               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft    Stateless Neighbor Presence Discovery    February 2013


   IGPs and an EGP such as BGP [RFC4271], there may be other methods
   available to distinguish between trusted and untrusted sources.  For
   example, routes carried in an IGP could be considered trusted, while
   routes carried in BGP are untrusted.  For a network using BGP to
   carry all reachability information, except network transit and
   loopback interface routes, internal routes may be tagged with one or
   more BGP communities to indicate they are also trusted prefixes.

   There may be cases where a subset of the internal routes need to be
   considered untrusted, despite them being propagated internally via a
   routing protocol.  These routes will likely be for links at the edge
   of the local network, where untrusted hosts can be attached without
   local network control or authorisation.  These routes need to be
   labelled as untrusted, and that information propagated to all routers
   within the local network.  Route labelling mechanisms such as OSPF's
   External Route Tag [RFC5340] or a BGP community could be used for
   this purpose.

   A default route sourced from a routing protocol should never be used
   as a trusted packet source route.  If a router's operator wishes to
   trust all packet sources, they should specify the prefix that covers
   all IPv6 addresses, ::/0, as an operator configured trusted prefix.
   (The ::/0 prefix is only a default route when used as routing
   information.)

   Implementations should provide simple and convenient methods to use
   the network's routing information to distinguish between trusted and
   untrusted packet source prefixes.

5.3.1.2.  Ingress Interface

   A packet's ingress interface on the router could be used to determine
   whether stateful or stateless NPD takes place.  Interfaces on the
   router would be labelled as trusted or untrusted.

   The default trust level for interfaces would be up to the router's
   implementer.  Considerations could be the likely deployment scenario
   for the router implementation (e.g., residential Internet access, or
   within an enterprise network), and the type of interface (e.g., an
   interface type that is usually used to attach the router to the
   Internet, such as an ADSL interface, would be labelled untrusted).
   These default interface trust assignments should be easy to change.


6.  Acknowledgements

   Oliver Ddin provided review and comments, and suggested the use of
   ingress interface and other more general packet attributes to



Smith                    Expires August 24, 2013               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft    Stateless Neighbor Presence Discovery    February 2013


   determine packet source trust.

   Ray Hunter provided review and comments, and initiated the discussion
   that resulted in this memo using the term and more specifically
   focusing on Neighbor Presence Discovery.

   Igor Lubashev and Deb Banerjee provided review and comments, and
   identified a hysteresis issue around the SLNPD Activate Threshold.

   Review and comments were provided by Matthew Moyle-Croft and Karl
   Auer.

   This memo was prepared using the xml2rfc tool.


7.  Security Considerations

   This memo proposes a security mitigation method for an off-link
   sourced Neighbor Discovery DoS Attack.

   As discussed in Section 4.1, the method proposed creates an
   opportunity for an on-link sourced Neighbor Discovery DoS Attack,
   when mitigating the off-link sourced Neighbor Discovery DoS Attack.
   This is considered to be an acceptable security trade-off.

   Use of attributes that are carried within a packet to distinguish
   trusted and untrusted sources in Section 5.3.1 is based on the
   assumption that the values of these attributes can be trusted,
   meaning that they have been set by trusted packet sources.  If it is
   possible that these packet attribute values may have been forged,
   then their possible source should be considered untrusted during the
   Stateless Neighbor Presence Discovery procedure, if the Selective
   Stateless NPD enhancement has been implemented.


8.  Change Log [RFC Editor please remove]

   draft-smith-6man-mitigate-nd-cache-dos-slnd-00, initial version,
   2012-09-04

   draft-smith-6man-mitigate-nd-cache-dos-slnd-01, more clarity, 2012-
   10-13

   o  more comprehensive introduction (problem definition) text

   o  make it more obvious that hosts don't need to be changed





Smith                    Expires August 24, 2013               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft    Stateless Neighbor Presence Discovery    February 2013


   o  low-end/embedded hosts can consider all packet sources untrusted

   o  misc. minor text updates

   draft-smith-6man-mitigate-nd-cache-dos-slnd-05, structural changes,
   2012-11-08

   o  moved opportunities for SLNPD section to before SLNPD description

   o  spit SLNPD into basic functionality and optional enhancements

   o  use of ingress interface and other more general packet attributes
      to determine trust

   draft-smith-6man-mitigate-nd-cache-dos-slnd-06, better problem
   definition, 2012-02-20

   o  rephrase problem as one of neighbor presence discovery

   o  don't ignore Neighbor Advertisements that may be part of a
      previous stateful neighbor discovery transaction

   o  use a count down timer to allow outstanding SLNPD transactions to
      complete

   o  mention issues regarding trusting packet attributes


9.  References

9.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

9.2.  Informative References

   [RFC1958]  Carpenter, B., "Architectural Principles of the Internet",
              RFC 1958, June 1996.

   [RFC3031]  Rosen, E., Viswanathan, A., and R. Callon, "Multiprotocol
              Label Switching Architecture", RFC 3031, January 2001.

   [RFC3756]  Nikander, P., Kempf, J., and E. Nordmark, "IPv6 Neighbor
              Discovery (ND) Trust Models and Threats", RFC 3756,
              May 2004.

   [RFC4193]  Hinden, R. and B. Haberman, "Unique Local IPv6 Unicast



Smith                    Expires August 24, 2013               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft    Stateless Neighbor Presence Discovery    February 2013


              Addresses", RFC 4193, October 2005.

   [RFC4271]  Rekhter, Y., Li, T., and S. Hares, "A Border Gateway
              Protocol 4 (BGP-4)", RFC 4271, January 2006.

   [RFC4291]  Hinden, R. and S. Deering, "IP Version 6 Addressing
              Architecture", RFC 4291, February 2006.

   [RFC4861]  Narten, T., Nordmark, E., Simpson, W., and H. Soliman,
              "Neighbor Discovery for IP version 6 (IPv6)", RFC 4861,
              September 2007.

   [RFC4862]  Thomson, S., Narten, T., and T. Jinmei, "IPv6 Stateless
              Address Autoconfiguration", RFC 4862, September 2007.

   [RFC4941]  Narten, T., Draves, R., and S. Krishnan, "Privacy
              Extensions for Stateless Address Autoconfiguration in
              IPv6", RFC 4941, September 2007.

   [RFC5340]  Coltun, R., Ferguson, D., Moy, J., and A. Lindem, "OSPF
              for IPv6", RFC 5340, July 2008.

   [RFC5570]  StJohns, M., Atkinson, R., and G. Thomas, "Common
              Architecture Label IPv6 Security Option (CALIPSO)",
              RFC 5570, July 2009.

   [RFC5942]  Singh, H., Beebee, W., and E. Nordmark, "IPv6 Subnet
              Model: The Relationship between Links and Subnet
              Prefixes", RFC 5942, July 2010.

   [RFC6437]  Amante, S., Carpenter, B., Jiang, S., and J. Rajahalme,
              "IPv6 Flow Label Specification", RFC 6437, November 2011.


Author's Address

   Mark Smith
   In My Own Time
   PO BOX 521
   HEIDELBERG, VIC  3084
   AU

   Email: markzzzsmith@yahoo.com.au








Smith                    Expires August 24, 2013               [Page 14]

