


Internet Engineering Task Force                                 M. Smith
Internet-Draft                                                      IMOT
Updates: 4861 (if approved)                              October 7, 2012
Intended status: Standards Track
Expires: April 10, 2013


   Mitigating IPv6 Router Neighbor Cache DoS Using Stateless Neighbor
                               Discovery
             draft-smith-6man-mitigate-nd-cache-dos-slnd-00

Abstract

   The IPv6 neighbor discovery cache is vulernable to a Denial of
   Service attack that purposely exhausts the state used during the
   neighbor discovery address resolution process.  This can be very
   disruptive when a router is successfully attacked.

   This memo proposes a stateless form of neighbor discovery to be used
   by routers to eliminate the opportunity for this DoS attack.  This
   method of stateless neighbor discovery would be used for unknown or
   untrusted packet sources, when the router's neighbor cache's state
   capacity reaches a medium to high threshold of use.  Trusted packet
   sources would continue to be provided with traditional stateful
   neighbor discovery.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 10, 2013.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2012 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.




Smith                    Expires April 10, 2013                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft        Stateless Neighbor Discovery          October 2012


   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
     1.1.  Requirements Language . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   3.  Stateless Neighbor Discovery  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
     3.1.  SLND Variables  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
     3.2.  SLND Process  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   4.  Consequences of Stateless Neighbor Discovery  . . . . . . . . . 5
     4.1.  Neighbor Advertisement Validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
     4.2.  Optimisation Functions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   5.  Trusted/Untrusted Source Prefix List  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
     5.1.  Configured Trusted and Untrusted Prefixes . . . . . . . . . 7
     5.2.  Routing Information . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
     5.3.  Default to Untrusted  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   6.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   7.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
   8.  Change Log [RFC Editor please remove] . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
   9.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
     9.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
     9.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9


















Smith                    Expires April 10, 2013                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft        Stateless Neighbor Discovery          October 2012


1.  Introduction

   The IPv6 neighbor discovery cache [RFC4861] is vulernable to a Denial
   of Service attack that purposely exhausts the state used during the
   neighbor discovery address resolution process [RFC3756].  This can be
   very disruptive when a router is successfully attacked.

   This memo proposes a stateless form of neighbor discovery to be used
   by routers to eliminate the opportunity for this DoS attack.  This
   method of stateless neighbor discovery would be used for unknown or
   untrusted packet sources, when the router's neighbor cache's state
   capacity reaches a medium to high threshold of use.  Trusted packet
   sources would continue to be provided with traditional stateful
   neighbor discovery.

1.1.  Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].


2.  Terminology

   Stateful Neighbor Discovery (SFND): Traditional neighbor discovery,
   as specified in [RFC4861].  This form of neighbor discovery maintains
   per packet destination state for all unresolved destinations during
   the neighbor discovery process.  The neighbor cache's state capacity
   is intentionally exhausted to cause the neighbor cache Denial of
   Service attack.

   Stateless Neighbor Discovery (SLND): The form of neighbor discovery
   described in this memo.  This form of neighbor discovery does not
   maintain per packet destination state for unresolved destinations
   during the neighbor discovery process.


3.  Stateless Neighbor Discovery

3.1.  SLND Variables

   To perform stateless neighbor discovery, four variables are
   maintained:

   SLND Flag - This flag indicates whether or not the interface will
   perform SLND if necessary.

   SLDN Activate Threshold - This variable specifies the threshold when



Smith                    Expires April 10, 2013                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft        Stateless Neighbor Discovery          October 2012


   stateless neighbor discovery is activated.  The threshold specifies a
   neighbor cache utilisation level.  It is expressed as a percentage,
   with a default value of 80%.  It may be either a per-interface or
   router global variable depending on whether the router implementation
   has per-interface neighbor caches or a global neighbor cache used by
   all interfaces.

   SLND Active Flag - This flag indicates whether or not the interface
   is performing SLND for untrusted packet sources.  It is maintained
   for each interface on the router.

   Trusted/Untrusted Sources Prefix List ("TUSP List") - This variable
   specifies a list of trusted and/or untrusted packet source address
   prefixes.  It is a per-interface variable, as different interfaces on
   the router may have different sets of trusted and/or untrusted packet
   sources.  However, a router may maintain a single global TUSP List
   that is used by all interfaces that may perform SLND, which don't
   have an interface specific TUSP List.

   SLND Neighbor Solicitation Rate Limit ("SLND NS Rate Limit") - This
   variable specifies a threshold for multicast Neighbor Solictiations
   when the interface is performing SLND, specified in packets per
   second.  It is a per-interface attribute, as different interfaces may
   have different thresholds.  The rate value should be appropriate to
   the multicast capabilities of the interface link technology, with a
   typical value being 10% of the multicast rate supported by the link.
   A router may maintain a global threshold that is applied to
   interfaces that do not have an interface specific rate limit.

3.2.  SLND Process

   The stateless neighbor discovery process may occur once a router has
   determined the outgoing interface for a packet, and that the packet's
   destination is on-link.

   If the packet's destination address is present in the neighbor cache,
   and the link-layer address has been resolved, the packet is forwarded
   to it's destination.

   If the packet's destination address is not present in the neighbor
   cache, and the SLND Flag is off, traditional stateful neighbor
   discovery is performed for the packet's destination.

   If the packet's destination address is not present in the neighbor
   cache, and the SLND Flag is on, the packet's source address is
   compared to the TUSP List.

   If the packet's source address is determined to be trusted,



Smith                    Expires April 10, 2013                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft        Stateless Neighbor Discovery          October 2012


   traditional neighbor discovery is performed.

   If the packet's source address is determined to be untrusted,
   stateless neighbor discovery is performed.  The stateless neighbor
   discovery process is as follows:

   1.  The router determines if sending a multicast neighbor
       solicitation would exceed the SLND NS Rate Limit for the outgoing
       interface.  If the SLND NS Rate Limit would be exceeded, drop the
       packet and do not proceed any further.

   2.  A multicast neighbor solicitation is sent by the router for the
       destination address in the packet.  The packet is then dropped.

   3.  As some later point in time, the router is likely to receive a
       unicast neighbor advertisement, for a previously sent neighbor
       solicitation.

   4.  If the SLND Active Flag is off, the router ignores the neighbor
       advertisement.

   5.  If the SLND Active Flag is on, the router creates an entry in
       it's neighbor cache using the information received in the unicast
       neighbor advertisement.  Stateless neighbor discovery is now
       complete.

   The utilisation of the neighbor cache has to be measured to determine
   if it crosses the SLDN Activate Threshold.  If the utilisation
   increases above the SLDN Activate Threshold, the SLND Active Flag is
   switched on, and if it decreases below the SLDN Activate Threshold,
   the SLND Active Flag is switched off.  Neighbor cache utlisation
   should be measured and compared to the SLDN Activate Threshold when:

   o  entries are added to the neighbor cache, during either stateful or
      stateless neighbor discovery

   o  entries are removed from the neighbor cache when NUD discovers the
      neighbor has become unreachable


4.  Consequences of Stateless Neighbor Discovery

   During traditional stateful neighbor discovery, state is used to
   perform the following:

   o  ensure a received neighbor advertisement corresponds to a
      previously sent neighbor solicitation




Smith                    Expires April 10, 2013                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft        Stateless Neighbor Discovery          October 2012


   o  to retransmit a limited number of neighbor solicitations if
      previous solicitations remain unanswered

   o  to store a small number of packets that triggered the neighbor
      discovery process, so that they can be transmitted if neighbor
      discovery completes successfully

   o  to generate an ICMPv6 destination unreachable, address unreachble
      messages back to the traffic source, should the neighbor discovery
      process fail

   Stateless neighbor discovery sacrifices these functions and the
   related state to mitigate the neighbor cache denial-of-service
   attack.

4.1.  Neighbor Advertisement Validation

   Ensuring received advertisements correspond to previously sent
   neighbor solicitations prevents on-link nodes from sending
   unsolicited neighbor advertisements, and then having them added to
   the router's neighbor cache without validation.  Doing so would allow
   the on-link nodes to perform a neighbor cache denial of service
   attack, similar to the one this memo mitigates for off-link sources.

   If neighbor advertisement validation is to occur, then the router is
   vulnerable to an off-link sourced neighbor cache DoS attack, but not
   vulnerable to an on-link sourced neighbor cache DoS attack.  If this
   neighbor advertisement validation does not occur, then the reverse is
   the case.

   Considering that on-link nodes will usually have a vested interest in
   the router continuing to operate, that there will be a much smaller
   set of on-link sources, and that they'll be far better known and
   possibly access controlled, the likelihood of an on-link sourced
   neighbor cache DoS is much lower than an off-link sourced neighbor
   cache DoS.  It is therefore beneficial to sacrifice on-link neighbor
   cache DoS protection to gain off-link neighbor cache DoS protection.
   Also note that during the stateless neighbor discovery process
   proposed in this memo, neighbor advertisement validation is only
   sacrificed when an off-link sourced neighbor cache DoS appears to be
   taking place.  Under normal circumstances on-link sourced neighbor
   advertisement validation will continue to occur.

4.2.  Optimisation Functions

   The nature of IPv6 is best effort, meaning that there is a
   possibility that packets may be lost as they transit the network, and
   that IPv6 will not make any attempt to recover lost packets.  If an



Smith                    Expires April 10, 2013                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft        Stateless Neighbor Discovery          October 2012


   application residing on an IPv6 node requires reliable packet
   delivery, it will need to utilise locally implemented reliable upper
   layer protocols such as TCP and SCTP, or implement it's own
   reliability mechanisms.  These reliability mechanisms involve
   retransmitting packets.

   The remaining uses of stateful neighbor discovery state are not
   assured of success.  The limited number of neighbor solicitation
   retransmissions may not be enough, causing neighbor discovery to fail
   even though the target node exists.  There may be more packets sent
   that trigger neighbor discovery than are stored for transmission when
   neighbor discovery completes successfully, causing them to be
   dropped.  The ICMPv6 destination unreachable message may be dropped
   on the way back to the traffic originating node, perhaps
   intentionally by a network located firewall.

   This means that these functions are useful but not essential
   optimisations.  If necessary, they do not need to be performed, as
   the traffic source will retransmit it's packets, reinitiating the
   neighbor discovery process.  This provides the opportunity to perform
   a stateless form of neighbor discovery if there is evidence that a
   neighbor cache DoS attack is occuring, mitigating the off-link
   sourced neighbor cache DoS attack.


5.  Trusted/Untrusted Source Prefix List

   The following information sources can be used to construct the
   trusted/untrusted source prefix list (TUSP List).

5.1.  Configured Trusted and Untrusted Prefixes

   The first TUSP List source is an operator configured list of prefixes
   and their lengths, each with a flag indicating whether traffic with
   source addresses that falls within the specified prefix is from a
   trusted or untrusted source.

   How this list is evaluated would be implementation dependent, however
   it is likely to be either sequential from first to last entry, or
   using a longest match algorithm.

   This list should have a default entry of the ULA prefix (fc00::/7)
   [RFC4193], flagged as a trusted source.  An implementation must allow
   this entry to be removed.







Smith                    Expires April 10, 2013                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft        Stateless Neighbor Discovery          October 2012


5.2.  Routing Information

   The second TUSP List source is the network's routing information.

   The network's routing information can be used to distinguish trusted
   and untrusted traffic sources.  An advantage of using routing
   information for this purpose is that it will typically be dynamically
   and automatically distributed to all routers within the network, when
   dynamic routing protocols are used.  This avoids routers in the
   network having to be manually reconfigured when subnets are added or
   removed from the network.

   The contents of a stub network's route table is typically all the
   internal routes for the network, and then a default route used to
   reach the Internet.  The list of internal routes can be used to
   distinguish between trusted and untrusted sources, with traffic
   sources matching internal routes being trusted, and all other traffic
   sources being untrusted.

   In more complex routing environments, such as those using one or more
   IGPs and an EGP such as BGP, there may be other methods available to
   distinguish between trusted and untrusted sources.  For example,
   routes carried in an IGP could be considered trusted, while routes
   carried in BGP are untrusted.  For a network using BGP to carry all
   reachability information, except network transit and loopback
   interface routes, routes may be tagged with one or more BGP
   communities which indicate internal and therefore trusted prefixes.

   A default route should never be used to define a trusted traffic
   source prefix.  If a router's operator wishes to trust all traffic
   sources, they should configure ::/0 as a configured trusted prefix.

   Implementations should provide convenient methods to use the
   network's routing information to distinguish between trusted and
   untrusted traffic source prefixes.

5.3.  Default to Untrusted

   Finally, should none of the previous trusted or untrusted source
   prefix information sources match the source address of traffic that
   would trigger neighbor discovery, the packet source should be
   considered untrusted.


6.  Acknowledgements






Smith                    Expires April 10, 2013                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft        Stateless Neighbor Discovery          October 2012


7.  Security Considerations

   This memo proposes a security mitigation for an off-link sourced
   neighbor cache denial-of-service attack.

   As discussed in Section 4.1, the method proposed creates an
   opportunity for an on-link sourced neighbor cache DoS attack, when
   mitigating the off-link sourced neighbor cache DoS.  This is
   considered to be an acceptable security trade-off.


8.  Change Log [RFC Editor please remove]

   draft-smith-6man-mitigate-nd-cache-dos-slnd-00, initial version,
   2012-09-04


9.  References

9.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

9.2.  Informative References

   [RFC3756]  Nikander, P., Kempf, J., and E. Nordmark, "IPv6 Neighbor
              Discovery (ND) Trust Models and Threats", RFC 3756,
              May 2004.

   [RFC4193]  Hinden, R. and B. Haberman, "Unique Local IPv6 Unicast
              Addresses", RFC 4193, October 2005.

   [RFC4861]  Narten, T., Nordmark, E., Simpson, W., and H. Soliman,
              "Neighbor Discovery for IP version 6 (IPv6)", RFC 4861,
              September 2007.


Author's Address

   Mark Smith
   In My Own Time
   PO BOX 521
   HEIDELBERG, VIC  3084
   AU

   Email: markzzzsmith@yahoo.com.au




Smith                    Expires April 10, 2013                 [Page 9]

