



Internet Engineering Task Force                               M.R. Smith
Internet-Draft                                                      IMOT
Intended status: Standards Track                          March 29, 2013
Expires: September 30, 2013


   MLDv2 Procedures for Link-Layer Unicast Delivery of Multicast IPv6
                   draft-smith-mldv2-link-unicast-00

Abstract

   Some multi-access link-layer technologies typically not provide good
   IPv6 multicast performance, using link-layer multicasts, when the
   volume of multicast traffic is significant.  It would be possible to
   replicate and then link-layer unicast multicast IPv6 traffic to
   interested listeners to overcome these link-layer performance
   limitations.  This memo describes MLDv2 and IPv6 neighbor discovery
   procedures to support link-layer unicast delivery of multicast IPv6
   traffic.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 30, 2013.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must



Smith                  Expires September 30, 2013               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft  MLDv2 Procedures for Link-Layer Unicast       March 2013


   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
     1.1.  Requirements Language . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   2.  Requirements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   3.  Procedures  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     3.1.  Unicast Link-Layer Information Determination  . . . . . .   3
     3.2.  Determining When a Multicast Listener Becomes Unreachable   4
   4.  Operating Models  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     4.1.  All Groups on an Interface  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     4.2.  Specific Groups on an Interface . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   5.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   6.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   7.  Change Log [RFC Editor please remove] . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   8.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     8.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     8.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7

1.  Introduction

   Some multi-access link-layer technologies, such as IEEE 802.11,
   typically do not provide good IPv6 multicast performance when the
   volume of multicast traffic is significant.  Additionally, unicast
   performance of the link may also be impacted while significant
   multicast traffic is present.  To overcome link-layer multicast
   performance problems, it could be useful to use packet replication
   and link-layer unicasting of the IPv6 multicast traffic when the
   node's capacity to do so exceeds the link-layer's multicast capacity
   and/or performance.  It could also be useful to use unicast
   transmission of multicast IPv6 traffic to reduce power consumption on
   battery powered devices attached to the link.

   This link-layer unicast transmission of IPv6 multicast traffic would
   be an alternative option to using link-layer multicast transmission.
   Where necessary, such as when the link-layer unicast information for
   the destination(s) cannot or cannot easily be determined, link-layer
   multicast would continue to be used.

   [RFC6085] updates the operation of IPv6 over Ethernet to support
   link-layer unicast delivery of IPv6 multicast traffic.  This is
   possible as the destination link-layer address used for frames
   carrying IPv6 multicast packets does not have to be a link-layer
   multicast address.  This technique could be applied to other multi-



Smith                  Expires September 30, 2013               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft  MLDv2 Procedures for Link-Layer Unicast       March 2013


   access link-layer technologies that support IPv6, including point-to-
   point link-layers, where the outgoing link-layer interface is the
   required link-layer information.

   [RFC6085] does not specify how the IPv6 multicast traffic sender
   learns and maintains link-layer unicast destination information for
   multicast IPv6 traffic delivery.  This memo proposes these
   procedures, using a combination of the functionality of IPv6
   Multicast Listener Discovery protocol, version 2 (MLDv2) [RFC3810]
   and IPv6 Neighbor Discovery [RFC4861].  MLDv2 is necessary as it
   supports tracking of individual listeners.

   These procedures are primarily applicable to multicast routers.
   Hosts may also use these procedures if they are willing to act as a
   passive observer of the operation of MLDv2 on the link, and perform
   link-layer unicast replication of IPv6 multicast traffic for groups
   for which they are sources.

1.1.  Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].

2.  Requirements

   To support unicast link-layer delivery of multicast traffic, in
   addition to the existing MLDv2 procedures, the following will need to
   be achieved:

   o  determination of the link-layer information of the multicast
      listeners for which unicast link-layer delivery will be used,

   o  determination of when an individual multicast listener becomes
      unreachable, so that delivery of multicast traffic using unicast
      link-layer delivery to that listener can cease.

3.  Procedures

3.1.  Unicast Link-Layer Information Determination

   MLDv2 listeners express their interest in receiving traffic destined
   to one or more groups by issuing one or more Multicast Listener
   Reports.

   The source address used for a Multicast Listener Report must either
   be the unspecified address (::) or a valid link-local address
   [RFC3810].



Smith                  Expires September 30, 2013               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft  MLDv2 Procedures for Link-Layer Unicast       March 2013


   The unspecified address is used when a valid link-local address has
   not been acquired, and is used during IPv6 Neighbor Discovery
   Duplicate Address Detection (DAD) [RFC4861].  These Reports are to be
   discarded by multicast routers, as their purpose is to inform MLDv2
   snooping switches of group membership for groups used during DAD.  In
   the context of this memo, they do not provide the information
   necessary to determine the unicast link-layer information for a
   multicast listener.

   A link-local address is used as the source address for all other
   Multicast Listener Reports.  [RFC3810] specifies that Multicast
   Listener Reports without valid link-local addresses must be silently
   discarded, and that a valid link-local address is one that the router
   has determined to belong to the link on which the Report was received
   on.  This requirement implies that for the Multicast Listener Report
   to be accepted, the link-local source address must be already be
   present in the multicast router's neighbor cache, and the link-layer
   address resolved for link-layers that require it.  Alternatively, it
   implies that the Report should trigger neighbor presence discovery
   for the Report's link-local source address.  Note that in this latter
   case it is not clear whether the Report should be stored until
   neighbor presence discovery is complete and then processed or
   discarded, or immediately discarded after neighbor presence discovery
   is started.  It may be useful to store the Multicast Listener Report
   for processing after neighbor presence discovery is complete, however
   it would be an optimisation, as Multicast Listener Reports are not
   inherently reliable, and therefore will be retransmitted.

   If the Multicast Listener Report link-local source address has been
   determined to be valid using neighbor discovery, the link-layer
   information necessary for link-layer unicast delivery of IPv6
   multicast has also been determined.  Multicast traffic towards this
   listener can now be delivered using unicast link-layer transmission.

3.2.  Determining When a Multicast Listener Becomes Unreachable

   IPv6 Neighbor Unreachability Discovery (NUD) [RFC4861] actively
   tracks the reachability of the unicast neighbors, or more
   specifically the unicast IPv6 addresses(es) of the neighbors, that
   traffic is being sent to.

   MLDv2 supports per-host tracking of multicast listener status on an
   interface.  Hosts will be individually identified using the link-
   local addresses they use as their Multicast Listener Report source
   addresses.

   If NUD detects that the link-local address of a multicast listener
   has become unreachable, link-layer unicast transmission of multicast



Smith                  Expires September 30, 2013               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft  MLDv2 Procedures for Link-Layer Unicast       March 2013


   IPv6 traffic should cease.  This should occur as soon as possible, as
   some link-layer technologies will resort to flooding traffic to all
   link nodes if a unicast destination becomes unknown.

   NUD's detection of the disappearance of the neighbor should be
   considered the equivalent of receiving a Multicast Listener Report
   from the link-local address owner, leaving all joined groups.

4.  Operating Models

   For a particular multicast interface on a router (or host), there are
   two possible modes of operation for link-layer unicast transmission
   of multicast traffic:

   o  all groups on the interface,

   o  specific groups on the interface.

4.1.  All Groups on an Interface

   In this mode of operation, all multicast groups available on the
   interface are candidates for the use of link-layer unicast
   transmission of multicast traffic.  When possible, link-layer unicast
   of multicast traffic should be used.

   This mode of operation might be most useful when the hosts on the
   link are or are likely to be battery powered.  This would ensure that
   the hosts are only receiving link-layer multicast traffic, perhaps
   for groups they are not interested in, only when it is not possible
   to use link-layer unicasts.  This should improve the hosts' battery
   life.

4.2.  Specific Groups on an Interface

   Alternatively, link-layer unicast transmission of multicast traffic
   is only used for specific multicast groups.  These groups will need
   to be specified via some mechanism that is outside of the scope of
   this memo.  Examples of these mechanisms might be a list of groups
   configured by a system operator, or via an automated and distributed
   configuration protocol, that nominates specific multicast groups for
   link-layer unicast transmission.

   An example scenario might be one where low volume multicast traffic,
   such as IPv6 neighbor discovery traffic, continues to be sent using
   link-layer multicasts.  High volume multicast traffic, carrying
   video, is link-layer unicast to the subset of hosts that are
   interested in it.




Smith                  Expires September 30, 2013               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft  MLDv2 Procedures for Link-Layer Unicast       March 2013


5.  Acknowledgements

   Review and comments were provided by YOUR NAME HERE!

   This memo was prepared using the xml2rfc tool.

6.  Security Considerations

   The procedures described in this memo use a combination of the
   existing functionality of MLDv2 and IPv6 Neighbor Discovery.
   Consequently, the security considerations include those of both MLDv2
   [RFC3810] and IPv6 Neighbor Discovery [RFC4861].

   Link-layer multicasts of multicast IPv6 traffic will typically be
   sent to all link-layer nodes, unless a technique such as MLD snooping
   [RFC4541] is used to more selectively forward link-layer multicasts
   to likely interested nodes.  It is possible that multicast IPv6
   traffic will be sent to nodes that are not interested in it, and for
   which it would be beneficial for data confidentially reasons for them
   not to receive it.

   Link-layer unicast delivery of IPv6 multicast traffic provides an
   improvement in data confidentiality for the multicast IPv6 traffic
   that is unicast and successfully delivered to its destination.  If
   the link-layer unicast destination has disappeared, some link-layer
   technologies will resort to flooding the unicast traffic to all
   nodes.  In this case, the data confidentially benefits of link-layer
   unicast of multicast IPv6 traffic will have disappeared.  Data
   confidentiality will have returned to the level provided by
   conventional link-layer multicast of multicast IPv6 traffic, when MLD
   snooping or similar techniques are not in use.

   The level of data confidentiality improvement is dependent on the
   operating model of the interface sending the traffic (all groups or
   specific groups), and whether it is necessary to resort to link-layer
   multicasts when it is not or not easily possible to determine the
   required link-layer unicast information.  For example, for a
   multicast group carrying video traffic, it is likely to be possible
   to determine the link-layer unicast information for all interested
   listeners, and therefore all multicast video traffic can be link-
   layer unicast.  Alternatively, if this technique is applied to IPv6
   Neighbor Discovery, some functions of neighbor discovery cannot be
   performed without link-layer multicasts, meaning that the data
   confidentiality improvements will be lower.

7.  Change Log [RFC Editor please remove]

   draft-smith-mldv2-link-unicast-00, initial version, 2013-03-29



Smith                  Expires September 30, 2013               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft  MLDv2 Procedures for Link-Layer Unicast       March 2013


8.  References

8.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

8.2.  Informative References

   [RFC3810]  Vida, R. and L. Costa, "Multicast Listener Discovery
              Version 2 (MLDv2) for IPv6", RFC 3810, June 2004.

   [RFC4541]  Christensen, M., Kimball, K., and F. Solensky,
              "Considerations for Internet Group Management Protocol
              (IGMP) and Multicast Listener Discovery (MLD) Snooping
              Switches", RFC 4541, May 2006.

   [RFC4861]  Narten, T., Nordmark, E., Simpson, W., and H. Soliman,
              "Neighbor Discovery for IP version 6 (IPv6)", RFC 4861,
              September 2007.

   [RFC6085]  Gundavelli, S., Townsley, M., Troan, O., and W. Dec,
              "Address Mapping of IPv6 Multicast Packets on Ethernet",
              RFC 6085, January 2011.

Author's Address

   Mark Smith
   In My Own Time
   PO BOX 521
   HEIDELBERG, VIC  3084
   AU

   Email: markzzzsmith@yahoo.com.au
















Smith                  Expires September 30, 2013               [Page 7]
