A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3402

        Title:      Dynamic Delegation Discovery System (DDDS)
                    Part Two: The Algorithm
        Author(s):  M. Mealling
        Status:     Standards Track
        Date:       October 2002
        Mailbox:    michael@neonym.net
        Pages:      17
        Characters: 38925
        Obsoletes:  2915, 2168

        I-D Tag:    draft-ietf-urn-ddds-07.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3402.txt


This document describes the Dynamic Delegation Discovery System (DDDS)
algorithm for applying dynamically retrieved string transformation
rules to an application-unique string.  Well-formed transformation
rules will reflect the delegation of management of information
associated with the string.  This document is also part of a series
that is completely specified in "Dynamic Delegation Discovery System
(DDDS) Part One: The Comprehensive DDDS" (RFC 3401).  It is very
important to note that it is impossible to read and understand any
document in this series without reading the others.

This document is a product of the Uniform Resource Names Working Group
of the IETF.

This is now a Proposed Standard Protocol.

This document specifies an Internet standards track protocol for
the Internet community, and requests discussion and suggestions
for improvements.  Please refer to the current edition of the
"Internet Official Protocol Standards" (STD 1) for the
standardization state and status of this protocol.  Distribution
of this memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.


