


MEDIACTRL WG                                                  D. Sisalem
Internet-Draft                                                V. Pascual
Intended status: BCP                                             Tekelec
Expires: March 25, 2010                               September 21, 2009


                MRB-Media Server Interaction Mechanisms
                   draft-sisalem-mediactrl-mrbctrl-00

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on March 25, 2010.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2009 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents in effect on the date of
   publication of this document (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info).
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.

Abstract

   The MediaCtrl work group in the IETF is currently working on an
   architecture for controlling media services.  As part of the
   MediaCtrl architecture the Media Resource Broker (MRB) was identified



Sisalem & Pascual        Expires March 25, 2010                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                 MRB Control                September 2009


   as the component needed for intelligent, application level media
   service selection based on non-static signaling properties.  This
   document defines the mechanisms needed by the media servers to
   publish their capabilities and the mechanisms needed by the MRB to
   monitor the status of the media servers.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   3.  Publishing of Media Server Capabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
     3.1.  Media Server Publish Request  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
     3.2.  Media Server Publish Response . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   4.  Media Server Status Reporting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   5.  Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   6.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   7.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   8.  Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   9.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   Appendix A.  Change Log . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8































Sisalem & Pascual        Expires March 25, 2010                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                 MRB Control                September 2009


1.  Introduction

   The MediaCtrl work group examines the protocols used for the
   communication between media servers and their clients, e.g.,
   application servers.  The MediaCtrl Requirements
   [I-D.ietf-mediactrl-requirements] and MediaCtrl Architecture
   [I-D.ietf-mediactrl-architecture] documents indicate that it should
   be possible to have a many-to-many relationship between Application
   Servers and Media Servers.  To enable the Application Servers to find
   the appropriate Media Server required for offering a certain service,
   the Application Servers must have an overview of all the available
   Media Servers, the capabilities of these servers as well their
   status.  To relieve the Application servers from having to Keep an
   up-to-date overview of Media Servers, the Media Resource Broker (MRB)
   is being discussed in the MediaCtrl work group.  The MRB will be
   located between the Application Servers and the Media servers and
   will have the responsibility of receiving requests from the
   Application Servers for certain services and deciding which Media
   Server should be handling this request.

   The tasks of a Media Resource Broker (MRB) can be summarized as
   follows:

      - Receive and process requests for service from Application
      Servers.

      - Make a decision on which Media Server can best handle the
      requested service.  This decision can be made by matching the
      capabilities of the Media Server with the requested service,
      status of the Media Servers in terms of load or availability and
      policies defined by the operator of the MRB related to costs,
      quality of service, subscriber identity or time of day for example

      - Reply to the Application Server with regard to the made choice
      (Query Mode), or forward the request to the chosen Media Server
      (Inline Mode), see [I-D.ietf-mediactrl-mrb] for more details on
      the Query and In-Line modes

   As the basis for making a decision about which Media Server should
   handle a certain request the MRB requires from the Media Servers two
   types of information:

      - List of capabilities: This includes information about the name
      and address of the Media Server, the types of supported services,
      the supported features and capacity for example.

      - Status: Status information describe the current state of a Media
      Server in terms of load and available capacity.  Without this



Sisalem & Pascual        Expires March 25, 2010                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                 MRB Control                September 2009


      information, the MRB might decide to use an overloaded Media
      Server.

   For the MRB to collect this information, the interface between the
   MRB and the Media Servers must enable the Media servers to publish
   their capabilities and to exchange information about their status
   with the MRB.  This draft addresses possible mechanisms for realizing
   both the publishing and status reporting processes.

2.  Terminology

   In this document, the key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED",
   "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT
   RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" are to be interpreted as
   described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].

   The other concepts and terminology used in this document are
   compatible with [RFC3261].

   This document inherits terminology proposed in the MediaCtrl
   Requirements [I-D.ietf-mediactrl-requirements] and MediaCtrl
   Architecture [I-D.ietf-mediactrl-architecture] documents as well as
   the terms defined in [I-D.ietf-mediactrl-mrb] which include:

      - Media Resource Broker (MRB): A logical entity that is
      responsible for both collection of appropriate published Media
      Server (MS) information and supplying of appropriate MS
      information to consuming entities.

      - Query MRB: An instantiation of an MRB (See previous definition)
      that provides an interface for an Application Server to retrieve
      the location of an appropriate Media Server.  The result returned
      to the Application Server can be influenced by information
      contained in the query request.

      - In-line MRB: An instantiation of an MRB (See definition) that
      directly receives requests on the signalling path.  The decision
      making process is totally delegated to the MRB.

3.  Publishing of Media Server Capabilities

   In order for an MRB to use an MS it needs to know about the
   existence, address and the capabilities of the MS.  The MS will
   publish its information only infrequently, namely after starting and
   after a change in configuration.  To keep the interface between the
   MRB and MS simple it seems that using HTTP would be the most
   appropriate solution.  Including the MS information as XML with HTTP
   results in a simple solution that uses common standards and tools



Sisalem & Pascual        Expires March 25, 2010                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                 MRB Control                September 2009


   that are already available.  In the following sections the use of
   HTTP RFC 2616 [RFC2616] and HTTPS RFC 2818 [RFC2818] as transport for
   publishing the MS capabilities is described.

3.1.  Media Server Publish Request

   The MS includes the description of its capabilities in the body of an
   HTTP/HTTPS POST request.  The MIME type contained in the HTTP/HTTPS
   request/reponse should be 'application/ms+xml'.  This value MUST be
   reflected in the appropriate HTTP headers like 'Content-Type' and
   'Accept'.  The body of the POST request MUST only contain the
   'mediaServerPublishRequest' element.  The 'mediaServerPublishRequest'
   element is the primary container of information related to a media
   server publish request.  In general Media Server Publish Request can
   include information about:

      - Name and location: Information about the location of the server
      such as a URI or IP address

      - Services: What kind of services are supported such as
      conferencing, IVR, etc.

      - Features: What specific features the MS provides for the
      supported services.  For example in the case the MS provides IVR
      services then the list of features might include support for VXML
      for IVR services, length of announcements, supported languages,
      etc.

      - Capacity: Number of supported parallel calls as well as the rate
      of accepted calls

   The details of the element are TBD.

3.2.  Media Server Publish Response

   If an HTTP POST request containing the 'mediaRerverPublishRequest'
   can be processed successfully then the MRB MUST respond to the MS
   with a 200 OK HTTP/HTTPS response message.  This indicates that the
   request was received and processed.  If processing the request
   resulted in an error, mis-formatted content or unrecognizable
   content- the MRB MUST return an application level error by including
   a 'mediaServerPublishError' element in the 200 OK HTTP/HTTPS
   response.  The details of this element are TBD.  Note that the use of
   HTTP/HTTPS for carrying the Media Server information has no impact on
   the protocol.  If protocol level operations and errors occur then
   they should be signalled as specified in HTTP RFC 2616 [RFC2616] and
   HTTPS RFC 2818 [RFC2818].  This signifies that the request was
   received, was valid and could be responded appropriately.



Sisalem & Pascual        Expires March 25, 2010                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                 MRB Control                September 2009


4.  Media Server Status Reporting

   To be able to load balance incoming requests between different Media
   Servers, the MRB will need information about the load and capacity of
   the available Media Servers.  This is needed to ensure that an
   overloaded server does not receive even more requests and ends up
   dropping these requests while other servers still have idle capacity.

   In the context of overload control [I-D.hilt-sipping-overload]
   already describes two mechanisms that enable SIP entities to exchange
   information about their load status.  These mechanisms are shortly
   described below:

      - SIP Response Header: Media Servers add an "oc" parameter to the
      topmost Via header field in responses sent to the MRB.  The value
      of the "oc" parameter describes the load of the MS, see
      [I-D.hilt-sipping-overload]

      - SIP Event Package: With this approach the MRB subscribes to the
      load status of the MS and the MS notifies the MRB regularly about
      its load status.  This information is then used to identify
      overloaded Media Servers and achieve better load distribution.

5.  Summary

   A Media Resource Broker has to collect information about the
   capabilities of Media Servers as well as be able to monitor the
   status of these servers.  This draft suggests using HTTP/HTTPS in
   order to enable the Media Servers to publish their capabilities.  In
   order to monitor the status of the Media Servers we suggest using the
   mechanisms proposed for exchanging overload information.  By using
   mechanisms that the MRB and the Media Servers are expected to be
   implementing anyway, the overall implementation complexity of
   communication protocols between the the MRB and the Media Servers is
   minimized.

6.  Security Considerations

   The proposed mechanism for publishing the Media Server capabilities
   will be considered later.

   The proposed mechanisms for monitoring the load of Media Servers have
   the same security consideration as those reported in
   [I-D.hilt-sipping-overload]







Sisalem & Pascual        Expires March 25, 2010                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                 MRB Control                September 2009


7.  IANA Considerations

   TBD

8.  Acknowledgments

   TBD

9.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]                          Bradner, S., "Key words for use in
                                      RFCs to Indicate Requirement
                                      Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
                                      March 1997.

   [RFC3261]                          Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H.,
                                      Camarillo, G., Johnston, A.,
                                      Peterson, J., Sparks, R., Handley,
                                      M., and E. Schooler, "SIP: Session
                                      Initiation Protocol", RFC 3261,
                                      June 2002.

   [RFC2616]                          Fielding, R., Gettys, J., Mogul,
                                      J., Frystyk, H., Masinter, L.,
                                      Leach, P., and T. Berners-Lee,
                                      "Hypertext Transfer Protocol --
                                      HTTP/1.1", RFC 2616, June 1999.

   [RFC2818]                          Rescorla, E., "HTTP Over TLS",
                                      RFC 2818, May 2000.

   [I-D.ietf-mediactrl-requirements]  Dolly, M. and R. Even, "Media
                                      Server Control Protocol
                                      Requirements", draft-ietf-
                                      mediactrl-requirements-04 (work in
                                      progress), February 2008.

   [I-D.ietf-mediactrl-architecture]  Melanchuk, T., "An Architectural
                                      Framework for Media Server
                                      Control", draft-ietf-mediactrl-
                                      architecture-04 (work in
                                      progress), November 2008.

   [I-D.ietf-mediactrl-mrb]           Boulton, C. and L. Miniero, "Media
                                      Resource Brokering",
                                      draft-ietf-mediactrl-mrb-00 (work
                                      in progress), May 2009.




Sisalem & Pascual        Expires March 25, 2010                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                 MRB Control                September 2009


   [I-D.hilt-sipping-overload]        Hilt, V., Widjaja, I., and H.
                                      Schulzrinne, "Session Initiation
                                      Protocol (SIP) Overload Control",
                                      draft-hilt-sipping-overload-06
                                      (work in progress), March 2009.

Appendix A.  Change Log

   New Document

Authors' Addresses

   D. Sisalem
   Tekelec
   Am Borsigturm 11
   Berlin
   Germany

   EMail: sisalem@iptel.org


   V. Pascual
   Tekelec
   Am Borsigturm 11
   Berlin
   Germany

   EMail: victor@iptel.org























Sisalem & Pascual        Expires March 25, 2010                 [Page 8]


