





Network Working Group                                  Han Nguyen (AT&T)
Internet Draft                                       James Uttaro (AT&T)
Expiration Date: September 2011        Rahul Aggarwal (Juniper Networks)
Intended Status: Proposed Standard      Yakov Rekhter (Juniper Networks)
                                                           March 7, 2011

                 Virtual Hub-and-Spoke in BGP/MPLS VPNs

                 draft-rekhter-l3vpn-virtual-hub-00.txt


Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.


Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors. All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document. Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document. Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.





                                                              [Page 1]

Internet Draft   draft-rekhter-l3vpn-virtual-hub-00.txt    March 1, 2011


Abstract

   With BGP/MPLS VPNs any-to-any connectivity among sites of a given
   Virtual Private Network would require each Provider Edge router that
   has one or more of these sites connected to it to hold all the routes
   of that Virtual Private Network. The approach described in this
   document allows to reduce the number of Provider Edge routers that
   have to maintain all these routes by requiring only a subset of these
   routers to maintain all these routes.


Specification of Requirements

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].


1. Overview

   With BGP/MPLS VPNs [rfc4364] providing any-to-any connectivity among
   sites of a given Virtual Private Network (VPN) is usually
   accomplished by requiring each Provider Edge router (PE) that has one
   or more of these sites connected to it to hold all the routes of that
   VPN.  The approach described in this document allows to reduce the
   number of PEs that have to maintain all these routes by requiring
   only a subset of such PEs to maintain all these routes.

   Consider a VPN that has its sites connected to a set of PEs. In the
   context of this VPN we designate a subset of these PEs as "Virtual
   Spoke" PEs (or just Virtual Spokes), while the rest of PEs in the set
   will be "Virtual Hub" PEs (or just Virtual Hubs).  For a given VPN,
   its set of Virtual Hubs could include not only the PEs that have
   sites of that VPN connected to them, but also PEs that have no sites
   of that VPN connected to them.

   Note that while in the context of one VPN a given PE may act as a
   Virtual Hub, in the context of another VPN the same PE may act as a
   Virtual Spoke, and vice versa. Thus a given PE may act as a Virtual
   Hub only for some, but not all the VPNs present on that PE. Likewise,
   a given PE may act as a Virtual Spoke only for some, but not all the
   VPNs present on that PE.

   For a given VPN each Virtual Spoke of that VPN is "associated" with
   two or more Virtual Hubs of that VPN (we use two Virtual Hubs for
   redundancy to avoid a single point of failure). Note that a given
   Virtual Hub may have no Virtual Spokes associated with it, in which
   case it acts as a "vanilla" PE.



                                                              [Page 2]

Internet Draft   draft-rekhter-l3vpn-virtual-hub-00.txt    March 1, 2011


   A PE that acts as a Virtual Hub of a given VPN maintains all the
   routes of that VPN. A PE that acts as a Virtual Spoke of a given VPN
   needs to maintain only the routes originated by the sites of that VPN
   connected to that PE, plus two or more VPN-IP default routes whose
   Next Hops are the addresses of the Virtual Hubs associated with that
   Virtual Spoke. This way, only a subset of PEs that have sites of a
   given VPN, namely only the PEs acting as Virtual Hubs of that VPN,
   have to maintain all the routes of that VPN. PEs acting as Virtual
   Spokes of that VPN need to maintain only a (small) subset of the
   routes of that VPN.


2. Routing Information Exchange

   Routing information exchange among all the PEs of a given VPN is
   subject to the following rules.

   A PE that has sites of a given VPN connected to it has to retain
   routing information received from the VPN sites connected to it.
   This is irrespective of whether the PE acts as a Virtual Hub or a
   Virtual Spoke of that VPN.

   A PE that has sites of a given VPN connected to it has to export (as
   VPN-IP routes) all the routes received from these sites.  This is
   irrespective of whether the PE acts as a Virtual Hub or a Virtual
   Spoke of that VPN.

   In addition, a Virtual Hub of a given VPN has to export a VPN-IP
   default route for that VPN. This route SHOULD be exported to only the
   Virtual Spokes of that VPN that are associated with that Virtual Hub.

   To enable a Virtual Spoke of a given VPN to share its outbound
   traffic load among the Virtual Hubs associated with that Spoke, each
   Virtual Hub of that VPN, when originating a VPN-IP default route MUST
   use a distinct RD (per Hub, per VPN).

   If one or more sites of a given VPN originate an IP default route
   (e.g., this may happen when these sites have connection to the
   Internet), and the PEs connected to these sites re-advertise it as a
   VPN-IP default route, then these PEs MUST act as Virtual Hubs of that
   VPN. It is RECOMMENDED that this VPN-IP default route be of higher
   preference than a VPN-IP default route originated by a Virtual Hub
   that does not receive an IP default route from one of the VPN sites
   connected to it.

   A Virtual Hub of a given VPN has to import all the non-default VPN-IP
   routes originated by all other PEs that have sites of that VPN
   connected to them (irrespective of whether these other PEs act as



                                                              [Page 3]

Internet Draft   draft-rekhter-l3vpn-virtual-hub-00.txt    March 1, 2011


   Virtual Hubs or Virtual Spokes for that VPN).

   A Virtual Hub of a given VPN MUST NOT import a VPN-IP default route
   unless this route has been originated by another Virtual Hub that has
   sites connected to it, and these sites originate a default route used
   for Internet connectivity. In other words, the Virtual Hub of a given
   VPN MUST NOT import a VPN-IP default route, unless this route has
   been originated by some other Virtual Hub, and that other Virtual Hub
   originated this default route as a result of receiving an IP default
   route from one of the CEs of that VPN connected to that other Virtual
   Hub.

   A Virtual Spoke of a given VPN has to import a VPN-IP default route
   for that VPN that has been originated by the Virtual Hubs of that VPN
   that are associated with that Virtual Spoke.

   In addition, a Virtual Spoke of a given VPN MAY import VPN-IP routes
   for that VPN that have been originated by some other Virtual Spokes
   of that VPN.


   The above rules that govern the routing information exchange among
   all the PEs of a given VPN are realized using Route Target (RT)
   extended communities [rfc4360] and VRF export/import policies based
   on these RTs. One possible scheme that enables to realize such rules
   is described in Section "Deployment Scenarios". This document does
   not preclude use of other schemes, as long as such schemes would
   support the above rules.


3. Forwarding Considerations

   This section describes changes/modifications to the forwarding
   procedures specified in [rfc4364].

   A Virtual Hub of a given VPN MUST use a VRF-table-label pointing to
   the VRF of that VPN for the MPLS label that the Hub advertises with a
   VPN-IP default route for that VPN.

   When a Virtual Hub of a given VPN originates a VPN-IP default route
   for that VPN, the Virtual Hub MUST NOT install in its VRF of that VPN
   a default route, unless this route has been originated either (a) as
   a result of the Virtual Hub receiving an IP default route from one of
   the CEs of that VPN connected to it, or (b) as a result of the
   Virtual Hub receiving (and importing) a VPN-IP default route from
   some other Virtual Hub.

   In the absence of Virtual Hubs and Virtual Spokes, support for



                                                              [Page 4]

Internet Draft   draft-rekhter-l3vpn-virtual-hub-00.txt    March 1, 2011


   IBGP/EBGP load balancing in the presence of any-to-any connectivity
   uses the following rule. When a PE receives a packet from another PE,
   the PE that receives the  packet determines (using the MPLS label
   carried in the packet) the VRF that should be used for further
   forwarding the packet. If (using the information present in the VRF)
   the PE determines that the packet could be forwarded over one of the
   attachment circuits of that VRF (for the definition of "VRF
   attachment circuits" see [rfc4364]), then the PE MUST forward the
   packet over one of these circuits, and MUST NOT forward the packet to
   another PE.

   In order to support IBGP/EBGP load balancing on a Virtual Hub the
   above rule is modified as follows. When a Virtual Hub receives a
   packet from another PE scenario, the Virtual Hub identifies (using
   the MPLS label carried in the packet) the VRF that should be used for
   further forwarding the packet. If the MPLS label carried in the
   packet is the label that the Virtual Hub advertised in the VPN-IP
   default route, then the Virtual Hub is not restricted to use only one
   of the VRF attachment circuits for forwarding the packet - the
   Virtual Hub may forward the packet to another PE.


   To illustrate this consider the following example:

                 <- RD:0/0           RD:0/0->

                                  <- RD:10.2.1         <-10.2.1/24
   CE1----PE-S-------------PE-H----------------PE-S1--------------CE2
                          /
                          |    |
                          |    |  10.2.1/24
                          |    |
                         CE4   CE3

   A multi-homed site (not shown in the above figure) is connect via CE2
   and CE3. Thus both CE2 and and CE3 advertise a route to 10.2.1/24.
   CE2 advertises this route to PE-S1, which in turn originates a VPN-IP
   route RD:10.2.1.  CE3 advertises this route to PE-H.

   PE-H is a Virtual Hub, while PE-S and PE-S1 are Virtual Spokes
   associated with that Virtual Hub. Thus PE-H originates a VPN-IP
   default route (RD:0/0), and both PE-S and PE-S1 import that route.

   PE-H receives from PE-S1 a VPN-IP route to RD:10.2.1 and from CE3 a
   plain IP route to 10.2.1. Thus the VRF entry on PE-H has two possible
   next hops for 10.2.1: CE3 and PE-S1 (the latter is an indirect next
   hop).




                                                              [Page 5]

Internet Draft   draft-rekhter-l3vpn-virtual-hub-00.txt    March 1, 2011


   Now consider what happens when CE1 originates a packet destined to
   10.2.1.1. When PE-S receives this packet, PE-S (following the VPN-IP
   default route) forwards the packet to PE-H. In the absence of the
   modification specified above, when PE-H receives this packet, PE-H
   will be forced to forward the packet to CE3 (as PE-H can reach CE3
   via a VRF attachement circuit).  However, that would prevent
   IBGP/EBGP load balancing, as it would preclude the possiblity of
   forwarding this packet via PE-S1 and CE2.

   With the modified rule specified above, PE-H determines that the MPLS
   label in the packet is the MPLS label that PE-H advertised to PE-S in
   the VPN-IP default route. Thus PE-H may forward the packet either via
   CE3 or via PE-S1 (with PE-S1 subsequently forwarding the packet to
   CE2), resulting in preseving IBGP/EBGP load balancing.

   Likewise, if CE4 originates a packet destined to 10.2.1.1, PE-H may
   forward the packet either via CE3 or via PE-S1 (with PE-S1
   subsequently forwarding the traffic to CE2), resulting in preserving
   IBGP/EBGP load balancing.

   Note however, that if there is some other CE, CE5, connected to PE-
   S1, and that CE5 sends a packet to 10.2.1.1, then (due to the IP
   longest match rule) PE-S1 will always forward this packet to CE2.
   Thus IBGP/EBGP load balancing will not be available for the
   destinations that have been learned locally by a Virtual Spoke.


4. Deployment considerations

   For a given VPN a Virtual Hub and a set of Virtual Spokes associated
   with that Virtual Hub should be chosen in a way that minimizes the
   additional network distance/latency penalty, given that VPN
   geographic footprint.

   For a given VPN some/all of its Virtual Spokes could be grouped into
   geographically-based clusters with any-any connectivity within each
   cluster. Note that the Virtual Spokes within a given cluster need not
   be associated with the same Virtual Hub(s). Likewise, not all Virtual
   Spokes associated with a given Virtual Hub need to be in the same
   cluster.  A use case for this would be VPN for large retail chain in
   which data traffic is hub/spoke between each store and centralized
   data-centers but there is need for direct VoIP traffic between stores
   within same geographical area.

   The following describes one possible scheme that enables to realize
   the rules for exchanging routing information among PEs, as specified
   in Section "Routing Information Exchange".




                                                              [Page 6]

Internet Draft   draft-rekhter-l3vpn-virtual-hub-00.txt    March 1, 2011


   Consider a "vanilla" any-to-any VPN. All the PEs of such VPN are
   provisioned with the same export and import RT. To evolve this VPN
   into Virtual Hubs and Spokes we keep the same export RT on all the
   PEs of that VPN (both Virtual Hubs and Virtual Spokes). This RT is
   attached to all the VPN-IP routes that PEs originate as a result of
   receiving corresponding IP routes from their CEs (including the VPN-
   IP default route originated as a result of receiving an IP default
   route). We also keep the same Import RT on all the Virtual Hubs.

   In addition, each Virtual Hub is provisioned with its own RT, called
   RT-VH.  This RT-VH MUST be different from the export RT provisioned
   on that Virtual Hub. For a given PE this RT-VH has to be distinct for
   every Virtual Hub present on that PE. To avoid the situation where
   within a given VPN all the Virtual Spokes would be associated with
   every Virtual Hub (in other words, to partition Virtual Spokes among
   Virtual Hubs), different Virtual Hubs within that VPN SHOULD use
   different RT-VHs.  Use of IP-address specific RTs may be an
   attractive option for RT-VHs. When a Virtual Hub originates a VPN-IP
   default route, if this route is NOT originated as a result of
   receiving an IP default route from one of the CEs of that VPN
   connected to the Virtual Hub, then the Virtual Hub attaches RT-VH to
   that route.

   A given Virtual Spoke is provisioned to import only VPN-IP routes
   that carry RT-VH of the Virtual Hubs associated with that Virtual
   Spoke (thus associating a new Virtual Spoke with a given Virtual Hub
   requires provisioning only on that Virtual Spoke - no provisioning
   changes are required on the Virtual Hub).

   Use of RT Constrains [rfc4684] may further facilitate/optimize
   routing exchange in support of Virtual Hubs and Spokes.


5. An example of RT provisioning

   Consider a VPN A that consists of 9 sites - site-1 through site-9.
   Each site is connected to its own PE - PE-1 through PE-9.

   We designate PE-3, PE-6, and PE-9 as Virtual Hubs.

   PE-1 and PE-2 are Virtual Spokes associated with PE-3. PE-4 and PE-5
   are Virtual Spokes associated with PE-6. PE-7 and PE-8 are Virtual
   Spokes associated with PE-9.

   All the PEs (both Virtual Hubs and Virtual Spokes) are provisioned to
   export routes using RT-A (just as it would be with "vanilla" any-to-
   any VPN).




                                                              [Page 7]

Internet Draft   draft-rekhter-l3vpn-virtual-hub-00.txt    March 1, 2011


   All the Virtual Hubs (PE-3, PE-6, and PE-9) are provisioned to import
   routes with RT-A (just as it would be with "vanilla" any-to-any VPN).

   In addition, PE-3 is provisioned to originate a VPN-IP default route
   with RT-A-VH-1, while PE-1 and PE-2 are provisioned to import routes
   with RT-A-VH-1.

   Likewise, PE-6 is provisioned to originate a VPN-IP default route
   with RT-A-VH-2, while PE-4 and PE-5 are provisioned to import routes
   with RT-A-VH-2.

   Finally, PE-9 is provisioned to originate a VPN-IP default route with
   RT-A-VH-3, while PE-7 and PE-8 are provisioned to import routes with
   RT-A-VH-3.

   Now let's modify the above a bit by assuming that site-3 has Internet
   connectivity. Thus site-3 advertises an IP default route to PE-3.
   PE-3, in turn originates a VPN-IP default route. In this case, the
   VPN-IP default route carries RT-A (rather than RT-A-VH-1, as before),
   which results in importing this route to PE-3, PE-6, and PE-9.


6. IANA Considerations

   This document introduces no new IANA Considerations.


7. Security Considerations

   This document introduces no new Security Considerations, above and
   beyond what is already specified in [rfc4364].


8. Acknowledgements


9. Normative References

   [rfc4360] Sangli, S., Tappan, D., and Y. Rekhter, "BGP Extended
   Communities Attribute", RFC 4360, February 2006.

   [rfc4364] Rosen, E. and Y. Rekhter, "BGP/MPLS IP Virtual Private
   Networks (VPNs)", RFC 4364, February 2006.

   [rfc4684] Pedro Marques, et al., "Constrained Route Distribution for
   Border Gateway Protocol/MultiProtocol Label Switching (BGP/MPLS)
   Internet Protocol (IP) Virtual Private Networks (VPNs)", RFC4684,
   November 2006



                                                              [Page 8]

Internet Draft   draft-rekhter-l3vpn-virtual-hub-00.txt    March 1, 2011


10. Non-normative References



11. Authors' Addresses


   Han Nguyen
   AT&T
   e-mail: han.nguyen@att.com

   James Uttaro
   AT&T
   e-mail: ju1738@att.com

   Rahul Aggarwal
   Juniper Networks, Inc.
   e-mail: rahul@juniper.net

   Yakov Rekhter
   Juniper Networks, Inc.
   e-mail: yakov@juniper.net





























                                                              [Page 9]
