


Internet Engineering Task Force                              G. Bertrand
Internet-Draft                                                E. Stephan
Intended status: Informational                   France Telecom - Orange
Expires: January 8, 2012                                       G. Watson
                                                            T. Burbridge
                                                              P. Eardley
                                                                      BT
                                                                   K. Ma
                                                           Azuki Systems
                                                            July 7, 2011


         Use Cases for Content Delivery Network Interconnection
                    draft-bertrand-cdni-use-cases-02

Abstract

   Content Delivery Networks (CDNs) are commonly used for improving the
   footprint and the end-user experience of a content delivery service,
   at a reasonable cost.  This document outlines real world use-cases
   (not technical solutions) for interconnecting CDNs.  It provides the
   business motivations for CDNI Working Group, which can be used to
   validate different interconnection arrangements, and requirements of
   the various CDNI interfaces.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 8, 2012.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal



Bertrand, et al.         Expires January 8, 2012                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft               CDNI Use Cases                    July 2011


   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

   This document may contain material from IETF Documents or IETF
   Contributions published or made publicly available before November
   10, 2008.  The person(s) controlling the copyright in some of this
   material may not have granted the IETF Trust the right to allow
   modifications of such material outside the IETF Standards Process.
   Without obtaining an adequate license from the person(s) controlling
   the copyright in such materials, this document may not be modified
   outside the IETF Standards Process, and derivative works of it may
   not be created outside the IETF Standards Process, except to format
   it for publication as an RFC or to translate it into languages other
   than English.































Bertrand, et al.         Expires January 8, 2012                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft               CDNI Use Cases                    July 2011


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     1.1.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     1.2.  Abbreviations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     1.3.  High Level Use Cases for Multi-CDN Systems . . . . . . . .  6
     1.4.  The Need for CDNI Standards  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   2.  Footprint Extension Use Cases  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     2.1.  Geographic Extension . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     2.2.  Region to Region Interconnection . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     2.3.  Nomadic Users  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     2.4.  Delivery Restrictions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   3.  Offload Use Cases  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     3.1.  Overload Handling and Dimensioning . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     3.2.  Resiliency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
       3.2.1.  Failure of Content Delivery Resources  . . . . . . . . 11
       3.2.2.  Failure of Content Acquisition . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     3.3.  Branding Consideration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   4.  CDN Capability Use Cases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     4.1.  Device and Network Technology Extension  . . . . . . . . . 12
     4.2.  Technology and Vendor Interoperability . . . . . . . . . . 13
     4.3.  QoE and QoS Improvement  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   5.  Acknowledgments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   6.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   7.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   8.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
     8.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
     8.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15






















Bertrand, et al.         Expires January 8, 2012                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft               CDNI Use Cases                    July 2011


1.  Introduction

   This document now merges input from [I-D.watson-cdni-use-cases] and
   [I-D.ma-cdni-publisher-use-cases].

   Content Delivery Networks (CDNs) are commonly used for improving the
   footprint and the end-user experience of a content delivery service,
   at a reasonable cost.  This document outlines real world use-cases
   (not technical solutions) for interconnecting CDNs.  It provides the
   business motivations for CDNI Working Group, which can be used to
   validate different interconnection arrangements, and requirements of
   the various CDNI interfaces.

   There are many possible combinations for the relationships between
   the different parties (Network Service Provider (NSP), CDN Provider,
   Content Service Provider (CSP) and End User) involved in end-to-end
   content delivery.  However, in the context of interconnecting CDNs
   the key relationships are listed below.

   o  How the CSP interacts with the CDN provider, so that the CDN
      delivers content in a manner compliant with CSP's distribution
      policies.

   o  How the End User interacts with the CSP and one or more CDNs to
      request and receive content.

   o  How the different CDN providers, operating their CDNs, interact
      with one another to deliver the CSP's content to the End User
      while continuing to enforce the CSP's distribution policies.

   This document describes a number of use cases that motivate CDN
   Interconnection.

1.1.  Terminology

   We adopt the terminology described in
   [I-D.jenkins-cdni-problem-statement], [RFC3466], and [RFC3568],
   except for the terms defined below.

   CDN Provider:

   An administrative entity who operates a CDN over a NSP or over the
   Internet.

   Authoritative CDN (aCDN):

   A CDN provider contracted by the CSP for delivery of content by its
   CDN or by its downstream CDNs.



Bertrand, et al.         Expires January 8, 2012                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft               CDNI Use Cases                    July 2011


   Downstream CDN (dCDN):

   A CDN provider which is contracted by an uCDN to achieve the delivery
   of content to users.

   Access CDN:

   A CDN that is connected to the end-user's access and has information
   about the end-user's profile and access capabilities.

   Delivering CDN:

   The CDN that delivers the requested content asset to the end-user.
   In particular, the delivering CDN can be an access CDN.

   CDN Interconnection (CDNI):

   Relationship between two CDNs that enables a CDN to provide content
   delivery services on behalf of another CDN.  It relies on a set of
   interfaces over which two CDNs communicate in order to achieve the
   delivery of content to end-users by one CDN (the downstream CDN) on
   behalf of another CDN (the upstream CDN).

   CDN peering: A business relation between two CDN providers based on
   one or more CDN interconnections.

   Recursive request routing:

   Recursive: Where a process is repeated, but embedded within the
   original process.  In the case of Request Routing, this means that
   the initial request received by the Authoritative CDN is processed
   downstream from one CDN to another and that the responses are send
   back upstream to the Authoritative CDN which then replies to the
   initial request.

   Iterative request routing

   Iterative: Where a process is repeated multiple times to make
   progress towards a goal.  In the case of Request Routing, this means
   that the initial request is received by the Authoritative CDN, which
   replies it with a redirection directive to a downstream CDN.  When
   the end-user sends its request to the downstream CDN, the same
   process is repeated, until the request arrives to the delivering CDN.

   Asymmetric Distribution:

   A distribution scenario where different NSPs have distribution rights
   to the same content, but at different levels of quality (e.g., high



Bertrand, et al.         Expires January 8, 2012                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft               CDNI Use Cases                    July 2011


   definition vs. low definition video), which places restrictions on
   delivery delegation.

1.2.  Abbreviations

   [Ed.  Note: List of abbreviations to be updated later]

   o  CSP: Content Service Provider

   o  dCDN: downstream CDN

   o  ISP: Internet Service Provider

   o  NSP: Network Service Provider

   o  PC: Personal Computer

   o  QoE: Quality of Experience

   o  QoS: Quality of Service

   o  SLA: Service Level Agreement

   o  STB: Set-Top-Box

   o  uCDN: upstream CDN

   o  UA: User Agent

   o  UE: User Equipment

   o  VoD: Video on Demand

   o  WiFi: Wireless Fidelity

1.3.  High Level Use Cases for Multi-CDN Systems

   Content Delivery Networks (CDNs) are used to deliver content because
   they can:

   o  improve the experience for the End User; for instance delivery has
      lower latency and better robustness,

   o  reduce the operator's costs; for instance lower delivery cost
      (reduced bandwidth usage) for cacheable content,

   o  reduce the Content Service Provider costs, such as datacenter
      capacity, space, and electricity consumption.



Bertrand, et al.         Expires January 8, 2012                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft               CDNI Use Cases                    July 2011


   Indeed, many network service providers and enterprise service
   providers are deploying or have deployed their own CDNs.  Despite the
   potential benefits of interconnecting CDNs, today each CDN is a
   standalone network.  The objective of CDN interconnection is to
   overcome this restriction: the interconnected CDNs should be able to
   collectively behave as a single delivery infrastructure.

   Let's take an example, as depicted in Figure 1.  Two CDN Providers
   establish a CDN Interconnect.  The Content Service Provider CSP-1
   reaches an agreement with CDN Provider A for the delivery of its
   content.  CDN Provider A and CDN Provider B agree to interconnect
   their CDNs.  When a User Agent that is connected to CDN Provider B's
   network requests Content from CSP-1, the Content is actually
   delivered from CDN-B, because handling of requests for CSP-1's
   Content has been delegated as part of the CDN Interconnect agreement.
   The End User benefits through a better quality of experience, because
   the Content is delivered from a nearby Surrogate.  CDN Provider A
   benefits because it doesn't need to deploy such an extensive CDN,
   whilst CDN Provider B receives some compensation for the delivery.
   CSP-1 benefits because it only needs to make one business agreement
   and one physical connection, with CDN Provider A, but its End Users
   get a service quality as though it had also gone to the trouble of
   making a business agreement with CDN Provider B.


         +-------+              +-------+
         | CSP-1 |              | CSP-2 |
         +-------+              +-------+
             |                      |
        ,--,--,--.             ,--,--,--.
     ,-'          `-.       ,-'          `-.
    ( CDN Provider A )=====( CDN Provider B )
     `-.  (CDN-A) ,-'       `-. (CDN-B)  ,-'
        `--'--'--'             `--'--'--'
                                   |
                             +------------+
                             | User Agent |
                             +------------+
    === CDN Interconnect


                                 Figure 1

   To extend the example, another Content Service Provider, CSP-3, may
   also reach an agreement with CDN Provider A. But it does not want its
   Content to be distributed by CDN Provider B, for example, CSP-3 may
   not have distribution rights in the country where CDN Provider B
   operates.  This example illustrates that policy considerations are an



Bertrand, et al.         Expires January 8, 2012                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft               CDNI Use Cases                    July 2011


   important part of CDNI.

   This document identifies three main motivations for a CDN Provider to
   interconnect its CDN:

   o  CDN Footprint Extension Use Cases (Section 2)

   o  CDN Offload Use Cases (Section 3)

   o  CDN Capability Use Cases (Section 4)

1.4.  The Need for CDNI Standards

   Existing CDN interfaces are proprietary and an external CDN typically
   cannot use them, especially if the two CDNs rely on different
   solutions.  Nevertheless, [I-D.bertrand-cdni-experiments] shows that
   some level of CDN interconnection can be achieved experimentally
   without standardized interfaces between the CDNs.  The methods used
   in these experiments are hardly usable in an operational context,
   because they suffer from several limitations in terms of
   functionalities, scalability, and security level.

   The aim of the CDNI standards work is therefore to overcome such
   shortcomings; a full list of requirements is being developed in
   [I-D.lefaucheur-cdni-requirements].


2.  Footprint Extension Use Cases

   Footprint extension is expected to be a major use case for CDN
   interconnection.

2.1.  Geographic Extension

   In this use case, the CDN Provider wants to extend the geographic
   distribution that it can offer CSPs, without

   o  compromising the quality of delivery

   o  attracting transit and other network costs by serving from
      geographically or topologically remote surrogates.

   If there are several CDN Providers that have a geographically limited
   footprint (e.g., restricted to one country), or do not serve all end-
   users in a geographic area, then interconnecting their CDNs enables
   CDN Providers to provide their services beyond their own footprint.

   As an example, suppose a French CSP wants to distribute its TV



Bertrand, et al.         Expires January 8, 2012                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft               CDNI Use Cases                    July 2011


   programs to End Users located in various countries in Europe and
   North Africa.  It asks a French CDN Provider to deliver the content.
   The French CDN Provider's network only covers France, so it makes an
   agreement with another CDN Provider that covers North Africa.
   Overall, from the CSP's perspective the French CDN Provider provides
   a CDN service for both France and North Africa.

   In addition to video, this use case applies to other types of content
   such as automatic software updates (browser updates, operating system
   patches, virus database update, etc).

2.2.  Region to Region Interconnection

   In the previous section, we have described the case of geographic
   extension between CDNs operated by different entities.  A large CDN
   Provider may also operate CDNs from several subsidiaries (which may
   rely on different CDN solutions, see Section 4.2).  In certain
   circumstances, the CDN Provider needs to make its CDNs interoperate
   to provide a consistent service to its customers on its whole
   footprint.

2.3.  Nomadic Users

   In this scenario a CSP wishes to allow users who move to other
   geographic regions to continue to access their content.  The
   motivation in this case is to allow nomadic users to maintain access,
   rather than to allow all residents within a region access to the
   content.

   This use case covers situations like users moving between different
   CDN Providers within the same geographic region, or users switching
   between different devices, as discussed in Section 4.

2.4.  Delivery Restrictions

   The content distribution policies that a CSP attaches to a content
   asset depend on many criteria.  Distribution rights for audiovisual
   content are often negotiated using a combination of temporal
   licensing (e.g., available for 24 hours, available 28 days after DVD
   release, etc.), resolution-based licensing (e.g., high definition vs.
   standard definition), and geo- location-based licensing (e.g., per
   country).

   "Geo-blocking" rules may specify:

   o  the geographic regions where content can be delivered from (i.e.
      the location of the Surrogates), or




Bertrand, et al.         Expires January 8, 2012                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft               CDNI Use Cases                    July 2011


   o  geographic locations where content can be delivered to (i.e., the
      location of the End Users).

   Hence, the exchange through the CDN interconnection of information
   for controlling the footprint of the delivery is an important use
   case.

   The delivery of content may be further influenced by policies which
   may include time-based rules that specify:

   o  an activation time (i.e., the time when the content should become
      available for delivery),

   o  a deactivation time (i.e., time after which the content should no
      longer be delivered), or

   o  an expiration time (i.e., the time at which the content files
      should be expunged from all CDN storage).

   The delivery of content may be further influenced by policies which
   may include quality of service rules that specify:

   o  the maximum resolution deliverable to specific devices,

   o  the maximum resolution deliverable though a specific NSP, or

   o  the maximum resolution deliverable to users based on their
      subscription levels.

   The enforcement of CSP licensing rules when making CDN delegation
   decisions is another important use case for CDN interconnection.


3.  Offload Use Cases

3.1.  Overload Handling and Dimensioning

   A CDN is likely to be dimensioned to support the prime-time traffic.
   However, unexpected spikes in content popularity may drive load
   beyond the expected peak.  The prime recurrent time peaks of content
   distribution may differ between two CDNs.  Taking advantage of the
   different traffic peak times, a CDN may interconnect with another CDN
   to increase its effective capacity during the peak of traffic.  This
   brings dimensioning savings to the CDNs as they can use the resources
   of each other during their peaks of activity.

   Offload also applies to planned situations where a CDN Provider needs
   CDN capacities in a particular region during a short period of time.



Bertrand, et al.         Expires January 8, 2012               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft               CDNI Use Cases                    July 2011


   For example, a CDN can offload traffic to another CDN during a
   specific maintenance operation or for covering the distribution of a
   special event.  For instance, consider a TV-channel which has
   exclusive distribution rights on a major event, such as a
   celebrities' wedding, or a major sport competitions.  The CDNs that
   the TV-channel uses for delivering the content related to this event
   are likely to experience a flash crowd during the event and to need
   offloading traffic, while other CDNs will support a more usual
   traffic load and be able to handle the offloaded traffic load.

3.2.  Resiliency

3.2.1.  Failure of Content Delivery Resources

   It is important for CDNs to be able to guarantee service continuity
   during partial failures (e.g., failure of some Surrogates).  In
   partial failure scenarios, a CDN Provider could redirect some
   requests towards another CDN, which must be able to serve the
   redirected requests or, depending on traffic management policies, to
   forward these requests to the CSP's origin server.

3.2.2.  Failure of Content Acquisition

   Source content acquisition is typically handled in one of two ways:

   o  CDN origin, where a downstream CDN acquires content from an
      upstream CDN, and the authoritative CDN acquires content from an
      origin server of the CSP, or

   o  CSP origin, where the CDNs acquire content directly from an origin
      server of the CSP.

   Resiliency may be required against failure to ingest content from the
   CSP.  If a CDN is unable to retrieve the content, it may be that the
   CSP's origin server is inaccessible to only this CDN, in which case
   redirection of the end-users to an alternative CDN may circumvent the
   problem.  A CSP may also choose to specify one or more backup origin
   servers.

3.3.  Branding Consideration

   There are situations where one CDN Provider cannot or does not want
   to operate all the functions of a CDN.  For instance, it always acts
   as an uCDN and offloads the content delivery to dCDNs, i.e., it uses
   the surrogates of other CDSPs.  In this model, the uCDN acquires
   content and receives the initial routing requests from the user
   agent; whereas, the dCDNs operate the content delivery functions.
   The uCDN also retrieves and presents the logging for the CSP.



Bertrand, et al.         Expires January 8, 2012               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft               CDNI Use Cases                    July 2011


   Preserving branding elements could interest the CSP or CDSPs.  The
   CSP might desire to offer content services under its name, even if
   the associated CDN service involves other organizations.  Therefore,
   the CSP could request that the name of the CDSPs does not appear in
   the URLs.  Similarly, in offload situations, the uCDN might want to
   offer CDN services under its own branding.  This highlight a
   requirement for exchanging branding related constraints over a CDNI.


4.  CDN Capability Use Cases

4.1.  Device and Network Technology Extension

   In this use case, the CDN Provider may have the right geographic
   footprint, but wishes to support the delivery of content to
   alternative devices, such as smartphones connected to a mobile
   network.  In this case, the CDN Provider may federate with another
   CDN Provider that offers service to these devices.

   Consider the scenario shown in Figure 2.  In this example, a nomadic
   user switches from a TV going through a cable provider to a
   smartphone going through a mobile operator.  The CDN Provider on the
   cable network may wish to delegate delivery of Content to the CDN
   Provider on the mobile network.  There are several possible
   differences that may arise in this use case compared with the ones
   discussed earlier, for example:

   o  the phone may require the Content at lower resolution than the TV;

   o  the CSP may want to license only lower resolution Content to CDN
      Provider 2;

   o  the CSP may not want CDN Provider 2 to deliver Content if the
      connection quality is below some threshold;

   o  the CSP may want to tailor the Content in some special way
      depending on whether the End User is on cable or mobile, for
      example, different adverts / DRMs / codecs / container formats /
      delivery protocols...

   These examples suggest the requirement for Asymmetric Distribution of
   Content across the CDN interconnect.  In the nomadic scenario, the
   switch of CDN should be as seamless as possible from the End User's
   perspective.







Bertrand, et al.         Expires January 8, 2012               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft               CDNI Use Cases                    July 2011


         +-----+
         | CSP |
         +-----+
            |
       ,--,--,--.             ,--,--,--.
    ,-'          `-.       ,-'          `-.
   ( CDN Provider A )=====( CDN Provider B )
    `-.  Fixed   ,-'       `-.  Mobile  ,-'
       `--'--'--'             `--'--'--'
           |                      |
         +----+               +-------+
         | TV |(1)            | Phone |(2)
         +----+               +-------+

   === CDN Interconnect


   Fixed-Mobile Session Shifting

                                 Figure 2

4.2.  Technology and Vendor Interoperability

   A CDN Provider may deploy a new CDN to run alongside its existing
   CDN, as a simple way of migrating its CDN service to a new
   technology.  A CDN Provider may have a multi-vendor strategy for its
   CDN deployment.  A CDN Provider may want to deploy a separate CDN for
   a particular CSP or a specific network.  In all these circumstances,
   CDNI benefits the CDN Provider, as it simplifies or automates some
   inter-CDN operations (e.g., migrating the request routing function
   progressively).

4.3.  QoE and QoS Improvement

   Some CSPs are willing to pay a premium for enhanced delivery of
   Content to their End Users.  In some cases, even if the CDN Provider
   could deliver the content to the end users, it cannot meet the CSP's
   service level agreement.  So, it makes a CDN Interconnect agreement
   with another CDN Provider that can meet the SLA, for instance an
   Access CDN, which is able to deliver content from Surrogates located
   closer to the end-user.


5.  Acknowledgments

   The authors would like to thank Francois Le Faucheur and Ben Niven-
   Jenkins for lively discussions.




Bertrand, et al.         Expires January 8, 2012               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft               CDNI Use Cases                    July 2011


   They also thank the contributors of the EU FP7 OCEAN and ETICS
   projects for valuable inputs.


6.  IANA Considerations

   This memo includes no request to IANA.


7.  Security Considerations

   CDN interconnect, as described in this document, has a wide variety
   of security issues that should be considered.  The security issues
   fall into three general categories:

   o  CSP Trust: where the CSP may have negotiated service level
      agreements for delivery quality of service with the uCDN, and/or
      configured distribution policies (e.g., geo-restrictions,
      availability windows, or other licensing restrictions), which it
      assumes will be upheld by dCDNs to which the uCDN delegates
      requests.  Furthermore, billing and accounting information must be
      aggregated from dCDNs with which the CSP may have no direct
      business relationship.  These situtations where trust is delegated
      must be handled in a secure fashion to ensure CSP confidence in
      the CDN interconnection.

   o  Client Transparency: where the client device or application which
      connects to the CDN must be able to interact with any dCDN using
      its existing security and DRM protocols (e.g., cookies,
      certificate-based authentication, custom DRM protocols, URL
      signing algorithms, etc.) in a transparent fashion.

   o  CDN Infrastructure Protection: where the dCDNs must be able to
      identify and validate delegated requests, in order to prevent
      unauthorized use of the network and to be able to properly bill
      for delivered content.  A dCDN may not wish to advertise that it
      has access to or is carrying content for the uCDN or CSP,
      especially if that information may be used to enhance denial of
      service attacks.  In general, CDNI interfaces and protocols should
      minimize overhead for dCDNs.

   This document focuses on the motivational use cases for CDN
   interconnect, and does not analyze these threats in detail.


8.  References





Bertrand, et al.         Expires January 8, 2012               [Page 14]

Internet-Draft               CDNI Use Cases                    July 2011


8.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

8.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.bertrand-cdni-experiments]
              Bertrand, G., Faucheur, F., and L. Peterson, "Content
              Distribution Network Interconnection (CDNI) Experiments",
              draft-bertrand-cdni-experiments-00 (work in progress),
              February 2011.

   [I-D.jenkins-cdni-problem-statement]
              Niven-Jenkins, B., Faucheur, F., and N. Bitar, "Content
              Distribution Network Interconnection (CDNI) Problem
              Statement", draft-jenkins-cdni-problem-statement-02 (work
              in progress), March 2011.

   [I-D.lefaucheur-cdni-requirements]
              Faucheur, F., Viveganandhan, M., Watson, G., and Y. Lee,
              "Content Distribution Network Interconnection (CDNI)
              Requirements", draft-lefaucheur-cdni-requirements-01 (work
              in progress), March 2011.

   [I-D.ma-cdni-publisher-use-cases]
              Nair, R. and K. Ma, "Content Distribution Network
              Interconnection (CDNI) Publisher Use",
              draft-ma-cdni-publisher-use-cases-00 (work in progress),
              March 2011.

   [I-D.watson-cdni-use-cases]
              Watson, G., "CDN Interconnect Use Cases",
              draft-watson-cdni-use-cases-00 (work in progress),
              January 2011.

   [RFC3466]  Day, M., Cain, B., Tomlinson, G., and P. Rzewski, "A Model
              for Content Internetworking (CDI)", RFC 3466,
              February 2003.

   [RFC3568]  Barbir, A., Cain, B., Nair, R., and O. Spatscheck, "Known
              Content Network (CN) Request-Routing Mechanisms",
              RFC 3568, July 2003.








Bertrand, et al.         Expires January 8, 2012               [Page 15]

Internet-Draft               CDNI Use Cases                    July 2011


Authors' Addresses

   Gilles Bertrand
   France Telecom - Orange
   38-40 rue du General Leclerc
   Issy les Moulineaux,   92130
   FR

   Phone: +33 1 45 29 89 46
   Email: gilles.bertrand@orange-ftgroup.com


   Stephan Emile
   France Telecom - Orange
   2 avenue Pierre Marzin
   Lannion  F-22307
   France

   Email: emile.stephan@orange-ftgroup.com


   Grant Watson
   BT
   pp GDC 1 PP14, Orion Building, Adastral Park, Martlesham
   Ipswich,   IP5 3RE
   UK

   Email: grant.watson@bt.com


   Trevor Burbridge
   BT
   B54 Room 70, Adastral Park, Martlesham
   Ipswich,   IP5 3RE
   UK

   Email: trevor.burbridge@bt.com


   Philip Eardley
   BT
   B54 Room 77, Adastral Park, Martlesham
   Ipswich,   IP5 3RE
   UK

   Email: philip.eardley@bt.com





Bertrand, et al.         Expires January 8, 2012               [Page 16]

Internet-Draft               CDNI Use Cases                    July 2011


   Kevin Ma
   Azuki Systems
   43 Nagog Park
   Acton,   MA 01720
   USA

   Phone: +1 978 844 5100
   Email: kevin.ma@azukisystems.com











































Bertrand, et al.         Expires January 8, 2012               [Page 17]

