


Network Working Group                                           Y. Stein
Internet-Draft                                                 Y. Gittik
Intended status: Informational                   RAD Data Communications
Expires: September 5, 2012                                     M. Morrow
                                                                 L. Fang
                                                           Cisco Systems
                                                           W. Henderickx
                                                          Alcatel-Lucent
                                                           March 4, 2012


                        Accessing Cloud Services
                    draft-stein-cloud-access-00.txt

Abstract

   Cloud services are revolutionizing the way computational resources
   are provided, but at the expense of requiring an even more
   revolutionary overhaul of the networking infrastructure needed to
   deliver them.  Much recent work has focused on intra- and inter-
   datacenter connectivity requirements and architectures, while the
   "access segment" connecting the cloud services user to the datacenter
   still needs to be addressed.  In this draft we consider tighter
   integration between the network and the datacenter, in order to
   improve end-to-end Quality of Experience, while minimizing both
   networking and computational resource costs.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 5, 2012.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2012 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.



Stein, et al.           Expires September 5, 2012               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft          Accessing Cloud Services              March 2012


   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Model of Existing Cloud Services  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   3.  Optimized Cloud Access  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   4.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   5.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   6.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9































Stein, et al.           Expires September 5, 2012               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft          Accessing Cloud Services              March 2012


1.  Introduction

   Cloud services replace computational power and storage resources
   traditionally located under the user's table or on the user's in-
   house servers, with resources located in remote datacenters.  The
   cloud resources may be raw computing power and storage
   (Infrastructure as a Service - IaaS), or computer systems along with
   supported operating systems and tools (Platform as a Service - PaaS),
   or even fully developed applications (Software as a Service - SaaS).
   The inter- and intra-datacenter networking architectures needed to
   support cloud services are described in
   [I-D.bitar-datacenter-vpn-applicability].

   The cloud service user connects to cloud resources over a networking
   infrastructure.  Today this infrastructure is often the public
   Internet, but (for reasons to be explained below) is preferably a
   network maintained by a Network Service Provider (N-SP).  The
   datacenter(s) may belong to the N-SP (which is the case considered by
   [I-D.masum-chari-shc]), or may belong to a separate Cloud Service
   Provider (C-SP), and accessible from the N-SP's network.

   The advantages of cloud services over conventional IT services
   include elasticity (the ability to increase or decrease resources on
   demand rather than having to purchase enough resources for worst case
   scenarios), scalability (allocating multiple resources and load-
   balancing them), high-availability (resources may be backed up by
   similar resources at other datacenters belonging to the C-SP), and
   offloading of IT tasks (such as applications upgrading, firewalling,
   storage backup, and disaster recovery).  These translate to economic
   efficiencies if actually delivered.

   The disadvantages of cloud service are lack of direct control by the
   customer, additional transaction latency and communications costs,
   and insecurity regarding remote storage of sensitive data.  These
   translate to economic inefficiencies unless actually controlled.

   In order to obtain the advantages of cloud service without the
   disadvantages, the cloud services customer enters into a Service
   Level Agreement (SLA) with the C-SP.  However, such an SLA by itself
   will be unable to guarantee end-to-end service goals, since it does
   not cover degradations introduced by the intervening network.
   Indeed, if the datacenter is accessed over the public Internet, end-
   to-end service goals may be unattainable.  Thus an additional SLA
   with the N-SP (that may already be in effect for pre-cloud services)
   is typically required.  Even when the C-SP and the N-SP are the same
   entity, these SLAs may be separate documents.  The lack of a single
   end-to-end service level guarantee leads to finger pointing with the
   resulting decrease in service level.



Stein, et al.           Expires September 5, 2012               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft          Accessing Cloud Services              March 2012


   Cloud services require a fundamental rethinking of the Information
   Technology (IT) infrastructure, due to the requirement for dynamic
   changes in IT resource configuration.  Physical IT resources are
   replaced by virtualized ones packaged in Virtual Machines (VMs).  VMs
   can be created, relocated while running (VMotion), and destroyed on-
   demand.  Since VMs need to interconnect, connect to physical
   resources, and connect to the cloud services user, they need to be
   allocated appropriate IP and layer 2 addresses.  Since these
   addresses need to be allocated, moved, and destroyed on-the-fly, the
   cloud IT revolution directly impacts the networking infrastructure.
   Recent work, such as [I-D.bitar-datacenter-vpn-applicability], has
   focused on requirements and architectures for connectivity inside and
   between datacenters.  However, the "access segment", that is, the
   networking infrastructure connecting the cloud services user to the
   datacenter, has not been fully addressed.

   The creation, management, manipulation, and removal of cloud
   resources is called "orchestration" (see [I-D.dalela-orchestration]).
   Orchestrators need to respond to user demands and uphold user SLAs,
   while taking into account the location and availability of IT
   resources, and optimizing the C-SP's operational objectives.  These
   objectives include, for example, decreasing costs by consolidating
   resources, balancing use of resources by reallocating computational
   and storage resources, and enforcing engineering, business, and
   security policies.  Orchestrators of the present generation do not
   attempt optimization of C-SP's networking resources, but this
   generalization is being studied.  Furthermore, these orchestrators
   are completely oblivious to the N-SP's resources and objectives.
   Hence, there is no mechanism for maintaining end-to-end SLAs, or for
   optimizing end-to-end networking.

   This goal of this Internet Draft is to kick off discussions on
   requirements and possible mechanisms for improving end-to-end Quality
   of Experience while minimizing both networking and computational
   costs.
















Stein, et al.           Expires September 5, 2012               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft          Accessing Cloud Services              March 2012


2.  Model of Existing Cloud Services

                                                          -----
                      /- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -I O I
                                                          -----
                    /                                       I
                                                        ----------
                  /                                     I        I
                                                        I  DC A  I
                /    --------       -----------        /I        I
               /     I      I       I         I       / ----------
          --------   I      I       I  N-SP   I--->---
          I user I->-I  CE  I--->---I         I
          --------   I      I       I network I--->---
                     I      I       I         I       \ ----------
                     --------       -----------        \I        I
                                                        I  DC B  I
                                                        I        I
                                                        ----------

     Figure 1: Simplified model of cloud service provided over Service
       Provider network to an enterprise customer behind a CE device

   For concreteness, we will assume the scenario of Figure 1.  On the
   left we see a cloud services user attached to a customer site
   network.  This network connects to the outside world via a Customer
   Edge (CE), which may be a branch-site router or switch, a special
   purpose cloud demarcation device, or in degenerate cases the user's
   computer itself.  The N-SP network is assumed to be a well-engineered
   network providing VPN and other SLA-based services to the customer
   site.  The N-SP network is managed from an Operations Support System
   (OSS), which may include a Business Support System (BSS).  Connected
   to this network are datacenters (two are shown - datacenter A and
   datacenter B), which may belong to the N-SP, or to a separate C-SP.
   The orchestrator of datacenter A is depicted as "O".  Additionally,
   Internet access may be available directly from the CE (not shown) or
   from the N-SP network.

   In the usual cloud services orchestration model the user requests a
   well-defined resource, for example over the telephone, via a web-
   based portal, or via a function call.  The orchestrator, after
   checking correctness, availability, and updating the billing system,
   allocates the resource, e.g., a VM on a particular CPU located in a
   particular rack in datacenter A. In addition, the required networking
   resources are allocated to the VM, e.g., an IP address, an Ethernet
   MAC address, and a VLAN tag.  The VM is now started and consumes CPU
   power, memory, and disk space, as well as communications bandwidth
   between itself and other VMs on the same CPU, within the same rack,



Stein, et al.           Expires September 5, 2012               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft          Accessing Cloud Services              March 2012


   on other racks in the same datacenter, between datacenters, and
   between itself and the user.  If it becomes necessary to move the VM
   from its allocated position to somewhere else (VMotion), the
   orchestrator needs to reallocate the required computational and
   communications resources.  In general this requires allocating new
   addresses and rerouting all of the aforementioned traffic types,
   while maintaining continuous operation of the VM.  When the user
   informs the C-SP that it no longer requires the VM, the orchestrator
   needs to clear the routing entries, withdraw the communications
   resources, release storage and computational resources, and update
   the billing system.

   The operations of the previous paragraph are all performed by the
   orchestrator, with possible cooperation with orchestrators from other
   datacenters.  The needed routing information is advertised to the
   N-SP via standard routing protocols, without taking into account
   possible effects on the N-SP network.  If, for example, the path in
   the N-SP network to datacenter A degrades, while the path to
   datacenter B is performing well, this information is neither known by
   the orchestrator, nor is there a method for the orchestrator to take
   it into account.  Instead, the N-SP must find a way to reach
   datacenter A, even if this path is expensive, or of high latency, or
   problematic in some other way.

   This predicament arises due to the orchestrator communicating
   (indirectly) with the user, but not with the N-SP's OSS.  In
   addition, although the CE may be capable of OAM functionality, fault
   and performance monitoring of the communications path through the
   N-SP network are not employed.  Finally, while the user can
   (indirectly) communicate with the orchestrator, there is no
   coordinated path to the N-SP's OSS/BSS.




















Stein, et al.           Expires September 5, 2012               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft          Accessing Cloud Services              March 2012


3.  Optimized Cloud Access

                                                          -----
                                    /------/--------------I O I
                                   /      /               -----
                                  /   -------               I
                                 -----I OSS I           ----------
                                /     -------           I        I
                               /         I              I  DC A  I
                     -------- /     -----------        /I        I
                     I      I/      I         I       / ----------
          --------   I      I--->---I  N-SP   I--->---
          I user I->-I  CE  I       I         I
          --------   I      I--->---I network I--->---
                     I      I       I         I       \ ----------
                     --------       -----------        \I        I
                                                        I  DC B  I
                                                        I        I
                                                        ----------

   Figure 2: Cloud service with dual homing between a cloud-aware CE and
       N-SP network, and coordination between CE, N-SP OSS/BSS, and
                               orchestrator

   Figure 2. depicts two enhancements to the previous scenario.  The
   trivial enhancement is the providing of dual-homing between the CE
   and the N-SP network.  This is a well-known and widely deployed
   feature, which may be implemented regardless of the cloud services.
   We shall see that it acquires additional meaning in the context of
   the solution described below.

   More significantly, Figure 2 depicts three new control communications
   channels.  The CE device is now assumed to be cloud-aware, and may
   communicate directly with the N-SP OSS/BSS, and with the C-SP
   orchestrator.  In addition, the latter two may communicate with each
   other.  These control channels facilitate new capabilities, that may
   improve end-to-end QoE while optimizing operational cost.

   Consider the provisioning of a new cloud service.  With this new
   architecture the user's request is proxied by the cloud-aware CE to
   both the OSS/BSS and to the orchestrator.  Before commissioning the
   service, the orchestrator initiates network testing between the
   datacenter and the CE, and with the N-SP's assistance QoS parameters
   are determined for alternative paths to various relevant datacenters.
   The N-SP and C-SP (whether a single SP or two) can now jointly decide
   on placement of the VM in order to optimize the user's end-to-end
   Quality of Experience (QoE) while minimizing costs to both SPs.  The
   placement will necessitate the development of new combined C-SP +



Stein, et al.           Expires September 5, 2012               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft          Accessing Cloud Services              March 2012


   N-SP QoE metrics, while the latter minimization may only be reliable
   when a single SP provides networking and cloud resources.

   Similarly, the N-SP OSS may now trigger VMotion when network
   conditions warrant this, or may veto VMotion when its effect would be
   too onerous on the N-SP network.

   The cloud-aware CE may be configured to periodically test path
   continuity and measure QoS parameters.  The CE may trigger VMotion
   when the estimated QoE drops under that to be guaranteed by the SLA,
   thus promoting SLA assurance even when neither OSS nor orchestrator
   know of the problem.  Furthermore, the dual homing link from the CE
   to the N-SP network may be chosen not only when the primary link
   fails, but as part of the overall optimization of QoE vs. cost.

   In addition, popular yet stationary content may be cached in the N-SP
   network, and optimization may lead to the N-SP network providing this
   content without the need to access the datacenter at all.  In certain
   cases (e.g., catastrophic failure in the N-SP network or of the
   connectivity between that network and the datacenter), the cloud-
   aware CE may choose to bypass the N-SP network altogether and reach
   the datacenter over the public Internet (with consequent QoE
   reduction).


4.  Security Considerations

   Perceived insecurity of the customer's data sent to the cloud or
   stored in a datacenter is perhaps the single most important factor
   impeding the wide adoption of cloud services.  At present, the only
   solutions have been end-to-end authentication and confidentiality,
   with the high cost these place on user equipment.  The cloud-aware CE
   may assume the responsibility for securing the cloud services from
   the edge of the customer's walled garden, all the way to the VM.

   Isolation of C-SP customers is addressed in [I-D.masum-chari-shc].
   Security measures such as hiding of network topology, as well as on-
   the-fly inspection and modification of transactions are listed as
   requirements in [I-D.dalela-orchestration], while [I-D.dalela-sop]
   specifies encryption and authentication of orchestration protocol
   messages.


5.  IANA Considerations

   This document requires no IANA actions.





Stein, et al.           Expires September 5, 2012               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft          Accessing Cloud Services              March 2012


6.  References

   [I-D.bitar-datacenter-vpn-applicability]
              Bitar, N., Balus, F., Lasserre, M., Henderickx, W.,
              Sajassi, A., Fang, L., Ikejiri, Y., and M. Pisica, "Cloud
              Networking: Framework and VPN Applicability",
              draft-bitar-datacenter-vpn-applicability-01 (work in
              progress), October 2011.

   [I-D.dalela-orchestration]
              Dalela, A. and M. Hammer, "Service Orchestration Protocol
              (SOP) Requirements", draft-dalela-orchestration-00 (work
              in progress), January 2012.

   [I-D.dalela-sop]
              Dalela, A. and M. Hammer, "Service Orchestration
              Protocol", draft-dalela-sop-00 (work in progress),
              January 2012.

   [I-D.masum-chari-shc]
              Hasan, M., Chari, A., Fahed, D., Tucker, L., Morrow, M.,
              and M. Malyon, "A framework for controlling Multitenant
              Isolation, Connectivity and Reachability in a Hybrid Cloud
              Environment", draft-masum-chari-shc-00 (work in progress),
              February 2012.


Authors' Addresses

   Yaakov (Jonathan) Stein
   RAD Data Communications
   24 Raoul Wallenberg St., Bldg C
   Tel Aviv  69719
   Israel

   Email: yaakov_s@rad.com


   Yuri Gittik
   RAD Data Communications
   24 Raoul Wallenberg St., Bldg C
   Tel Aviv  69719
   Israel

   Email: yuri_g@rad.com






Stein, et al.           Expires September 5, 2012               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft          Accessing Cloud Services              March 2012


   Monique Morrow
   Cisco Systems
   Richtistrase 7
   CH-8304 Wallisellen
   Switzerland

   Email: mmorrow@cisco.com


   Luyuan Fang
   Cisco Systems
   300 Beaver Brook Road
   Boxborough, MA  01719
   US

   Email: lufang@cisco.com


   Wim Henderickx
   Alcatel-Lucent
   Copernicuslaan 50
   2018 Antwerp
   Belgium

   Email: wim.henderickx@alcatel-lucent.com


























Stein, et al.           Expires September 5, 2012              [Page 10]

