


Network Working Group                                       S. Wilkinson
Internet-Draft                                   University of Edinburgh
Intended status: Informational                             June 15, 2010
Expires: December 17, 2010


                    Options for AFS Standardisation
                draft-wilkinson-afs3-standardisation-00

Abstract

   With the impending formation of the foundation to house OpenAFS, the
   increasing pace of OpenAFS development, and the emergence of other
   AFS implementations, there is a growing need for a more formal,
   independent, standardisation body.

   This document seeks to define an initial form for that body.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 17, 2010.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents



Wilkinson               Expires December 17, 2010               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft       Options for AFS Standardisation           June 2010


   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  The proposed model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     2.1.  The Standardisation Group  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     2.2.  Group Chairs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
       2.2.1.  Appointment Term . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
       2.2.2.  Election procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
       2.2.3.  Mid-term vacancies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
       2.2.4.  Recall Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     2.3.  The Standardisation Process  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
       2.3.1.  Drafts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
       2.3.2.  The Registrar  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
       2.3.3.  Document States and Series . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
       2.3.4.  Decision making and consensus  . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     2.4.  Patents  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     2.5.  Relationship with the foundation . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   3.  Bootstrapping the Process  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   4.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   5.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   6.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13




















Wilkinson               Expires December 17, 2010               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft       Options for AFS Standardisation           June 2010


1.  Introduction

   The formation of a foundation to provide a home for OpenAFS was
   announced at the Best Practices Workshop at NJIT in 2008.  At that
   meeting, concerns were raised regarding the mechanism for
   standardising extensions to the AFS protocol.  In particular, the
   view was expressed that, as a matter of good governance, it was
   undesirable to have the standardisation of the protocol in the grasp
   of a single vendor.

   This document defines a standardisation process that is practically
   independent of this foundation.  At this time there are insufficient
   resources, both human and financial, to create a separate legal
   entity to house the standards work.  It is also apparent that
   standardising extensions to the AFS protocol is unlikely to be a good
   fit for any other, existing, standards organisation.  This means that
   the body must exist, for legal purposes, as part of the foundation,
   and mechanisms must be found to ensure its day-to-day independence
   within it.  These mechanisms should sufficiently encapsulate the
   standards process so it is possible to either donate it to another
   standards body, or to spin it off into its own foundation, should
   this be desirable at some future point.

   Retaining this independence sets us a number of simple ground rules:

   1.  It must be impossible for the foundation to use its position to
       standardise its ideas against the wishes of the community, or to
       prevent the standardisation of items approved by the community.

   2.  It must be impossible for the foundation to control the
       distribution, or implementation, of standards developed by the
       group

   3.  It must be impossible for the foundation to prevent the
       membership of the group by any person or organisation.

   4.  Should an irreparable breakdown of trust occur between the
       standardisation group and the foundation, it must be possible to
       move the standardisation effort elsewhere.

   Until recently, standardisation of extensions to AFS has occurred in
   a relatively adhoc fashion, with informal proposals generally being
   sent to and discussed on the afs3-standardization@grand.central.org
   list.  The issuing of code points, and other numeric registrations is
   then handled by the grand.central.org registrar (Jeffrey Hutzelman).
   This process has only been in place for a couple of years -
   extensions which predate it lack formal specification, and extensions
   which have been through it are often only documented in the mailing



Wilkinson               Expires December 17, 2010               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft       Options for AFS Standardisation           June 2010


   list archives.

   This lack of specifications for many recent additions to AFS causes
   significant issues for implementers outside of the OpenAFS project.
   In order to preserve the ability of third parties to create their own
   AFS implementations, it is vital that there is a clear set of
   definitions of AFS RPCs and code points that is independent of the
   OpenAFS source code.  Any successful standardisation process must
   establish, and maintain, a repository of specifications for all
   public extensions and refinements whoever they are designed and
   implemented by.

   To achieve this the process must allow participation by all, without
   regard for their organisational affiliation, so anyone with an
   interest in the development of the AFS protocol may contribute ideas
   and proposals.

   It would seem unwise to devote a large amount of energy now in
   defining rules and procedures to cater for all eventualities.
   Instead, I believe we should do the minimum necessary work in order
   to formally create a standardisation group satisfying the above goals
   to coincide with the formation of the foundation.  That group may
   then further define and refine its policies as it deems necessary.


2.  The proposed model

   This section proposes a model for AFS standardisation, designed to
   build upon as many existing resources as possible.  It is loosely
   based on, and borrows heavily upon, the IETF processes as documented
   in RFC2026 [RFC2026] and http://ietf.org/IESG/content/procdocs.html.

2.1.  The Standardisation Group

   The standardisation group consists of a mailing list.  Membership of
   this mailing list is freely open to all with an interest in AFS
   standardisation.  The list of mailing list members is freely
   available to all subscribers, and defines the membership of the AFS
   Standardisation Group.

   Discussions amongst the group are expected to occur upon this mailing
   list.  In order to ensure open participation decisions of the group
   must only be made on the list, and not at any other meetings that may
   occur.

   In essence, this simply formalises the existing
   afs3-standardization@grand.central.org mailing list.  It is proposed
   that this list be the initial home of the standardisation group, and



Wilkinson               Expires December 17, 2010               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft       Options for AFS Standardisation           June 2010


   its current membership be the initial members of the group.

2.2.  Group Chairs

   The standardisation group has two chairs.  These chairs have a number
   of responsibilities to the group, and the wider AFS community.  These
   responsibilities are discussed throughout this document, but in
   summary they comprise of

   o  Judgement of group opinion by determining rough consensus

   o  Encouraging momentum and forwards progress of group discussions
      and proposals

   o  Maintenance of the Standards Web site, including maintaining lists
      of proposals and standards and their statuses

   A successful chair will require a high level of organisational and
   people skills, and the respect of the wider AFS community.  They will
   not necessarily need a high degree of specific technical knowledge,
   as they are expected to interpret and act upon the will of the wider
   standardisation group, rather than imposing their personal views.

2.2.1.  Appointment Term

   Each chair serves a term of 2 years, with their terms offset by a
   year from each other.  This means a chair will be replaced every
   year, with the other chair remaining to provide continuity.  The
   outgoing chair's term ends on the last day of September of the
   appropriate year.

2.2.2.  Election procedure

   Chairs are appointed by an election run by one or more vote-takers.
   In normal operation, the vote-takers are the current standardisation
   group chairs.  In the event that no chair is available to act as a
   vote-taker, then the registrars will perform the vote-taking role.
   If a vote-taker wishes to stand in an election, they must recuse
   themselves from the vote-taking role.  Vote-takers who are also
   eligible voters may vote in the same manner as any other voter.

   At the start of the election process (typically the first of August
   each year) the vote-takers send the mailing list a request for
   nominations, accompanied by a list of currently eligible voters

   Eligibility to vote is determined by those who are subscribed to, or
   have posted to, the standardisation group during the time period from
   the 1st of June to the 1st July of the appropriate year.



Wilkinson               Expires December 17, 2010               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft       Options for AFS Standardisation           June 2010


   Nominations shall be sent to both the vote-takers, and the afs3-
   standardization mailing list.  Any consenting individual may be
   nominated, but shall be both proposed and seconded by eligible
   voters.  Self-nomination is not permitted.  In order to maintain
   balance between the two chairs, it is highly desirable that a
   candidate should not have the same affiliation as the remaining
   chair.

   Nominations are open for 14 days from the day the call is issued.
   Seven days after the nomination period has ended, if more than one
   candidate has emerged, the vote-takers will issue a call for votes,
   which will last for 14 days.  In the event of no eligible nominations
   being received, the vote-takers may, at their discretion, appoint an
   interim candidate to serve the full term.  The results of the
   election would be announced one week after the close of voting, with
   the new chair taking office from the 1st October

   Votes are submitted by email to all of the vote-takers.  The vote-
   takers shall make no public pronouncements regarding the number or
   character of votes received until the end of the election period.  At
   the end of the election, each vote-taker shall independently count
   the votes received and post to the group list the total number of
   votes received by each candidate, and the email addresses of all
   those who voted.  Under no circumstances shall the nature of
   individual votes be revealed.  The candidate who receives the most
   votes is elected as the incoming chair.  If voting is tied, then the
   vote-takers shall collectively have a single casting vote.

   At their discretion, the vote-takers may vary the above timeline,
   within the following constraints

   o  The new chair must take office on 1st October

   o  The eligibility cut-off must be 1st July

   o  The nominations period must last a minimum of 14 days

   o  The voting period must last a minimum of 14 days

   o  Results must be announced within 7 days of the close of voting

   The timeline to be used must be announced with the call for
   nominations.

2.2.3.  Mid-term vacancies

   In the event of the outgoing chair position becoming vacant on or
   after June 1, but before October 1, then the office will remain



Wilkinson               Expires December 17, 2010               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft       Options for AFS Standardisation           June 2010


   vacant until it is filled by the winner of the regular election

   If the returning chair position becomes vacant after June 1, but
   before the start of nominations for the regular election, then the
   election will select two candidates, with the returning chair's
   position being filled by the candidate with the second highest number
   of votes.

   If the returning chair's position becomes vacant between the opening
   of nominations, and the conclusion of the election, then the office
   remains vacant during the election, and the incoming chair shall hold
   a new election as soon as practical after taking office.

   In the event of any chair's position becoming vacant at any other
   time, the remaining chair (or the registrars, in the event of no
   chair remaining) shall run an election as soon as is reasonably
   practicable.

   When the election process must be started at an unusual time, the
   normal timeline is used, subject to the vote-taker's discretion,
   except that the new chair must take office two months after the call
   for nominations.  The eligibility cut-off remains the most recent
   July 1, as defined above.

2.2.4.  Recall Procedure

   In the event of a substantial breakdown of trust between the chairs
   and the rest of the standardisation group, a recall procedure may be
   employed to remove one, or both, of the chairs from their position.
   The use of this procedure is likely to be severely damaging to the
   community, and so should only be considered as a last resort.

   Recall shall be performed by means of a public ballot.  The proposers
   of the recall shall post their proposal to the afs3-standardization
   list, which triggers a 7 day public voting period.  Group members
   then publicly post to the list indicating their agreement or
   disagreement with the proposal.  A successful recall requires a
   majority of those posting to agree, and for more than 20% of the
   groups total membership to have voted.

2.3.  The Standardisation Process

   The standardisation process is similar to that of an IETF working
   group with proposals being submitted as drafts and refined by group
   members.  When a document is judged to be ready the chairs issue a
   call for opinions and determine the views of the group.  If the
   chairs determine that the group has achieved a rough consensus that
   the document should be approved then it advances to experimental



Wilkinson               Expires December 17, 2010               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft       Options for AFS Standardisation           June 2010


   status, code points are issued for the protocol elements, and
   developers proceed to create implementations.  The document may then
   be further refined based on the experience of these implementors.
   Providing one successful implementation exists, and the group
   achieves rough consensus that it is still worthy of standardisation,
   the document then advances to 'standard' status, reserved code points
   are marked as such, and it is published as part of an archival
   series.

2.3.1.  Drafts

   Proposals for standardisation are made as Internet Drafts.  These
   documents must be compliant with all of the provisions of the IETF's
   Guidelines to Authors of Internet Drafts [ID-Guide] and the documents
   it references.  Note that it is not permissible for documents that
   wish to progress through the AFS standardisation process to prohibit
   modification or derivative works, or to bar publication as an RFC.
   Drafts should be named as individual contributions, and contain the
   string afs3-stds within their name.

   Proposals are submitted by adding the draft to the Internet-Drafts
   Directory, and mailing a pointer to the resulting entry to the afs3-
   standardization list.  During the quiet periods prior to IETF
   conferences, drafts may be sent directly to the list, but should be
   uploaded once the quiet period ends.

   Drafts which define new RPCs must include suitable RPCL definitions
   for those RPCs.  Drafts must not include code points for new RPCs,
   error codes, or similar items, until those code points have been
   issued by the registrars.  The registrars will not normally allocate
   these code points to a standardisation group document until a draft
   has achieved consensus within the group.

   The group chairs will maintain a web page containing a list of all of
   the drafts currently under consideration by the group.  These will
   simply be pointers into the I-D repository - our drafts will have the
   same 6 month expiry period.

2.3.1.1.  Copyright

   All drafts published through the I-D and RFC Editor process must
   already license certain rights to the IETF, as described in section 4
   of BCP 78.  Documents published as part of the AFS standardisation
   process must also grant certain additional licenses, and include the
   following copyright statement.






Wilkinson               Expires December 17, 2010               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft       Options for AFS Standardisation           June 2010


   Copyright (C) <author(s)> (year).

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, I accept the provisions of
   Section 4 of BCP 78.

   In addition, by submitting this Internet-Draft, to the extent that
   this Internet-Draft or any portion thereof is protected by copyright
   and other rights of authorship, the Contributor, and each named
   co-Contributor, and the organization he or she represents or is
   sponsored by (if any) grant a perpetual, irrevocable, non-exclusive,
   royalty-free, world-wide right and license to any and all persons
   under all intellectual property rights in this Internet-Draft:

   (A) to copy, publish, display, and distribute this Internet-Draft,

   (B) to prepare or allow the preparation of translations of this
       Internet-Draft into languages other than English,

   (C) to prepare and distribute derivative works (other than
       translations) that are based on or incorporate all or part of
       this Internet-Draft, or comment upon it, the license to such
       derivative works not granting to any party any more rights than
       the license to this Internet-Draft,

   (D) to reproduce any trademarks, service marks, or trade names
       which are included in this Internet-Draft solely in connection
       with the reproduction, distribution, or publication of this
       Internet-Draft and derivative works thereof as permitted by
       this paragraph and/or by section 4 of BCP 78, and

   (E) to extract, copy, publish, display, distribute, modify, and
       incorporate into other works, for any purpose, any executable
       code or code fragments that are included in this Internet-Draft,
       it being understood that the licenses granted under this
       paragraph (E) shall not be deemed to grant any right under any
       patent, patent application, or other similar intellectual
       property right disclosed by me.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST,
   AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES,
   EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT
   THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY
   IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
   PURPOSE.

   The above text may be directly incorporated into the Copyright



Wilkinson               Expires December 17, 2010               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft       Options for AFS Standardisation           June 2010


   section of the document, or by incorporating a reference to this
   document.

      Copyright (C) <author(s)> (year).

      By submitting this Internet-Draft, I accept the provisions of
      Section 4 of BCP 78, and of Section 2.3.1.1 of the AFS
      standardisation document

2.3.2.  The Registrar

   The registrar maintains a register of protocol constants for the AFS
   protocols.  A number of registries already exist for the core AFS
   protocols, and additional registries may be added as required by
   extensions to the protocol.  The registrar's function is to maintain
   these lists for the community - to make them publicly available, and
   to allocate entries as required.

   Unlike the rest of the systems outlined in this document, the AFS
   community has had the benefit of the services of a volunteer
   registrar for a number of years.  What follows proposes changes in
   order to formalise the relationship between registrar and
   standardisation group, and to deal with single points of failure.

   The registrar would allocate protocol constants on demand.  These
   registrations may be for 'experimental' items, 'standard' items, or
   for private extensions.  Both experimental and standard items are
   allocated by documents advancing through our standardisation process.
   Private extensions would be allocated entries upon request.  Private
   extensions do not require public documentation.

   In addition to these allocation roles, the registrar will serve as a
   vote counter of last resort, for chair elections where no incumbent
   chair is available to perform the count.

   This combination of roles makes it difficult for a single individual
   to serve as registrar.  Instead, it is proposed to expand the role of
   registrar to include a number of individuals from the community.

   The registrars set their own procedures for adding new registrars,
   removing registrars, and determining the size of the group.  In the
   event there are no registrars, a new group will be formed consisting
   of one representative from each active AFS implementation and one
   representative chosen by the chairs.

   The registries themselves will be held as a set of collaboratively
   editable documents, to which all of the registrars will have equal
   access.  The registrars must make the current set of registries



Wilkinson               Expires December 17, 2010              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft       Options for AFS Standardisation           June 2010


   available to the community, including versions in the preferred
   source form.

2.3.3.  Document States and Series

   Documents may be either a draft, experimental, or a standard.
   Advancing between these states requires the consensus of the
   standardisation group, and only experimental and standard items may
   have protocol code points assigned to them.  (Private extensions may
   also have code points, but as these are not part of the
   standardisation process, we won't consider them further here)

   For a document to advance to 'standard', at least one implementation
   must exist of all of the protocol elements defined within the
   document - these implementations do not have to all be within the
   same product.

   As noted earlier, the group chairs are responsible for maintaining
   lists of documents at each of these stages.  Draft documents are held
   within the IETF's Internet Drafts repository, as are experimental
   documents.  It is the responsibility of the group chairs to ensure
   that experimental documents which are still being actively worked
   upon are kept current within the internet draft collection.

   The intention is that standard documents will be submitted by their
   authors to the RFC-Editor as an individual submission.  Upon
   successful completion of the RFC-Editor process, the resulting RFCs
   should be linked to by the group chairs, and referenced by the
   relevant registries.  Whilst this usage appears consistent with the
   individual submission process, it needs to be confirmed that the RFC
   Editor is happy with this.

2.3.4.  Decision making and consensus

   Decisions of the standardisation group are achieved by rough
   consensus, as determined by the group chairs.  It should be noted
   that, beyond determining consensus, the chairs have no veto or
   casting vote.  In fact, they should be careful to avoid their own
   personal beliefs interfering when judging the opinion of the group.

   For document actions, the document authors request that the chair
   determine whether there is consensus within the group.  The chair
   issues a consensus call, with a clear cut off point (typically 1
   week) during which group participants are invited to review the
   document, and express their opinions both for and against.  At the
   end of this period, the chair should have amassed sufficient
   information to determine whether there is a rough consensus for the
   document to advance.



Wilkinson               Expires December 17, 2010              [Page 11]

Internet-Draft       Options for AFS Standardisation           June 2010


2.4.  Patents

   The use of the Internet-Draft process, and of the RFC Editor
   Individual Submissions process for document publishing, means that
   the terms of BCP-79 apply with respect to patent notification.

2.5.  Relationship with the foundation

   The day to day operation of the standardisation group is independent
   of the foundation.


3.  Bootstrapping the Process

   Should the proposals in this document be accepted, we need to
   consider how to bootstrap the process.  I propose that once consensus
   has been reached on this document, we elect two chairs in the manner
   described above, with a start date to be determined.  The chair with
   the lower number of votes would serve a 1 year term, the chair with
   the higher number, 2 years as normal.

   The registrars would be initially comprised of the current registrar,
   plus a representative from all of the currently available AFS
   implementations (IBM, OpenAFS, kAFS and Arla) who wish to
   participate.

   A document describing the standardisation process would be the first
   task for the resulting group and would be used to pilot the entire
   document publishing process.


4.  Security Considerations

   As this memo describes a process, rather than a protocol, no security
   considerations are raised by its contents.


5.  IANA Considerations

   This memo includes no request to IANA.


6.  References

   [RFC2026]  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision
              3", BCP 9, RFC 2026, October 1996.

   [RFC3979]  Bradner, S., "Intellectual Property Rights in IETF



Wilkinson               Expires December 17, 2010              [Page 12]

Internet-Draft       Options for AFS Standardisation           June 2010


              Technology", BCP 79, RFC 3979, March 2005.

   [ID-Guide]
              Fenner (for the IESG), B., "I-D Guidelines",
              February 2008,
              <http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-guidelines.html>.


Author's Address

   Simon Wilkinson
   School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh
   Informatics Forum
   10 Crichton Street
   Edinburgh  EH8 9AB
   Scotland

   Email: sxw@inf.ed.ac.uk

































Wilkinson               Expires December 17, 2010              [Page 13]

