


Sieve Working Group                                             B. Leiba
Internet-Draft                                       Huawei Technologies
Updates: 5228 (if approved)                           September 14, 2012
Intended status: Standards Track
Expires: March 18, 2013


  Support for Internet Message Access Protocol (IMAP) Events in Sieve
                     draft-ietf-sieve-imap-sieve-09

Abstract

   Sieve defines an email filtering language that can, in principle,
   plug into any point in the processing of an email message.  As
   defined in the base specification, it plugs into mail delivery.  This
   document defines how Sieve can plug into points in the IMAP protocol
   where messages are created or changed, adding the option of user-
   defined or installation-defined filtering (or, with Sieve extensions,
   features such as notifications).  Because this requires future Sieve
   extensions to specify their interactions with this one, this document
   updates the base Sieve specification, RFC 5228.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on March 18, 2013.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2012 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents



Leiba                    Expires March 18, 2013                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft            IMAP events in Sieve            September 2012


   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.      Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   1.1.    Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   1.2.    Differences Between IMAP Events and Mail Delivery  . . . .  4
   1.3.    Conventions used in this document  . . . . . . . . . . . .  5

   2.      The IMAP Events in Sieve Extension . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   2.1.    The "imapsieve" Capability Strings . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   2.2.    Existing IMAP Functions Affected by IMAP events in
           Sieve  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   2.2.1.  The IMAP APPEND Command  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   2.2.2.  The IMAP COPY Command  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   2.2.3.  Changes to IMAP Message Flags  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   2.2.4.  When Script Actions Set the \Deleted Flag  . . . . . . . .  8
   2.3.    New Functions Defined by IMAP events in Sieve  . . . . . .  8
   2.3.1.  Interaction with Metadata  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8

   3.      Applicable Sieve Actions and Interactions  . . . . . . . . 10
   3.1.    The Implicit Keep  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   3.2.    The Keep Action  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   3.3.    The Fileinto Action  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   3.4.    The Redirect Action  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   3.5.    The Discard Action . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   3.6.    The Notify Action  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   3.7.    The Addheader and Deleteheader Actions . . . . . . . . . . 12
   3.8.    The Setflag, Deleteflag, and Removeflag Actions  . . . . . 12
   3.9.    MIME Part Tests and Replacement  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   3.10.   Spamtest and Virustest . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   3.11.   Inapplicable Actions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   3.12.   Future Sieve Actions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13

   4.      Interaction With Sieve Environment . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   4.1.    Base Sieve Environment Items: location and phase . . . . . 14
   4.2.    New Sieve Environment Items: imap.user and imap.email  . . 14
   4.3.    New Sieve Environment Item: imap.cause . . . . . . . . . . 14
   4.4.    New Sieve Environment Item: imap.mailbox . . . . . . . . . 15
   4.5.    New Sieve Environment Item: imap.changedflags  . . . . . . 15
   4.6.    Interaction With Sieve Tests (Comparisons) . . . . . . . . 15

   5.      Examples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16



Leiba                    Expires March 18, 2013                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft            IMAP events in Sieve            September 2012


   6.      Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17

   7.      IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
   7.1.    Registration of "imapsieve" IMAP capability  . . . . . . . 18
   7.2.    Registration of "imapsieve" Sieve extension  . . . . . . . 18
   7.3.    Registration of Sieve Environment Items  . . . . . . . . . 18
   7.3.1.  Registration of Sieve Environment Item: imap.cause . . . . 18
   7.3.2.  Registration of Sieve Environment Item: imap.mailbox . . . 19
   7.3.3.  Registration of Sieve Environment Item:
           imap.changedflags  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
   7.3.4.  Registration of Sieve Environment Item: imap.user  . . . . 19
   7.3.5.  Registration of Sieve Environment Item: imap.email . . . . 19
   7.4.    Registration of IMAP METADATA Mailbox Entry Name . . . . . 19
   7.5.    Registration of IMAP METADATA Server Entry Name  . . . . . 20

   8.      References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
   8.1.    Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
   8.2.    Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21

           Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23































Leiba                    Expires March 18, 2013                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft            IMAP events in Sieve            September 2012


1.  Introduction

1.1.  Overview

   Some applications have a need to apply Sieve filters [RFC5228] in
   contexts other than initial mail delivery.  This is especially true
   in diverse service environments, such as when the client is
   sporadically connected, is connected through a high-latency or high-
   cost channel, or is on a limited-function device.  For such clients,
   it may be very important, for higher performance and reliability, to
   take advantage of server capabilities, including those provided by
   Sieve filtering (and Sieve extensions, such as Notify [RFC5435]).

   This specification defines extensions to IMAP [RFC3501] to support
   the invocation of Sieve scripts at times when the IMAP server creates
   new messages or modifies existing ones.  It also defines how Sieve
   scripts will process these invocations.  Support for IMAP events in
   Sieve also requires support for the following:

   o  IMAP Metadata [RFC5464], because Metadata is used to associate
      scripts with IMAP mailboxes.

   o  Sieve Environment [RFC5183], because it defines an important way
      for Sieve scripts to test the conditions under which they have
      been invoked.

   o  Sieve IMAP4Flags [RFC5232], because it provides important
      functionality in handling IMAP events related to flag changes.

   Because this requires future Sieve extensions to specify their
   interactions with this one (see Section 3.12), this document updates
   the base Sieve specification, RFC 5228.

1.2.  Differences Between IMAP Events and Mail Delivery

   Invoking Sieve scripts in a context other than initial mail delivery
   introduces new situations, which changes the applicability of Sieve
   features and creates implementation challenges and user interface
   issues.  This section discusses some of those differences,
   challenges, and issues.

   At times other than message delivery, delivery "envelope" information
   might not be available.  With messages added through IMAP APPEND,
   there might be no way to even guess who the intended recipient is,
   and no concept of who "sent" the message.  Sieve actions that relate
   to contacting the sender, for example, will not be applicable.

   Because IMAP events will often be triggered by user actions, and



Leiba                    Expires March 18, 2013                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft            IMAP events in Sieve            September 2012


   because user interfaces allow bulk actions that differ from
   individual message arrival, it now becomes possible for a single user
   action, such as drag-and-drop, to initiate Sieve script processing on
   a large number of messages at once.  Implementations will have to
   deal with such situations as a "COPY" action or flag changes on
   dozens, or even thousands of messages.

   Other issues might surface as this extension is deployed and
   experience with it develops.

1.3.  Conventions used in this document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].




































Leiba                    Expires March 18, 2013                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft            IMAP events in Sieve            September 2012


2.  The IMAP Events in Sieve Extension

2.1.  The "imapsieve" Capability Strings

   An IMAP server advertises support for IMAP events in Sieve through
   the "imapsieve" capability.  A server that advertises "imapsieve" is
   claiming to be in compliance with this specification in all aspects.
   The syntax of the "imapsieve" capability string is defined as
   follows:

   capability /=  "IMAPSIEVE=" sieveurl-server
           ; <sieveurl-server> is defined in RFC 5804, Section 3

   Only one "imapsieve" capability string, specifying one sieveurl-
   server, is allowed to be present.  The sieveurl-server identifies the
   ManageSieve server that clients need to contact for managing Sieve
   scripts associated with this IMAP server.

   The corresponding Sieve implementation uses the Sieve capability
   string "imapsieve", and Sieve scripts that depend upon the IMAP
   events MUST include that string in their "required" lists.

   Implementations that support IMAP events in Sieve MUST also support
   IMAP Metadata [RFC5464] and Sieve Environment [RFC5183], because
   Metadata is used to associate scripts with IMAP mailboxes and
   Environment defines an important way for Sieve scripts to test the
   conditions under which they have been invoked.  Notwithstanding the
   support requirement, scripts that directly use Environment MUST also
   include its capability string in their "required" lists.

2.2.  Existing IMAP Functions Affected by IMAP events in Sieve

   The subsections below describe in detail the IMAP commands and
   situations on which IMAP events in Sieve have an effect.  Not all
   Sieve actions make sense in the case of messages affected by IMAP
   commands.  See Section 3 for details.

   It's important to note that since the base Sieve specification (see
   [RFC5228]) and its extensions define functions for scripts that are
   invoked during initial mail delivery, those function definitions are
   necessarily tailored to and limited by that context.  This document
   extends those function definitions for use during IMAP events.  By
   nature of that, Sieve functions, in this extended context, may behave
   somewhat differently, though their extended behaviour will still be
   consistent with the functions' goals.

   If more than one message is affected at the same time, each message
   triggers the execution of a Sieve script separately.  The scripts MAY



Leiba                    Expires March 18, 2013                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft            IMAP events in Sieve            September 2012


   be run in parallel.

2.2.1.  The IMAP APPEND Command

   A message may be added to a mailbox through the IMAP APPEND command.
   In a server that advertises "imapsieve", new messages added in this
   way MUST trigger the execution of a Sieve script, subject to the
   settings defined through Metadata (see Section 2.3.1).

   If the IMAP server also supports the IMAP MultiAppend extension
   [RFC3502], the APPEND command can create more than one message at a
   time.  In that case, each message creation is considered a separate
   event, and any applicable Sieve script is called once for each
   message.

2.2.2.  The IMAP COPY Command

   One or more messages may be added to a mailbox through the IMAP COPY
   command.  In a server that advertises "imapsieve", new messages added
   in this way MUST trigger the execution of a Sieve script, subject to
   the settings defined through Metadata.

2.2.3.  Changes to IMAP Message Flags

   One or more existing messages can have their flags changed in a
   number of ways, including:

   o  The FETCH command (may cause the \Seen flag to be set).

   o  The STORE command (may cause the \Answered, \Deleted, \Draft,
      \Flagged, and \Seen flags to be set or reset, and may cause
      keywords to be set or reset).

   o  The invocation of a Sieve script on an existing message, where the
      script uses one of the actions defined in the IMAP4Flags extension
      [RFC5232] to change the flags.

   In a server that advertises "imapsieve", messages whose flags are
   changed in any way (except as explained in the next sentence) MUST
   trigger the execution of a Sieve script, subject to the settings
   defined through Metadata.  The exception is that in order to avoid
   script loops, flag changes that are made as a result of a script that
   was itself invoked because of flag changes SHOULD NOT result in a
   further invocation of the script.  In any case, implementations MUST
   take steps to avoid such loops.

   For flag-change events, the Sieve script will see the message flags
   as they are AFTER the changes.



Leiba                    Expires March 18, 2013                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft            IMAP events in Sieve            September 2012


2.2.4.  When Script Actions Set the \Deleted Flag

   There are times when the actions "fileinto" (see Section 3.3),
   "redirect" (see Section 3.4), and "discard" (see Section 3.5) will
   set the \Deleted flag on the message.  In those cases, the following
   apply:

   When the \Deleted flag is set by the script, a flag-change Sieve
   script is not invoked.

   The implementation MAY then expunge the original message (WITHOUT
   expunging other messages in the mailbox).  Alternatively, it might
   have expunges batched or done by a user.  (It might be helpful to
   allow the user to make this choice through a preference.)

   If the server does the expunge, the effect is as though a client had
   flagged the message and done a UID EXPUNGE (see [RFC4315]) on the
   affected message(s) only.  Handling it this way allows clients to
   handle messages consistently, and avoids hidden changes that might
   invalidate their message caches.

2.3.  New Functions Defined by IMAP events in Sieve

2.3.1.  Interaction with Metadata

   Support for IMAP events in Sieve requires support for IMAP Metadata
   [RFC5464] as well, since the latter is used to associate scripts with
   IMAP mailboxes.

   When an applicable event occurs on an IMAP mailbox, if there is an
   IMAP metadata entry named "/shared/imapsieve/script" for the mailbox,
   that entry is used.  If there is not, but there is an IMAP metadata
   entry named "/shared/imapsieve/script" for the server, that entry is
   used (providing a way to define a global script for all mailboxes on
   a server).  If neither entry exists, then no script will be invoked.

   If a "/shared/imapsieve/script" metadata entry was selected above,
   its value is used as the name of the Sieve script that will be
   invoked in response to the IMAP event.  If the value is empty, then
   no script is run.  The selection of which metadata entry to use
   happens before any examination of the contents of the entry.  If the
   mailbox entry is selected and is then found to be unusable or empty,
   the server entry is not used as a backup: no script is run.

   This specifies the mechanism for "activating" a script for a given
   mailbox (or for all mailboxes), but does not specify a mechanism for
   creating, storing, or validating the script.  Implementations MUST
   support ManageSieve [RFC5804], and can use the PUTSCRIPT command to



Leiba                    Expires March 18, 2013                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft            IMAP events in Sieve            September 2012


   store the script without using the SETACTIVE command to activate it.

   Script names used in "/shared/imapsieve/script" metadata entries are
   the script names used on the corresponding ManageSieve server.  If a
   "/shared/imapsieve/script" metadata entry contains a script name that
   doesn't exist in the ManageSieve server, then no Sieve script will be
   invoked for IMAP Sieve events.

   Only one Sieve script may currently be defined per mailbox,
   eliminating the complexity and possible ambiguity involved with
   coordinating the results of multiple scripts.  Any sub-filtering is
   done in the Sieve script.  For example, if it's only necessary to
   deal with flag changes, but not with new messages appended or copied,
   the Sieve script will still be invoked for all events, and the script
   is responsible for checking the event type.

   The possibility is open for an extension to add support for multiple
   scripts -- for example, per-client scripts on a multi-client user's
   inbox, or per-user scripts on a mailbox that is shared among users.

   Because this metadata name is associated with the mailbox, there can
   (and it's expected that there will) be different scripts associated
   with events for different mailboxes.  Indeed, most mailboxes will
   probably invoke no script at all.



























Leiba                    Expires March 18, 2013                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft            IMAP events in Sieve            September 2012


3.  Applicable Sieve Actions and Interactions

   Since some Sieve actions relate specifically to the delivery of mail,
   not all actions and extensions make sense when the messages are
   created by other means or when changes are made to data associated
   with existing messages.  This section describes how actions in the
   base Sieve specification, and those in extensions known at this
   writing, relate to this specification.

   In addition to what is specified here, interactions noted in the
   individual specifications apply, and must be considered.

3.1.  The Implicit Keep

   For all cases that fall under IMAP events in Sieve, the implicit keep
   means that the message is treated as it would have been if no Sieve
   script were run.  For APPEND and COPY, the message is stored into the
   target mailbox normally.  For flag changes, the message is left in
   the mailbox.  If actions have been taken that change the message,
   those changes are considered transient and MUST NOT be retained for
   any keep action (because IMAP messages are immutable).  No error is
   generated, but the original message, without the changes, is kept.

3.2.  The Keep Action

   The keep action is applicable in all cases that fall under IMAP
   events in Sieve.  Its behaviour is as described for implicit keep, in
   Section 3.1.

3.3.  The Fileinto Action

   If the Sieve implementation supports the fileinto action, that action
   is applicable in all cases that fall under IMAP events in Sieve.  If
   the Copy extension [RFC3894] is available and the :copy option is
   specified, the implicit keep is retained; otherwise, fileinto cancels
   the implicit keep, as specified in the base Sieve specification.

   For APPEND and COPY, the message is stored into the fileinto mailbox
   IN ADDITION TO the original target mailbox.  For flag changes, the
   message is COPIED into the fileinto mailbox, without removing the
   original.  In all cases, fileinto always creates a new message,
   separate from the original.

   The fileinto action is not an IMAP APPEND or COPY, and therefore does
   not result in a subsequent event (see also the Security
   Considerations, Section 6).

   If a keep action is not also in effect, the original message is then



Leiba                    Expires March 18, 2013                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft            IMAP events in Sieve            September 2012


   marked with the \Deleted flag (see Section 2.2.4).

3.4.  The Redirect Action

   The redirect action is applicable in all cases that fall under IMAP
   events in Sieve.  It causes the message to be sent, as specified in
   the base Sieve specification, to the designated address.  If the Copy
   extension [RFC3894] is available and the :copy option is specified,
   the implicit keep is retained; otherwise, redirect cancels the
   implicit keep, as specified in the base Sieve specification.

   It's possible that a message processed in this way does not have the
   information necessary to be redirected properly.  It might lack
   necessary header information, and there might not be appropriate
   information for the MAIL FROM command.  In such cases, the "redirect"
   action uses Message Submission [RFC6409], and it is up to the Sieve
   engine to supply the missing information.  The redirect address is,
   of course, used for the "RCPT TO", and the "MAIL FROM" SHOULD be set
   to the address of the owner of the mailbox.  The message submission
   server is allowed, according to the Message Submission protocol, to
   perform necessary fix-up to the message (see Section 8 of RFC 6409).
   It can also reject the submission attempt, if the message is too ill-
   formed for submission.

   For APPEND and COPY, the message is stored into the target mailbox in
   addition to being redirected.  For flag changes, the message remains
   in its original mailbox.

   If a keep action is not also in effect, the original message is then
   marked with the \Deleted flag (see Section 2.2.4).

3.5.  The Discard Action

   The discard action is applicable in all cases that fall under IMAP
   events in Sieve.  For APPEND and COPY, the message is first stored
   into the target mailbox.  If an explicit keep action is also in
   effect, the discard action now does nothing.  Otherwise, the original
   message is then marked with the \Deleted flag (see Section 2.2.4).

3.6.  The Notify Action

   If the Nofity extension [RFC5435] is available, the notify action is
   applicable in all cases that fall under IMAP events in Sieve.  The
   result is that the requested notification is sent, and that the
   message is otherwise handled as it would normally have been.






Leiba                    Expires March 18, 2013                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft            IMAP events in Sieve            September 2012


3.7.  The Addheader and Deleteheader Actions

   If the EditHeader extension [RFC5293] is available, it can be used to
   make transient changes to header fields, which aren't saved in place,
   such as for "redirect" or "fileinto" actions.  Because messages in
   IMAP mailboxes are immutable, such changes are not applicable for the
   "keep" action (explicit or implicit).  See Section 3.1.

3.8.  The Setflag, Deleteflag, and Removeflag Actions

   Implementations of IMAP events in Sieve MUST also support the
   IMAP4Flags extension [RFC5232], and the actions associated with it
   are all applicable to any case that falls under IMAP events in Sieve.

   It is worth noting also that the "hasflag" test that is defined in
   the IMAP4Flags extension might be particularly useful in scripts
   triggered by flag changes ("hasflag" will see the new, changed
   flags).  The flag changes behave as though a client had made the
   change.

   As explained above, in order to avoid script loops flag changes that
   are made as a result of a script that was itself invoked because of
   flag changes SHOULD NOT result in another script invocation.  In any
   case, implementations MUST take steps to avoid such loops.

3.9.  MIME Part Tests and Replacement

   If the MIME Part Tests extension [RFC5703] is available, all of its
   functions can be used, but any changes made to the message, using the
   "replace" or "enclose" action, MUST be considered transient, and are
   only applicable with actions such as "redirect" and "fileinto".
   Because messages in IMAP mailboxes are immutable, such changes are
   not applicable for the "keep" action (explicit or implicit).  See
   Section 3.1.

3.10.  Spamtest and Virustest

   If the Spamtest and Virustest extensions [RFC5235] are available,
   they are applicable in all cases that fall under IMAP events in
   Sieve.

3.11.  Inapplicable Actions

   The following actions and extensions are not applicable to any case
   that falls under IMAP events in Sieve, because they are specifically
   designed to respond to delivery of a new email message.  Their
   appearance in the "require" control or their use in an IMAP event
   MUST result in an error condition that will terminate the Sieve



Leiba                    Expires March 18, 2013                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft            IMAP events in Sieve            September 2012


   script:

      reject [RFC5228]

      ereject [RFC5429]

      vacation [RFC5230]

   Future extensions that are specifically designed to respond to
   delivery of a new email message will likewise not be applicable to
   this extension.

3.12.  Future Sieve Actions

   As noted above, future extensions that are specifically designed to
   respond to delivery of a new email message will not be applicable to
   this extension, because this extension does not involve acting at
   new-message delivery time.

   In general, future extensions to Sieve that define new actions MUST
   specify the applicability of those actions to this specification.






























Leiba                    Expires March 18, 2013                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft            IMAP events in Sieve            September 2012


4.  Interaction With Sieve Environment

4.1.  Base Sieve Environment Items: location and phase

   The Sieve Environment extension defines a set of standard environment
   items (see [RFC5183], Section 4.1).  Two of those items are affected
   when the script is invoked through an IMAP event.

   The value of "location" is set to "MS" -- evaluation is being
   performed by a Message Store.

   The value of "phase" is set to "post" -- processing is taking place
   after (or perhaps instead of, in the case of APPEND) final delivery.

4.2.  New Sieve Environment Items: imap.user and imap.email

   In the normal case, when Sieve is used in final delivery, there is no
   identity for the "filer" -- the user who is creating or changing the
   message.  In this case, there is such an identity, and a Sieve script
   might want to access that identity.

   Implementations MUST set and make available two new environment
   items:

   "imap.user" -- the identity (login ID) of the IMAP user that caused
   the action.  This MUST be the empty string if it is accessed during
   normal (final delivery) Sieve processing.

   "imap.email" -- the primary email address of the IMAP user that
   caused the action (the user identified by "imap.user").  In some
   implementations, "imap.user" and "imap.email" might have the same
   value.  This MUST be the empty string if it is accessed during normal
   (final delivery) Sieve processing.

4.3.  New Sieve Environment Item: imap.cause

   Each mailbox uses a single script for all the change conditions
   described in this document (append, copy, flag changes).  To support
   that, the implementation MUST set the Environment [RFC5183] item
   "imap.cause", which contains the name of the action that caused the
   script to be invoked.  Its value is one of the following:

   o  APPEND (for invocations resulting from APPEND commands)

   o  COPY (for invocations resulting from COPY commands)

   o  FLAG (for invocations resulting from flag changes)




Leiba                    Expires March 18, 2013                [Page 14]

Internet-Draft            IMAP events in Sieve            September 2012


   Future extensions might define new events and, thus, new causes.
   Such extensions will come with their own capability strings, and the
   events they define will only be presented when their capabilities are
   requested.  Scripts that do not request those capabilities will not
   see those events, and will not encounter the new cause strings.

4.4.  New Sieve Environment Item: imap.mailbox

   The implementation MUST set the Environment [RFC5183] item
   "imap.mailbox" to the name of the mailbox that the affected message
   is in, in the case of existing messages, or is targeted to be stored
   into, in the case of new messages.  The value of this item is fixed
   when the script begins, and, in particular, MUST NOT change as a
   result of any action, such as "fileinto".

4.5.  New Sieve Environment Item: imap.changedflags

   If the script was invoked because of flag changes to an existing
   message, the implementation MUST set the Environment [RFC5183] item
   "imap.changedflags" to the name(s) of the flag(s) that have changed.
   If the script was not invoked because of flag changes, the value of
   this item MUST be the empty string.  The script will not know from
   this item whether the flags have been set or reset, but it can use
   the "hasflag" test to determine the current value.  See example 2 in
   Section 5 for an example of how this might be used.

4.6.  Interaction With Sieve Tests (Comparisons)

   Any tests against message envelope information, including the
   "envelope" test in the Sieve base specification, as well as any such
   test defined in extensions, are either inapplicable or have serious
   interoperability issues when performed at other than final-delivery
   time.  Therefore, envelope tests MUST NOT be permitted in the cases
   described here, and their use MUST generate a runtime error.

   This extension does not affect the operation of other tests or
   comparisons in the Sieve base specification.














Leiba                    Expires March 18, 2013                [Page 15]

Internet-Draft            IMAP events in Sieve            September 2012


5.  Examples

   Example 1:
   If a new message is added to the "ActionItems" mailbox, a copy is
   sent to the address "actionitems@example.com".

     require ["copy", "environment", "imapsieve"];

     if anyof (environment :is "imap.cause" "APPEND",
               environment :is "imap.cause" "COPY")  {
         if environment :is "imap.mailbox" "ActionItems" {
             redirect :copy "actionitems@example.com";
         }
     }

   Example 2:
   If the script is called for any message with the \Flagged flag set
   (tested through the IMAP4Flags extension [RFC5232]) AND this script
   invocation represents a change to that flag, then a notification is
   sent using the Notify extension [RFC5435].  No notification will be
   sent, though, if we're called with an existing message that already
   had that flag set.

     require ["enotify", "imap4flags", "variables",
              "environment", "imapsieve"];

     if environment :matches "imap.mailbox" "*" {
         set "mailbox" "${1}";
     }

     if allof (hasflag "\\Flagged",
               environment :contains "imap.changedflags" "\\Flagged") {
       notify :message "Important message in ${mailbox}"
           "xmpp:tim@example.com?message;subject=SIEVE";
     }

   Example 3:
   This shows an example IMAP CAPABILITY response when this extension is
   supported.  The client has done STARTTLS with the server, and is now
   inspecting capabilities.  (The untagged CAPABILITY response is split
   here for readability only, but will be in one response message.)

     C:  A01 CAPABILITY
     S:  * CAPABILITY IMAP4rev1 AUTH=PLAIN UIDPLUS LIST-EXTENDED
           ACL IMAPSIEVE=sieve://sieve.example.com MULTISEARCH
     S:  A01 OK done





Leiba                    Expires March 18, 2013                [Page 16]

Internet-Draft            IMAP events in Sieve            September 2012


6.  Security Considerations

   It is possible to introduce script processing loops by having a Sieve
   script that is triggered by flag changes use the actions defined in
   the IMAP4Flags extension [RFC5232].  Implementations MUST take steps
   to prevent script loops.  One way to avoid this problem is that if a
   script is invoked by flag changes, and that script further changes
   the flags, those flag changes SHOULD NOT trigger a Sieve script
   invocation.

   The fileinto action never results in the invocation of a script.  If
   an implementation did invoke a script as the result of a fileinto, as
   though an IMAP APPEND or COPY had been done, script loops could
   result (mailbox A responds to all COPY events by doing "fileinto B",
   and mailbox B responds to all COPY events by doing "fileinto A").  In
   general, actions taken as a result of the Sieve script are not IMAP
   events, and do not themselves trigger Sieve script invocations.

   It is also possible to introduce loops through the "redirect" or
   "notify" actions.  See Section 10 of Sieve [RFC5228], Section 8 of
   Sieve Notify [RFC5435], and the Security Considerations sections of
   the applicable notification-method documents for loop-prevention
   information.  This extension does not change any of that advice.

   This extension introduces side-effects to IMAP commands that users
   and script authors might not be aware of and that can accidentally be
   triggered by an operation that the user would expect to be innocuous.
   In particular, certain actions, such as redirect, can cause a message
   (such as a message appended to a mailbox by a user) to be sent to the
   Internet in response to something as simple as a flag change.  For
   example, a script might cause messages marked for deletion to be sent
   to some off-site archiving service.  If a user appends a draft
   message to a mailbox (perhaps an unencrypted draft message) and then
   marks it for deletion, it might be very surprising to the user that
   the message is sent off site.  Script authors need to be careful not
   to create these kinds of surprises, especially when creating global
   scripts.

   Other security considerations are discussed in IMAP [RFC3501], and
   Sieve [RFC5228], as well as in some of the other extension documents.











Leiba                    Expires March 18, 2013                [Page 17]

Internet-Draft            IMAP events in Sieve            September 2012


7.  IANA Considerations

7.1.  Registration of "imapsieve" IMAP capability

   IANA is asked to add "IMAPSIEVE=" to the IMAP 4 Capabilities
   registry, according to the IMAP 4 specification [RFC3501].
   (http://www.iana.org/assignments/imap4-capabilities)

7.2.  Registration of "imapsieve" Sieve extension

   The following information should be added to the Sieve Extensions
   registry, according to the Sieve specification [RFC5228]. (http://
   www.iana.org/assignments/sieve-extensions/sieve-extensions.xml)

   To: iana@iana.org
   Subject: Registration of new Sieve extension
   Capability name: imapsieve
   Description: Add Sieve processing for IMAP events.
   RFC number: [[this RFC]]
   Contact address: Sieve mailing list <sieve@ietf.org>

7.3.  Registration of Sieve Environment Items

   The following subsections register items in the Sieve Environment
   Items registry, according to the Environment extension [RFC5183].
   (http://www.iana.org/assignments/sieve-environment-items/ sieve-
   environment-items.xml)

7.3.1.  Registration of Sieve Environment Item: imap.cause

   To: iana@iana.org
   Subject: Registration of new Sieve environment item
   Item name: imap.cause
   Description: The name of the action that caused the script to be
   invoked.  Its value is one of the following:

   o  APPEND (for invocations resulting from APPEND commands)

   o  COPY (for invocations resulting from COPY commands)

   o  FLAG (for invocations resulting from flag changes)

   RFC number: [[this RFC]]
   Contact address: Sieve mailing list <sieve@ietf.org>







Leiba                    Expires March 18, 2013                [Page 18]

Internet-Draft            IMAP events in Sieve            September 2012


7.3.2.  Registration of Sieve Environment Item: imap.mailbox

   To: iana@iana.org
   Subject: Registration of new Sieve environment item
   Item name: imap.mailbox
   Description: The name of the mailbox that the affected message is in,
   in the case of existing messages, or is targeted to be stored into,
   in the case of new messages.  The value of this item is fixed when
   the script begins, and, in particular, MUST NOT change as a result of
   any action, such as "fileinto".
   RFC number: [[this RFC]]
   Contact address: Sieve mailing list <sieve@ietf.org>

7.3.3.  Registration of Sieve Environment Item: imap.changedflags

   To: iana@iana.org
   Subject: Registration of new Sieve environment item
   Item name: imap.changedflags
   Description: If the script was invoked because of flag changes to an
   existing message, this contains the name(s) of the flag(s) that have
   changed.  Otherwise, the value of this item MUST be the empty string.
   RFC number: [[this RFC]]
   Contact address: Sieve mailing list <sieve@ietf.org>

7.3.4.  Registration of Sieve Environment Item: imap.user

   To: iana@iana.org
   Subject: Registration of new Sieve environment item
   Item name: imap.user
   Description: The identity (IMAP login ID) of the IMAP user that
   caused the action.
   RFC number: [[this RFC]]
   Contact address: Sieve mailing list <sieve@ietf.org>

7.3.5.  Registration of Sieve Environment Item: imap.email

   To: iana@iana.org
   Subject: Registration of new Sieve environment item
   Item name: imap.email
   Description: The primary email address of the IMAP user that caused
   the action (the user identified by "imap.user").
   RFC number: [[this RFC]]
   Contact address: Sieve mailing list <sieve@ietf.org>

7.4.  Registration of IMAP METADATA Mailbox Entry Name

   The following information should be added to the IMAP METADATA
   Mailbox Entry Registry, according to the Metadata extension



Leiba                    Expires March 18, 2013                [Page 19]

Internet-Draft            IMAP events in Sieve            September 2012


   [RFC5464].
   (http://www.iana.org/assignments/imap-metadata/imap-metadata.xml)

   To: iana@iana.org
   Subject: IMAP METADATA Entry Registration
   Type: Mailbox
   Name: /shared/imapsieve/script
   Description: This entry name is used to define mailbox metadata
   associated with IMAP events in Sieve for the associated mailbox.
   Specifically, this specifies the Sieve script that will be invoked
   when IMAP events occur on the specified mailbox.
   Content-type: text/plain; charset=utf-8
   RFC number: [[this RFC]]
   Contact address: Sieve mailing list <sieve@ietf.org>

7.5.  Registration of IMAP METADATA Server Entry Name

   The following information should be added to the IMAP METADATA Server
   Entry Registry, items according to the Metadata extension [RFC5464].
   (http://www.iana.org/assignments/imap-metadata/imap-metadata.xml)

   To: iana@iana.org
   Subject: IMAP METADATA Entry Registration
   Type: Server
   Name: /shared/imapsieve/script
   Description: This entry name is used to define metadata associated
   globally with IMAP events in Sieve for the associated server.
   Specifically, this specifies the Sieve script that will be invoked
   when IMAP events occur on any mailbox in the server that does not
   have its own mailbox-level /shared/imapsieve/script entry.
   Content-type: text/plain; charset=utf-8
   RFC number: [[this RFC]]
   Contact address: Sieve mailing list <sieve@ietf.org>


















Leiba                    Expires March 18, 2013                [Page 20]

Internet-Draft            IMAP events in Sieve            September 2012


8.  References

8.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC3501]  Crispin, M., "INTERNET MESSAGE ACCESS PROTOCOL - VERSION
              4rev1", RFC 3501, March 2003.

   [RFC3502]  Crispin, M., "Internet Message Access Protocol (IMAP) -
              MULTIAPPEND Extension", RFC 3502, March 2003.

   [RFC3894]  Degener, J., "Sieve Extension: Copying Without Side
              Effects", RFC 3894, October 2004.

   [RFC5183]  Freed, N., "Sieve Email Filtering: Environment Extension",
              RFC 5183, May 2008.

   [RFC5228]  Guenther, P. and T. Showalter, "Sieve: An Email Filtering
              Language", RFC 5228, January 2008.

   [RFC5232]  Melnikov, A., "Sieve Email Filtering: Imap4flags
              Extension", RFC 5232, January 2008.

   [RFC5464]  Daboo, C., "The IMAP METADATA Extension", RFC 5464,
              February 2009.

   [RFC5804]  Melnikov, A. and T. Martin, "A Protocol for Remotely
              Managing Sieve Scripts", RFC 5804, July 2010.

   [RFC6409]  Gellens, R. and J. Klensin, "Message Submission for Mail",
              STD 72, RFC 6409, November 2011.

8.2.  Informative References

   [RFC4315]  Crispin, M., "Internet Message Access Protocol (IMAP) -
              UIDPLUS extension", RFC 4315, December 2005.

   [RFC5230]  Showalter, T. and N. Freed, "Sieve Email Filtering:
              Vacation Extension", RFC 5230, January 2008.

   [RFC5235]  Daboo, C., "Sieve Email Filtering: Spamtest and Virustest
              Extensions", RFC 5235, January 2008.

   [RFC5293]  Degener, J. and P. Guenther, "Sieve Email Filtering:
              Editheader Extension", RFC 5293, August 2008.




Leiba                    Expires March 18, 2013                [Page 21]

Internet-Draft            IMAP events in Sieve            September 2012


   [RFC5429]  Stone, A., "Sieve Email Filtering: Reject and Extended
              Reject Extensions", RFC 5429, March 2009.

   [RFC5435]  Melnikov, A., Leiba, B., Segmuller, W., and T. Martin,
              "Sieve Email Filtering: Extension for Notifications",
              RFC 5435, January 2009.

   [RFC5703]  Hansen, T. and C. Daboo, "Sieve Email Filtering: MIME Part
              Tests, Iteration, Extraction, Replacement, and Enclosure",
              RFC 5703, October 2009.









































Leiba                    Expires March 18, 2013                [Page 22]

Internet-Draft            IMAP events in Sieve            September 2012


Author's Address

   Barry Leiba
   Huawei Technologies

   Phone: +1 646 827 0648
   Email: barryleiba@computer.org
   URI:   http://internetmessagingtechnology.org/











































Leiba                    Expires March 18, 2013                [Page 23]

