A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3259

        Title:      A Message Bus for Local Coordination
        Author(s):  J. Ott, C. Perkins, D. Kutscher
        Status:     Informational
        Date:       April 2002
        Mailbox:    jo@tzi.uni-bremen.de, csp@isi.edu,
                    dku@tzi.uni-bremen.de 
        Pages:      39
        Characters: 84125
        Updates/Obsoletes/SeeAlso:    None

        I-D Tag:    draft-ietf-mmusic-mbus-transport-06.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3259.txt


The local Message Bus (Mbus) is a light-weight message-oriented
coordination protocol for group communication between application
components.  The Mbus provides automatic location of communication
peers, subject based addressing, reliable message transfer and
different types of communication schemes.  The protocol is layered
on top of IP multicast and is specified for IPv4 and IPv6.  The IP
multicast scope is limited to link-local multicast.  This document
specifies the Mbus protocol, i.e., message syntax, addressing and
transport mechanisms.

This document is a product of the Multiparty Multimedia Session
Control Working Group of the IETF.

This memo provides information for the Internet community.  It does
not specify an Internet standard of any kind.  Distribution of this
memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.
