A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3264

        Title:      An Offer/Answer Model with Session Description
                    Protocol (SDP)
        Author(s):  J. Rosenberg, H. Schulzrinne
        Status:     Standards Track
        Date:       June 2002
        Mailbox:    jdrosen@dynamicsoft.com,
                    schulzrinne@cs.columbia.edu 
        Pages:      25
        Characters: 60854
        Obsoletes:  2543

        I-D Tag:    draft-ietf-mmusic-sdp-offer-answer-02.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3264.txt


This document defines a mechanism by which two entities can make use
of the Session Description Protocol (SDP) to arrive at a common view
of a multimedia session between them.  In the model, one participant
offers the other a description of the desired session from their
perspective, and the other participant answers with the desired
session from their perspective.  This offer/answer model is most
useful in unicast sessions where information from both participants is
needed for the complete view of the session.  The offer/answer model
is used by protocols like the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP).

This document is a product of the Session Initiation Protocol Working
Group of the IETF.

This is now a Proposed Standard Protocol.

This document specifies an Internet standards track protocol for
the Internet community, and requests discussion and suggestions
for improvements.  Please refer to the current edition of the
"Internet Official Protocol Standards" (STD 1) for the
standardization state and status of this protocol.  Distribution
of this memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.


