


Network Working Group                                            S. Shah
Internet-Draft                                                  K. Patel
Intended status: Informational                             Cisco Systems
Expires: May 8, 2014                                        Nov 04, 2013


            Inter-domain SLA Exchange Implementation Report
                 draft-svshah-idr-sla-exchange-impl-00

Abstract

   This document is a report of implementations based on [IDR-SLA].
   [IDR-SLA] introduces a new BGP attribute to exchange QoS SLA
   parameters between BGP peers.  Current status of the implementation
   report covers Cisco implementation and an inter-operability results
   between implementations from 2 different Cisco OS.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on May 8, 2014.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.



Shah & Patel               Expires May 8, 2014                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft   IDR SLA Exchange Implementation Report         Nov 2013


Table of Contents

   1.  Implementations and interoperability  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
     1.1.  Survey of Operations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Suggestions for the future  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   3.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   4.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   5.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6










































Shah & Patel               Expires May 8, 2014                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft   IDR SLA Exchange Implementation Report         Nov 2013


1.  Implementations and interoperability

                       Cisco IOS    Cisco NX-OS
       Cisco IOS            Y             Y
       Cisco NX-OS          Y             Y

1.1.  Survey of Operations


    Optional transitive attribute:
        Is QoS attribute implemented as an optional transitive attribute
        - Yes



    Local QoS SLA policy enablement:
        When QoS SLA policy enablement triggers an explicit BGP update
            message with QoS attribute and SLA sub-type content, has an
            attribute's highest order bit, in the QoS attribute flag,
            set to 1? This is to indicate receiver to drop the message
            on reception.
        - Yes



    Is implementation capable of QoS SLA advertisement in the context
        of advertised NLRI? with source AS = 0 in the QoS SLA attribute
        - did not implement

    Is implementation capable of advertising QoS SLA with explicit
        source and destination AS encoded?
        - Yes



    First trigger for QoS SLA advertisement:
        At the first trigger for SLA advertisement, a sender advertises
            SLA parameters with an unique SLA id?
        - Yes

        Acting as a receiver, is implementation capable to learn an
            advertised QoS attribute and SLA parameters
        - Yes



    Updating previously advertised QoS SLA:
        On an event detecting update to earlier advertised SLA, sender



Shah & Patel               Expires May 8, 2014                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft   IDR SLA Exchange Implementation Report         Nov 2013


            picks the same SLA id, advertised before, and signals new
            SLA parameters in its entirety. No delta updates.
        - Yes

        Acting as a receiver, is implementation capable to replace SLA
            parameters learned previously?
        - Yes



    Invalidation of previously advertised SLA:
        On an event to invalidate previously advertised SLA parameters,
            a BGP update message is sent to the same destination AS with
            the same SLA id, advertised before, with SLA message
            containing 0 Traffic Class count.
        - Yes

        Acting as a receiver, is implementation capable to remove
            previously learned QoS SLA parameters?
        - Yes



    QoS SLA advertisement for point to point connection:
        Is implementation capable to advertise SLA for the destination
            that is next hop
        - Yes

    QoS SLA advertisement for destination multiple hops away:
        Is implementation capable to advertise SLA for the destination
            that is multiple hops away?
        - Yes

    None of the forwarding nodes modify the content of the QoS SLA
        parameters?
        - Yes



    Inter-operability with nodes not supporting this attribute:
        Is interoperability tested to make sure this optional transitive
            attribute is forwarded without any impact through the nodes
            that do not implement support of this attribute
        - Yes



    Attributes implemented:



Shah & Patel               Expires May 8, 2014                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft   IDR SLA Exchange Implementation Report         Nov 2013


        Cisco:
            Direction
                incoming
                outgoing
            Traffic Class Count
            Traffic Class Description
            Traffic Class Elements Count
            Classifier Element values
                ipDiffServCodePoint
            Traffic Class Service Count
            Service Attributes:
                Traffic_CLASS_TSPEC
                MINRATE_IN_PROFILE_MARKING
                MINRTE_OUT_PROFILE_MARKING
                RELATIVE_PRIORITY




2.  Suggestions for the future

   The proposed draft is to define message to exchange SLA parameters
   between two nodes.  The proposal does not mandate sender to have SLA
   parameters provisioned in a specific manner the QoS attribute and SLA
   sub-type contents are encoded in the message.  It is not required
   though it would be nice if SLA negotiation and SLA format, that gets
   provisioned on vendor devices, is well defined and aligned with the
   SLA sub-type format proposed in the [IDR-SLA] and thus providing a
   consistent way of mapping.


3.  Acknowledgements

   Thanks to Ruta Vaidya for providing data on Cisco implementation.


4.  Security Considerations

   No Security considerations are required for the report presented in
   this document.


5.  Normative References

   [IDR-SLA]  Shah, S., Patel, K., Bajaj, S., Tomotaki, L., and M.
              Boucadair, "Inter-domain SLA Exchange,
              I-D.draft-ietf-idr-sla-exchange", June 2013.




Shah & Patel               Expires May 8, 2014                  [Page 5]

Internet-Draft   IDR SLA Exchange Implementation Report         Nov 2013


Authors' Addresses

   Shitanshu Shah
   Cisco Systems
   170 W. Tasman Drive
   San Jose, CA  95134
   US

   Email: svshah@cisco.com


   Keyur Patel
   Cisco Systems
   170 W. Tasman Drive
   San Jose, CA  95134
   US

   Email: keyupate@cisco.com

































Shah & Patel               Expires May 8, 2014                  [Page 6]

