A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3087

        Title:      Control of Service Context using SIP Request-URI 
        Author(s):  B. Campbell, R. Sparks
        Status:     Informational
        Date:       April 2001
        Mailbox:    bcampbell@dynamicsoft.com, rsparks@dynamicsoft.com
        Pages:      39
        Characters: 83612
        Updates/Obsoletes/SeeAlso:  None

        I-D Tag:    draft-campbell-sip-service-control-03.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3087.txt


This memo provides information for the Internet community.  It
describes a useful way to conceptualize the use of the standard SIP
(Session Initiation Protocol) Request-URI (Uniform Resource
Identifier) that the authors and many members of the SIP community
think is suitable as a convention.  It does not define any new
protocol with respect to RFC 2543.
 
In a conventional telephony environment, extended service
applications often use call state information, such as calling
party, called party, reason for forward, etc, to infer application
context.  In a SIP/2.0 call, much of this information may be either
non-existent or unreliable.  This document proposes a mechanism to
communicate context information to an application.  Under this
proposal, a client or proxy can communicate context through the use
of a distinctive Request-URI.  This document continues with examples
of how this mechanism could be used in a voice mail application. 

This memo provides information for the Internet community.  It does
not specify an Internet standard of any kind.  Distribution of this
memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.
