



Internet Engineering Task Force                                  G. Chen
Internet-Draft                                              China Mobile
Intended status: Informational                               C. Williams
Expires: March 01, 2014                                       Consultant
                                                                 D. Wing
                                                          A. Yourtchenko
                                                     Cisco Systems, Inc.
                                                         August 28, 2013


            Happy Eyeballs Extension for Multiple Interfaces
               draft-ietf-mif-happy-eyeballs-extension-03

Abstract

   Currently the interface selection in multi-interface environment is
   exclusive - only one interface can be used at the time, frequently
   needing manual intervention.  Happy Eyeballs in MIF would make the
   selection process smoother by using the connectivity checks over a
   pre-filtered interfaces according to defined policy.  This would
   choose "best" interface with an automatic fallback.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on March 01, 2014.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents



Chen, et al.             Expires March 01, 2014                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft             happy-eyeballs-mif                August 2013


   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   3.  Happiness Parameters  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   4.  HE Behaviour in MIF . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     4.1.  First Step, Filter  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     4.2.  Second Step, Sort . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   5.  Implementation Framework  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   6.  Additional Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     6.1.  Usage Scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     6.2.  Fallback Timeout  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     6.3.  DNS Selections  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     6.4.  Flow Continuity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   7.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   8.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   9.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   10. References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
     10.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
     10.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11

1.  Introduction

   In multiple interface context, the problems raised by hosts with
   multiple interfaces have been discussed.  The MIF problem
   statement[RFC6418] described the various issues when using a wrong
   domain selection on a MIF node.  Happy Eyeballs (HE) [RFC6555]
   described how a dual-stack client can determine the functioning path
   to a dual-stack server.  It's using stateful algorithm to help
   applications quickly determine if IPv6 or IPv4 is the most fast path
   to connect a server.  That is a good method to achieve smart path
   selection.  However, the assumption is a single-homed context.  The
   interaction with multiple interfaces is deferred for further study.

   [I-D.anipko-mif-mpvd-arch] has proposed a multiple provisioning
   domain architecture.  This memo has been proposed to extend happy
   eyeballs algorithm to fit into the multiple interfaces context.
   Several additional considerations have been elaborated to analyze the
   user demands and initiate HE-MIF connections.  It allows a node with
   multiple interfaces picking a fast flow path.




Chen, et al.             Expires March 01, 2014                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft             happy-eyeballs-mif                August 2013


2.  Problem Statement

   The section enumerates several concrete use cases in existing
   networks.

   Case 1: WiFi is broken

   o  [Scenario] A MIF node has both 3G and WIFI interface.  When the
      node enters a WiFi area, a common practice would always prefer
      WiFi because it' cheap and fast-speed normally.

   o  [Problem] User assumes the wifi is working, because the node
      already got IP address from WiFi.  However, he can't run
      applications due to Internet connectivity being unavailable.  This
      may be an authentication required coming into play, or unstable
      Layer 2 conditions.  In order to figure out the problems, users
      have to turn off the WiFi manually.

   o  [Workaround] Users can indicate their desire with some setting on
      the phone.  For instance, they may prefer to wait a little bit of
      time but not forever.  After the timer is expired, users would
      finally give up the WiFi path and try to establish connection over
      3G path.  Users may won't want the wait time too short, because
      the 3G path for most people is more expensive than wifi path.

   Case 2: VPN (Virtual Private Network) scenario

   o  [Scenario] In some cases, a node has multiple interface because of
      VPN.  Users would only have interests to connect a corporate
      network inside VPN.  While, connecting to Internet would work
      outside the VPN.

   o  [Problem] That is normally a implementation consideration that
      unmanaged interface may be considered less trustworthy than
      managed.  It results in trusted interfaces having the highest
      priority.  This setting may steer all traffic to VPN interface.
      When this is a traffic heading to a corporate site, everything is
      fine.  But sometimes, the connections out to Internet sites may
      suffer from long-distance path delays.

   o  [Workaround] It's desirable if routing could be bound to each
      interface.  However, a node following weak host model[RFC1122]
      takes routing tables as node-scoped.  Some sophisticated VPN
      softwares may configure a specific route setting on each interface
      to dispatch traffic in a predetermined network environment.  As an
      alternative, It may be useful to perform parallel IP connectivity
      checks before selecting an interface.  Consequently, the fastest
      interface would be picked up automatically.



Chen, et al.             Expires March 01, 2014                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft             happy-eyeballs-mif                August 2013


   Case 3: 3G/LTE tethering scenario

   o  [Scenario] Many mobile phones are equipped with software to offer
      tethered Internet access.  It shares their Internet connection
      with another Internet-capable mobile phone or other devices over
      Wi-Fi.

   o  [Problem] The WiFi link that tethered phone see is not free WiFi
      link, i.e. it might be 3G backhaul.  The policy of "always WiFi"
      leads to all traffic being sent over the tethering WiFi.  Usually,
      such tethering WiFi link puts sharing limitation to access nodes.
      It could cause contention on both that WiFi link and the backhaul
      3G link, while it be higher cost than going on the 3G that is
      built in the handset.

   o  [Workaround] To solve that, it is necessary for the node to be
      aware of not only the link layer information, but also services
      information, like billable or free.  That could help to facilitate
      the execution of the algorithm.  Same concern has been documented
      in Section 4.4 of [RFC6418])

   Case 4: Policy Conflict

   o  [Scenario] A node has WiFi and 3G access simultaneously.  In
      mobile network, IPv6-only may be preferable since IPv6 has the
      potential to be simpler than dual-stack.  WiFi access still remain
      on IPv4.

   o  [Problem] The problem is caused by policy confliction.  The
      transition to IPv6 is likely to encourage IPv6 and prefer
      IPv6[RFC6724].  If the 3G path has IPv6 on it and the WiFi does
      not, a suboptimal interface might be chosen from the cost saving
      perspective.

   o  [Workaround] Users interests should be well understood and
      considered before interface selection.  The different
      preconditions may impact subsequent behaviors.  Users concern
      about high-reliability or high-speed or less-cost should make
      different choice.  A flexible mechanism should be provided allow
      to make smart decision.

3.  Happiness Parameters

   To solve the problems, this section provides the design proposal for
   HE-MIF.  Two sets of "Happiness" parameters have been defined.  It
   serves upper applications and initiates HE-MIF connections to below
   level API subsequently.  Going through the process, MIF nodes could
   pick an appropriate interface which would correspond to user demands.



Chen, et al.             Expires March 01, 2014                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft             happy-eyeballs-mif                August 2013


   The two sets of "Happiness" parameters are called Hard set and Soft
   set respectively.

   o  Hard set: It contains parameters which have mandatory indications
      that interface behaviour should comply with.  This might provide
      an interface for applications constraints or delivering operator's
      policies.  Basically, parameters in Hard set should be easy-to-use
      and easy-to-understand.  The potential users would directly use
      those.  When several hard parameters were conflicted, user's
      preference should override.

      *  User's preference: users would express preferences which may
         not have a formally technical language , like "No 3G while
         roaming", "Only use free WiFi", etc.

      *  Operator policies: operators would deliver the customized
         policies in particular network environments due to geo-location
         or services regulation considerations.  One example in 3GPP
         network is that operator could deliver policies from access
         network discovery and selection function (ANDSF).

   o  Soft set: It's a factor contributing to the best path.  The
      following is considered as for the justification.

      *  Next hop: [RFC4191] allows configuration of specific routes to
         a destination.

      *  DNS selection: [RFC6731] could configure nodes with information
         to indicate DNS server address for a particular namespace.

      *  Source address selection: the information provided by [RFC6724]
         would be considered.

      *  Other factors: There is a common practice may impact interface
         selection, e.g. WiFi is preferable.  Such conventional
         experiences should also be considered.

4.  HE Behaviour in MIF

   Corresponding to the two sets of parameters, a HE-MIF node may take a
   two-step approach.  One is to do "hard" decision to synthesize
   policies from different actors (e.g., users and network operator).
   In a nutshell, that is a filter which will exclude the interfaces
   from any further consideration.  The second is to adjust how we make
   a connection on multiple interfaces after the filter.  It's a sorting
   behaviour.  In the multiple provisioning domain architecture,
   Provisioning Domain ( PVD) selection is performed based on "hard" and
   "soft" inputs.  Connections intend to be initiated on the resultant



Chen, et al.             Expires March 01, 2014                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft             happy-eyeballs-mif                August 2013


   PVDs in parallel.  Those two steps are described as following sub-
   sections.  It should be noted that HE-MIF doesn't prescribe such two-
   step model.  It will be very specific to particular cases and
   implementations.  For example, if one interface or PVD is left after
   the first step, the process would be closed.

4.1.  First Step, Filter

   One goal of filter is to reconcile multiple selection policies from
   users or operators.  Afterwards, the merged demands would be mapped
   to a set of candidate interfaces, which is judged as qualified.

   Decision on reconciliation of different policies will depend very
   much on the deployment scenario.  An implementation may not be able
   to determine priority for each policies without explicit
   configuration provided by users or administrator.  For example, an
   implementation may by default always prefer the WiFi due to cost
   saving consideration.  Whereas, users may dedicatedly prefer 3G
   interface to seek high-reliability or security benefits even to
   actively turn off WiFi interface.  The decision on mergence of
   policies may be made by implementations, by node administrators, even
   by other standards investigating customer behaviour.  However, it's
   worth to note that a demand from users should be normally considered
   higher priority than from other actors.

   The merged policies would serve as a filter principle doing iterate
   across the list of all known interfaces.  Qualified interface would
   be selected to sort processing at next step.

4.2.  Second Step, Sort

   Sort process would guarantee "best" interface selection with fallback
   capacities.  As soon as a node connects to a network at bootstrap or
   changes to a different network, network connectivity status probes
   have been performed in some existing implementations, e.g. Windows
   Vista, Windows 7, Windows Server 2008 and iOS.  In the process, a
   pre-configured URL have been connected to examine a certain answer.
   If anything is abnormal, it assumes there is a proxy on the path.
   This status detection is recommended to be used in HE-MIF to detect
   DNS interception or HTTP proxy that forces a login or a click-
   through.  The unexamined interfaces should be accounted as
   "unconnected" . Those interfaces should not join the sort process.
   For a PVD-aware node, it could instinctively avoid the mismatch of
   provisionning information.  Those status detection behaviors may not
   be applied to such node.






Chen, et al.             Expires March 01, 2014                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft             happy-eyeballs-mif                August 2013


   Two phases normally are involved in a sort process, i.e. name
   resolving and data session establishing.  Parameters in soft set
   should considered at this stage.

   When the node initiates name requests, it should follow the
   instruction in [RFC6731]if DNS server selection DHCP option is
   provided.  Otherwise, DNS queries would be sent out on multiple
   interfaces on relevant PVDs in parallel.  More discussions of DNS
   selection in HE-MIF are elaborated at Section 6.3.

   Once a peer address was resolved, a connection would be intended to
   setup.  Heading to a destination, a particular interface on relevant
   PVDs may comply with the configuration of soft parameters , e.g. next
   hop[RFC4191] , source address selection[RFC6724] or a common
   practice.  A particular interface should be treated with higher
   priority compared to others.  And, it should be choose to initiate
   the connection in advance.  This could avoid thrashing the network,
   by not (always) making simultaneous connection attempts on multiple
   interfaces.  After making a connection attempt on the preferred
   interface and failing to establish a connection within a certain time
   period (see Section 6.2), a HE-MIF implementation will decide to
   initiate connection attempt using rest of interfaces in parallel.
   This fallback consideration may make subsequent connection attempts
   successful on non-preferable interface.

   The node would cache information regarding the outcome of each
   connection attempt.  Cache entries would be flushed periodically.  A
   system-defined timeout may take place to age the state.  Maximum on
   the order of 10 minutes defined in [RFC6555] is recommended to keep
   the interface state changes synchronizing with IP filmily states.  So
   long as new connections are being attempted by the MIF-node, such an
   implementation should occasionally make connection attempts using the
   soft-parameter's preferred interface, as it may have become
   functional again.

   If there are no specific soft-parameters provided, all selected
   interface on relevant PVDs should be equally treated.  The
   connections would initiate on several interface simultaneously.  The
   goal here is to provide fast connection for users, by quickly
   attempting to connect using one of interfaces.  Afterwards, the node
   would do the same caching and flushing process as described above.

5.  Implementation Framework

   The simplest way for the implementation is within the application
   itself.  The mechanism described in the document would not require
   any specific support from the operating system beyond the commonly
   available APIs that provide transport service.  It could also be



Chen, et al.             Expires March 01, 2014                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft             happy-eyeballs-mif                August 2013


   implemented as high-level API approach, linking to MIF-API
   [I-D.ietf-mif-api-extension].  A number of enhancements could be
   added, making the use of the high-level APIs much more productive in
   building applications.

6.  Additional Considerations

6.1.  Usage Scope

   Connection-oriented transports (e.g., TCP, SCTP) could be directly
   applied as scoped in [RFC6555].  For connectionless transport
   protocols (e.g., UDP), it was also described "a similar mechanism can
   be used if the application has request/ response semantics (e.g., as
   done by Interactive Connectivity Establishment (ICE) to select a
   working IPv6 or IPv4 media path[RFC6157])."

6.2.  Fallback Timeout

   When the preferred interface was failed, HE-MIF would trigger
   fallback process to start connection initiation on several candidate
   interfaces.  It should set a reasonable wait time to comfort user
   experiences.  Aggressive timeouts may achieve quick interface
   handover, but at the cost of traffic that may be chargeable on
   certain networks.  E.g. the handover from WiFi to 3G would bring a
   bill to customers.  Considering the reasons, it is recommended to
   prioritize the input from users(e.g. real customers or applications)
   through UI(user interface).  For default-setting on a system, a hard
   error[RFC1122] in replied ICMP could serve as a trigger for the
   fallback process.  When the ICMP soft error is present or non-
   response was received, it's recommended that the timeout should be
   large enough to allow connection retransmission.  [RFC1122] states
   that such timer MUST be at least 3 minutes to provide TCP
   retransmission.  Several minutes delay may not inappropriate for user
   experiences.  A widespread practice[RFC5461] sets 75 seconds to
   optimize connection process.

   More optimal timer may be expected.  The particular setting will be
   very specific to implementations and cases.  The memo didn't try to
   provide a concrete value due to following concerns.












Chen, et al.             Expires March 01, 2014                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft             happy-eyeballs-mif                August 2013


   o  RTT(Round-Trip Time) on different interfaces may vary quite a lot.
      A particular value of timeout may not accurately help to make a
      decision that this interface doesn't work at all.  On the
      contrary, it may cause a misjudgment on a interface, which is not
      very fast.  In order to compensate the issues, the timeout setting
      based on past experiences of a particular interface may help to
      make a fair decision.  Whereas, it's going beyond the capability
      of Happy Eyeballs [RFC6555].  Therefore, it's superior to leave it
      to a particular implementation.

   o  In some cases, fast interface may not be treated as "best".  For
      example, a interface could be evaluated in the principle of
      bandwidth-delay, termed "Bandwidth-Delay-Product ".  Happy
      Eyeballs measures only connection speed.  That is, how quickly a
      TCP connection is established . It does not measure bandwidth.  If
      the fallback has to take various factors into account and make
      balanced decision, it's better to resort to a specific context and
      implementation.

6.3.  DNS Selections

   In the sort process, HE-MIF prioritizes [RFC6731]inputs to select a
   proper server.  [RFC6731]could help to address following two cases
   that HE-MIF failed to address.

   o  A DNS answer may be only valid on a specific provisioning domain,
      but HE-MIF may not be aware of that mapping because DNS reply may
      not be kept with the provisioning from which the answer comes.
      The situation may become worse if asking internal name with public
      address response or asking public name with private address
      answers.

   o  Some FQDNs can be resolvable only by sending queries to the right
      server (e.g., intranet services).  Otherwise, a response with
      NXDOMAIN is replied.  HE-MIF treats the DNS answer with fast
      response as optimal only if the record is valid.  That may cause
      messy for data connections, since NXDOMAIN doesn't provide useful
      information.













Chen, et al.             Expires March 01, 2014                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft             happy-eyeballs-mif                August 2013


   By doing HE-MIF, it can help to solve the issues of DNS interception
   with captive portal.  The DNS server modified and replied the answer
   with the IP address of captive portal rather than the intended
   destination address.  In those cases, TCP connection may succeed, but
   Internet connectivity is not available.  It results in lack of
   service unless user has authenticated.  HE-MIF recommended using
   network connectivity status probes to examine a pre-configured URL
   for detecting DNS interception on the path (see more in Section 4.2).
   The node will be able to automatically rely upon other interfaces to
   select right DNS servers by excluding the unexamined interfaces.

   It should be noticed that both [RFC6731]and HE-MIF can't fully solve
   the problems of DNS resolution issues, which was described in
   Section 2.3 of [RFC6731].  In order to handle the issues, a MIF-node
   should have PVD-aware capability to explicitly differentiate various
   provisioning domains.

6.4.  Flow Continuity

   Interface changing should only happen at the beginning of new session
   in order to keep flow continuity for ongoing TCP session.  Dynamic
   movement of traffic flows are beyond the scope of this document.

7.  IANA Considerations

   This memo includes no request to IANA.

8.  Security Considerations

   The security consideration is following the statement in [RFC6555]and
   [RFC6418].

9.  Acknowledgements

   The authors would like to thank Margaret Wasserman, Hui Deng, Erik
   Kline, Stuart Cheshire, Teemu Savolainen, Jonne Soininen, Simon
   Perreault, Zhen Cao, Dmitry Anipko and Ted Lemon for their helpful
   comments.

10.  References

10.1.  Normative References

   [RFC1122]  Braden, R., "Requirements for Internet Hosts -
              Communication Layers", STD 3, RFC 1122, October 1989.

   [RFC4191]  Draves, R. and D. Thaler, "Default Router Preferences and
              More-Specific Routes", RFC 4191, November 2005.



Chen, et al.             Expires March 01, 2014                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft             happy-eyeballs-mif                August 2013


   [RFC6555]  Wing, D. and A. Yourtchenko, "Happy Eyeballs: Success with
              Dual-Stack Hosts", RFC 6555, April 2012.

   [RFC6724]  Thaler, D., Draves, R., Matsumoto, A., and T. Chown,
              "Default Address Selection for Internet Protocol Version 6
              (IPv6)", RFC 6724, September 2012.

   [RFC6731]  Savolainen, T., Kato, J., and T. Lemon, "Improved
              Recursive DNS Server Selection for Multi-Interfaced
              Nodes", RFC 6731, December 2012.

10.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.anipko-mif-mpvd-arch]
              Anipko, D., "Multiple Provisioning Domain Architecture",
              draft-anipko-mif-mpvd-arch-02 (work in progress), July
              2013.

   [I-D.ietf-mif-api-extension]
              Liu, D., Lemon, T., and Z. Cao, "MIF API consideration",
              draft-ietf-mif-api-extension-03 (work in progress),
              November 2012.

   [RFC5461]  Gont, F., "TCP's Reaction to Soft Errors", RFC 5461,
              February 2009.

   [RFC6157]  Camarillo, G., El Malki, K., and V. Gurbani, "IPv6
              Transition in the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)", RFC
              6157, April 2011.

   [RFC6418]  Blanchet, M. and P. Seite, "Multiple Interfaces and
              Provisioning Domains Problem Statement", RFC 6418,
              November 2011.

Authors' Addresses

   Gang Chen
   China Mobile
   53A,Xibianmennei Ave.,
   Xuanwu District,
   Beijing  100053
   China

   Email: phdgang@gmail.com







Chen, et al.             Expires March 01, 2014                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft             happy-eyeballs-mif                August 2013


   Carl Williams
   Consultant
   El Camino Real
   Palo Alto, CA  94306
   USA

   Email: carlw@mcsr-labs.org


   Dan Wing
   Cisco Systems, Inc.
   170 West Tasman Drive
   San Jose, CA  95134
   USA

   Email: dwing@cisco.com


   Andrew Yourtchenko
   Cisco Systems, Inc.
   De Kleetlaan, 7
   Diegem  B-1831
   Belgium

   Email: ayourtch@cisco.com


























Chen, et al.             Expires March 01, 2014                [Page 12]
