



Network Complexity Research Group                               R. Sircar
Internet-Draft                                                  Ericsson
Intended status: Informational                              M. Behringer
Expires: April 21, 2014                                            Cisco
                                                        October 21, 2013


      Using Entropy as a Measure for Changes in Network Complexity
                 draft-sircar-complexity-entropy-00.txt

Abstract

   For the evaluation of network designs it is desirable to express
   their complexity in objective, measurable metrics.  Previous work has
   shown that a large number of distinct, partly dependent scales play a
   role in overall complexity.  This document proposes the use of multi-
   scale entropy metrics to describe the complexity of a network.  We
   observe that the complexity of a network which undergoes no changes
   over a longer time period is constant.  Conversely, when a network
   undergoes changes entropy is increasing; this is independent on
   whether the changes make the network more or less complex.  In other
   words, also a simplification effort increases complexity temporarily.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 21, 2014.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of



Sircar & Behringer       Expires April 21, 2014                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft         Network Complexity Entropy           October 2013


   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction and Problem Statement  . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Components of Network Complexity  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   3.  Multi-Scale Entropy Analysis  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   4.  Applying MSE Analysis to Complexity . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   5.  Validation of the Approach  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   6.  Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   7.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6

1.  Introduction and Problem Statement

   When designing networks, low complexity is an often cited goal.
   There are complexity metrics for some aspects of a network, for
   example graph complexity or software complexity.  But there is no
   scientific way to determine the overall complexity of a network.

   Every network has a lifecycle of its own.  A network is envisaged and
   architected based on the requirements to provide certain services.
   Based on the architecture, it is then designed, implemented and
   finally managed.  Each of these phases in the lifecycle of the
   network is impacted by the complexity of the network.

   The overall complexity of a network can be broken down into smaller
   parts, such as software complexity (of the operating systems),
   configuration complexity, or the complexity to trouble-shoot
   problems.  On a component level, tradeoffs can be observed between
   various parts of the network as described in [draft-ncrg-network-
   design-complexity].  For example various elements of state, such as
   forwarding state show a tradeoff with other network properties, such
   as optimal forwarding behaviour.

   All networks undergo further changes based on network growth, changes
   in the requirements or needs as well as goal, obsolescence of
   equipment, addition of services, change of vendors or technology or
   evolution of technology.  In a steady state condition of the network,
   complexity remains constant.

   Each of these changes is impacted by existing complexity of the
   network.  The change impacts the complexity level of the network.



Sircar & Behringer       Expires April 21, 2014                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft         Network Complexity Entropy           October 2013


   Thus, change in the network becomes an important parameter to be
   defined and measured.  This document introduces a term Network
   Complexity Entropy to measure this change of network's complexity.
   This is based on multi-scale entropy.  In this document we describe
   network complexity using multi-scale entropy analysis.  The
   underlying assumption is that complexity is related to change.  We
   postulate that a network with a decreasing number of changes over
   time gradually becomes less complex to operate.  Conversely, an
   increasing number of changes in the network means that the network is
   becoming more complex.

   To support our assumption we define a set of measurable variables
   which influence the complexity of the network, for example
   configuration state or resilience of the network.  The overall
   network entropy is a function of those variables.  As those variables
   become stable over time, the overall entropy goes down.  In our
   interpretation this is illustrating the decreasing operational
   complexity of the network over time.  We believe that entropy is a
   good approach to capture time based aspects of network complexity.

2.  Components of Network Complexity

   The document "A Framework for Defining Network Complexity"
   [I-D.irtf-ncrg-complexity-framework] gives a number of examples of
   network components, such as configuration, protocol state, operating
   systems, network hardware such as routers and transmission equipment,
   etc.  These components are used in this document as variables in for
   the multi-scale entropy analysis.

   For example, consider the configuration of all network devices.
   While the network is evolving and growing, there will be permanent
   change to the global configuration of the network.  However, assuming
   no changes in the services provided, for some period of time the
   overall operating system state could be unchanged, because the same
   OS is deployed in more locations.  The entropy of the configuration
   is increasing in this example, whereas the entropy of the operating
   systems is constant.

   There is no complete list of network components that should be
   considered for the analysis proposed in this document, as XXX offers
   only a categorisation with some examples.  The actual analysis will
   therefore depend on the variables chosed, and is likely to represent
   only a partial view of the change in complexity of a network.

   The following section explains in detail how multi-scale entropy
   analysis can be applied to measure changes in network complexity.





Sircar & Behringer       Expires April 21, 2014                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft         Network Complexity Entropy           October 2013


3.  Multi-Scale Entropy Analysis

   Entropy was first defined in thermodynamics to model real world
   phenomena.  Later it was used by Shannon to define the expected value
   of information contained in a message.  There has been a good amount
   of research where entropy has been used to measure topological
   structural complexity of the network.  [XXX add references] In each
   of these definitions, change was measured over regular periodicity of
   univariate time series on a single scale.  Certain authors have used
   similar definitions or mathematical constructs to assess structural
   complexity of the underlying traffic or signal generating mechanisms.
   These are very useful to evaluate repetitive patterns which are
   generally quite predictable (e.g., periodic).  Some of these
   approaches have also been used for completely unpredictable (e.g.,
   uncorrelated random) signals, but the results are not always very
   intuitive.

   In summary, all the above mentioned approaches are based on ergodic
   theory for dynamical systems with time as an invariant measure.  As
   suggested by Lloyd Demetriusa et. al.  XXX , the importance of
   entropy - and its applicability to network theory - rests on three
   fundamental properties:

   1.  Network entropy is an invariant of the dynamical system.  It
       characterizes the structure and the ergodic behaviour of a
       dynamical system operating on the network.

   2.  Network entropy is positively correlated with robustness.

   3.  Evolutionarily stable states are characterized by extremal values
       of network entropy.  Maximal values of entropy arise where
       evolution changes Complexity.

   In this draft, we reuse the definitions and research done previously
   to Network Complexity Entropy.

   Networks and their evolution are truly complex and long-range
   correlations at multiple spatial and temporal scales may be required
   to measure entropy.  The multi-scale entropy (MSE) method proposed by
   Costa et. al.  [XXX] explicitly quantifies the amount of structure
   (correlation)in real world time series.  This should help in defining
   the underlying system os system's complexity.  This approach has been 
   used by many researchers in recent times to identify such structural
   complexities in Internet Traffic flows XXX .

   The MSE method evaluates sample entropy of coarse grained (averaged
   over increasing sequential segment lengths) univariate time series;



Sircar & Behringer       Expires April 21, 2014                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft         Network Complexity Entropy           October 2013


   the underlying idea is that coarse graining defines temporal scales,
   hence a system without structure would exhibit a rapid decrease in
   entropy with an increase in time scale.  The existing MSE algorithm
   has been proven to be able to distinguish between time series with
   different degrees of complexity and its extensions have included
   more rigorous definitions of time scales.

   For a discrete random variable X, taking values {x1, ..., xn} with
   probabilities {p1, ..., pn}, the information entropy or Shannon
   entropy of X is then defined as the mean information content,
   yielding S(X) = Sum {(over i=1...n) pi log pi}.  Logarithm used here
   is the natural logarithm.

   Since the networks generate variable amount of data as well as noise, 
   MSE uses Approximate Entropy (ApEn) Algorithm [XXX] developed by Steve 
   Pincus. This has been used successfully in various disciplines. In MSE 
   or MultiScale Entropy, Costa et. al uses ApEn, but constructs multiple
   coarse-graining time series by averaging the data points within   
   non-overlapping windows of increasing length. Now, let us define  
   "Network Complexity Entropy", such that this is calculated using MSE 
   algorithm. Thus, Network Complexity Entropy is the MSE of the selected  
   variables measured over time.

   The goal of every network designer would be to optimize this Function.  
   Then, the goal of the Network Complexity Entropy is to:
   Minimize [Network Complexity Entropy for topological structure,
   Network Complexity Entropy for Traffic, Network Complexity Entropy
   for Control Plane State,...] ---- our Objective Function.

   Now, we need to now formulate 'n' Network Complexity Entropy for the
   network in study:

   1.  Network Complexity Entropy for Topology - Structural Complexity

   2.  Network Complexity Entropy for Systems of System - Complexity due
       to overall Network Structure and interfaces including VNO and
       multi-vendor aspects

   3.  Network Complexity Entropy for Control Plane State - Complexity
       due to Signaling, Routing and other Protocol Complexity

   4.  Network Complexity Entropy for Traffic and Optimal Forwarding
       State / Paths

   5.  Network Complexity Entropy for Configuration State

   6.  Network Complexity Entropy for Policy Architecture

   7.  Network Complexity Entropy for Cost and Human impact - Complexity
       due to financial systems, management systems and Systems
       Integration etc.

4.  Applying MSE Analysis to Complexity






Sircar & Behringer       Expires April 21, 2014                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft         Network Complexity Entropy           October 2013


   [now we define a (small) set of the above variables, and create an
   entropy function with those.  We model this function, and show
   results of the modelling.]

5.  Validation of the Approach

   [Ideally, we want to pick a real-life network, and check the above
   results against this network.  Not sure this is feasible...]

6.  Future Work

   [undoubtedly, there will be a lot of open questions...]

7.  Informative References

   [I-D.irtf-ncrg-complexity-framework]
              Behringer, M. and G. Huston, "A Framework for Defining
              Network Complexity", draft-irtf-ncrg-complexity-
              framework-00 (work in progress), February 2013.

Authors' Addresses

   Rana P. Sircar
   Ericsson


   Michael H. Behringer
   Cisco























Sircar & Behringer       Expires April 21, 2014                 [Page 6]
