A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3307

        Title:      Allocation Guidelines for IPv6 Multicast Addresses

        Author(s):  B. Haberman
        Status:     Standards Track
        Date:       August 2002
        Mailbox:    bkhabs@nc.rr.com
        Pages:      8
        Characters: 15742
        Updates/Obsoletes/SeeAlso:    None

        I-D Tag:    draft-ietf-malloc-ipv6-guide-04.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3307.txt


This document specifies guidelines that must be implemented by any
entity responsible for allocating IPv6 multicast addresses.  This
includes, but is not limited to, any documents or entities wishing
to assign permanent IPv6 multicast addresses, allocate dynamic IPv6
multicast addresses, and define permanent IPv6 multicast group
identifiers.  The purpose of these guidelines is to reduce the
probability of IPv6 multicast address collision, not only at the
IPv6 layer, but also at the link-layer of media that encode portions
of the IP layer address into the MAC layer address.

This document is a product of the Multicast-Address Allocation Working
Group of the IETF.

This is now a Proposed Standard Protocol.

This document specifies an Internet standards track protocol for
the Internet community, and requests discussion and suggestions
for improvements.  Please refer to the current edition of the
"Internet Official Protocol Standards" (STD 1) for the
standardization state and status of this protocol.  Distribution
of this memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.

