


dispatch                                                  J.R. Rosenberg
Internet-Draft                                               jdrosen.net
Intended status:  Standards Track                            C. Jennings
Expires:  April 28, 2011                                           Cisco
                                                       M. Petit-Huguenin
                                                               Stonyfish
                                                        October 25, 2010


A Usage of Resource Location and Discovery (RELOAD) for Public Switched
                 Telephone Network (PSTN) Verification
             draft-rosenberg-dispatch-vipr-reload-usage-03

Abstract

   Verification Involving PSTN Reachability (ViPR) is a technique for
   inter-domain SIP federation.  ViPR makes use of the RELOAD protocol
   to store unverified mappings from phone numbers to RELOAD nodes, with
   whom a validation process can be run.  This document defines the
   usage of RELOAD for this purpose.

Legal

   This documents and the information contained therein are provided on
   an "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE
   REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE
   IETF TRUST AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL
   WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY
   WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION THEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE
   ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS
   FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 28, 2011.



Rosenberg, et al.        Expires April 28, 2011                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft              ViPR Reload Usage               October 2010


Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  ViPR Usage  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   3.  PeerID Shim . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   4.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   5.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   6.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
     6.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
     6.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   Appendix A.  Release notes  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
     A.1.  Modifications between rosenberg-03 and rosenberg-02 . . . . 7
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7






















Rosenberg, et al.        Expires April 28, 2011                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft              ViPR Reload Usage               October 2010


1.  Introduction

   This document relies heavily on the concepts and terminology defined
   in [VIPR-OVERVIEW] and will not make sense if you have not read that
   document first.  As it defines a usage for RELOAD [P2PSIP-BASE], it
   assumes the reader is also familiar with that specification.  The
   same DHT can also be used for a RELOAD SIP usage [P2PSIP-SIP].


2.  ViPR Usage

   The ViPR usage defines details for how the DHT is used for ViPR
   operations.

   The ViPR usage defines Kind-ID 0x00000001.  This Kind-ID is a
   dictionary entry.  Its Resource-ID is defined through a
   transformation which takes an E.164 based number, and computes a
   Resource-ID as the least significant 128 bits of the SHA1 hash of the
   following string:  Cat(CHOICE(null, "COPY", "COPY2"), number) That
   is, the Resource-ID is the hash of a string which is the
   concatenation of the number, prefixed with nothing, or the words
   "COPY1" or "COPY2".

   For example, for number +14085555432:

   Resource-ID = least128(SHA1("+14085555432"))

   or

   Resource-ID = least128(SHA1("COPY1+14085555432"))

   or

   Resource-ID = least128(SHA1("COPY2+14085555432"))

   The object stored at this resource ID is a dictionary entry, which
   has a key and a value:

   Object = {key,value}

   Here, the key is formed by taking the Node-ID of the storing node in
   hex format, without the "0x", appending a "+", followed by the
   VServiceID in hex format, without the "0x".  For example, if a peer
   with Node-ID

   0x8f60f5eab753037e64ab6c53947fd532

   receives a Publish with a VServiceID of



Rosenberg, et al.        Expires April 28, 2011                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft              ViPR Reload Usage               October 2010


   0x7eeb6a7036478351

   The resulting key is:

   8f60f5eab753037e64ab6c53947fd532+7eeb6a7036478351

   Both parts of this key are important.  Using the Node-ID of the node
   performing the store basically segments the keyspace of the
   dictionary so that no two peers ever store using the same key.
   Indeed, the responsible node will verify the signature over the
   stored data and check the Node-ID against the value of the key, to
   make sure that a conflict does not take place.  The usage of the
   VService allows for a single ViPR server to service multiple
   clusters, and to ensure that numbers published by one cluster (using
   one VServiceID) do not clobber or step on numbers published by
   another cluster (using a different VServiceID).  The responsible node
   does not verify or check the VServiceID.

   When a node receives a Store operation for this usage, the data
   itself has a signature.  The node responsible for storing the data
   must verify this signature; the certificate will always be included
   in the data and indicate which Node-ID is used.  The responsible node
   must check that this Node-ID is included in the cert.  If the
   signature verifies, the responsible node checks that the data model
   is a dictionary entry.  The key must meet the format above.  The
   responsible node must check that it is a 32 character sequence of
   numbers and letters a-f, followed by a +, followed by a 16 character
   sequence of numbers and letters a-f.  If this checks, the key is
   split in half along the plus.  The first 32 characters are considered
   a hex value and compared with the Node-ID used for the signature.  If
   they match, it is good.  Otherwise the Store operation is rejected.
   If they did match, next the responsible node checks the value.  It
   must be a TLV, with the same format used by VAP, and it must contain
   a single Node-ID attribute.  The Node-ID must match that used for the
   signature.  If they don't match, the Store operation is rejected.  If
   they do match, the next step is a quota check.

   For each peer that the responsible node is storing data for, it must
   maintain a count of the number of unique dictionary entries being
   stored for that Node-ID.  For each resourceID, each key constitutes a
   unique dictionary entry.  So if a peer is storing 5 resourceIDs, and
   at each of those 5, there are two keys whose first 32 bits correspond
   to a particular Node-ID, it means this node is currently storing 10
   unique dictionary entries for that Node-ID.

   It takes the StorageQuota configuration parameter for this DHT, which
   measures the amount of numbers a particular node can store.  That
   value is multiplied by nine (a 3x factor to account for the



Rosenberg, et al.        Expires April 28, 2011                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft              ViPR Reload Usage               October 2010


   application-layer copies (COPY1 and COPY2), and another 3x factor for
   replicas).  Then, an addition 3x factor is added for rounding to make
   sure that the probability is low that a rejection occurs due to
   imperfect distribution of resourceIDs across the ring.  (Open Issue:
   need to adjust this multiplier - basically birthday problem!) and
   then divided by the fraction of the hashspace owned by this ViPR
   server.  If the result is less than one, it is rounded up to two.
   This is the max number of unique entries that can be stored for this
   storing peer ID.  If the ViPR server is not yet storing this many
   entries for that peer ID, the store is allowed.

   The method for merging data after a partition follows the normal
   RELOAD rules around temporal ordering.


3.  PeerID Shim

   Because the ViPR implementation of RELOAD protocol makes use of the
   concept of multiple Node-ID on the same physical box, utilizing a
   single cert, the TLS handshakes alone are not sufficient to determine
   the entity on both sides of the TLS connection.  As such, we will
   have a small "shim" type of protocol, which runs after TLS, but is
   not formally part of RELOAD.

   When a node initiates a TLS connection towards another node, after
   the TLS completes, it sends this message.  The message contains the
   Node-ID associated with this connection.  The recipient gets this,
   and sends back a similar message, containing its Node-ID.  Both sides
   will verify that, the Node-ID sent by the other side, are amongst the
   Node-IDs listed in the certificate.  The connections are then stored
   in the connection tables, indexed by this Node-ID.

   Furthermore, if, after this exchange, a node determines that it
   already has a connection in its connection table with that Node-ID on
   the far side, the older connection is closed.  This is actually a
   critical security function!  Without this, a user could clone ViPR
   servers utilizing the same certs, and each one can join the network.

   Finally, once the exchange has taken place, the node compares the
   Node-ID from its peer with the current set of blacklisted Node-ID
   from the ACL that is distributed through the DHT.  If the remote
   Node-ID appears on the list, the node closes the TCP/TLS connection
   immediately.

   The reason we are using a non-reload message for this, is that we
   need to be 100% sure that this never propagates.  It is strictly over
   a single connection and should never be routed.  Indeed, had we not
   had this idea of multiple Node-ID in a single cert, this would have



Rosenberg, et al.        Expires April 28, 2011                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft              ViPR Reload Usage               October 2010


   effectively been accomplished through TLS.  Alternatively, there is a
   TLS command for telling the other side who I expect them to be;
   however this is not implemented in older versions of OpenSSL, and so
   our shim forms an alternative to that which can be run on top of
   OpenSSL.


4.  Security Considerations

   TBD


5.  IANA Considerations

   TBD.  Need to register items in IANA registries created by RELOAD.


6.  References

6.1.  Normative References

   [P2PSIP-BASE]
              Jennings, C., Lowekamp, B., Rescorla, E., Baset, S., and
              H. Schulzrinne, "REsource LOcation And Discovery (RELOAD)
              Base Protocol", draft-ietf-p2psip-base-11 (work in
              progress), October 2010.

   [VIPR-OVERVIEW]
              Rosenberg, J., Jennings, C., and M. Petit-Huguenin,
              "Verification Involving PSTN Reachability: Requirements
              and Architecture Overview",
              draft-rosenberg-dispatch-vipr-overview-04 (work in
              progress), October 2010.

6.2.  Informative References

   [P2PSIP-SIP]
              Jennings, C., Lowekamp, B., Rescorla, E., Baset, S., and
              H. Schulzrinne, "A SIP Usage for RELOAD",
              draft-ietf-p2psip-sip-05 (work in progress), July 2010.


Appendix A.  Release notes

   This section must be removed before publication as an RFC.






Rosenberg, et al.        Expires April 28, 2011                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft              ViPR Reload Usage               October 2010


A.1.  Modifications between rosenberg-03 and rosenberg-02

   o  Nits.
   o  Shorter I-Ds references.
   o  Fixed the peerID and VServiceID to be hexadecimal.
   o  Fixed the description of the dictionary entry
   o  Fixed the description of the TLV.
   o  Used +1 408 555 prefix for phone numbers in examples.
   o  Replaced peerId by Node-ID
   o  Replaced resourceID by Resource-ID


Authors' Addresses

   Jonathan Rosenberg
   jdrosen.net
   Monmouth, NJ
   US

   Email:  jdrosen@jdrosen.net
   URI:    http://www.jdrosen.net


   Cullen Jennings
   Cisco
   170 West Tasman Drive
   San Jose, CA  95134
   USA

   Phone:  +1 408 421-9990
   Email:  fluffy@cisco.com


   Marc Petit-Huguenin
   Stonyfish

   Email:  marc@stonyfish.com














Rosenberg, et al.        Expires April 28, 2011                 [Page 7]

