A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3325
                            
        Title:      Private Extensions to the Session Initiation
                    Protocol (SIP) for Asserted Identity within
                    Trusted Networks
        Author(s):  C. Jennings, J. Peterson, M. Watson
        Status:     Informational
        Date:       November 2002
        Mailbox:    fluffy@cisco.com, Jon.Peterson@NeuStar.biz,
                    mwatson@nortelnetworks.com
        Pages:      18
        Characters: 36170
        Updates/Obsoletes/SeeAlso:   None
                            
        I-D Tag:    draft-ietf-sip-asserted-identity-02.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3325.txt


This document describes private extensions to the Session Initiation
Protocol (SIP) that enable a network of trusted SIP servers to assert
the identity of authenticated users, and the application of existing
privacy mechanisms to the identity problem.  The use of these
extensions is only applicable inside an administrative domain with
previously agreed-upon policies for generation, transport and usage of
such information.  This document does NOT offer a general privacy or
identity model suitable for use between different trust domains, or
use in the Internet at large.

This document is a product of the Session Initiation Protocol Working
Group and the Session Initiation Proposal Investigation Working Groups
of the IETF.  

This memo provides information for the Internet community.  It does
not specify an Internet standard of any kind.  Distribution of this
memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.


