A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3313

        Title:      Private Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)
                    Extensions for Media Authorization
        Author(s):  W. Marshall, Ed.
        Status:     Informational
        Date:       January 2003
        Mailbox:    wtm@research.att.com
        Pages:      16
        Characters: 36866
        Updates/Obsoletes/SeeAlso:    None

        I-D Tag:    draft-ietf-sip-call-auth-06.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3313.txt


This document describes the need for Quality of Service (QoS) and
media authorization and defines a Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)
extension that can be used to integrate QoS admission control with
call signaling and help guard against denial of service attacks.  The
use of this extension is only applicable in administrative domains, or
among federations of administrative domains with previously
agreed-upon policies, where both the SIP proxy authorizing the QoS,
and the policy control of the underlying network providing the QoS,
belong to that administrative domain or federation of domains.

This document is a product of the Session Initiation Protocol Working
Group of the IETF.

This memo provides information for the Internet community.  It does
not specify an Internet standard of any kind.  Distribution of this
memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.

