A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3265

        Title:      Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)-Specific Event
                    Notification 
        Author(s):  A. B. Roach
        Status:     Standards Track
        Date:       June 2002
        Mailbox:    adam@dynamicsoft.com
        Pages:      38
        Characters: 89005
        Obsoletes:  2543

        I-D Tag:    draft-ietf-sip-events-05.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3265.txt


This document describes an extension to the Session Initiation
Protocol (SIP).  The purpose of this extension is to provide an
extensible framework by which SIP nodes can request notification
from remote nodes indicating that certain events have occurred.

Concrete uses of the mechanism described in this document may be
standardized in the future.

Note that the event notification mechanisms defined herein are
NOT intended to be a general-purpose infrastructure for all
classes of event subscription and notification.

This document is a product of the Session Initiation Protocol Working
Group of the IETF.

This is now a Proposed Standard Protocol.

This document specifies an Internet standards track protocol for
the Internet community, and requests discussion and suggestions
for improvements.  Please refer to the current edition of the
"Internet Official Protocol Standards" (STD 1) for the
standardization state and status of this protocol.  Distribution
of this memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.
