A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3326
                                
        Title:      The Reason Header Field for the Session Initiation
                    Protocol (SIP)
        Author(s):  H. Schulzrinne, D. Oran, G. Camarillo
        Status:     Standards Track
        Date:       December 2002
        Mailbox:    schulzrinne@cs.columbia.edu, oran@cisco.com,
                    Gonzalo.Camarillo@ericsson.com
        Pages:      8
        Characters: 15695
        Updates/Obsoletes/SeeAlso:   None
                                
        I-D Tag:    draft-ietf-sip-reason-01.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3326.txt


For creating services, it is often useful to know why a Session
Initiation Protocol (SIP) request was issued.  This document defines
a header field, Reason, that provides this information.  The Reason
header field is also intended to be used to encapsulate a final
status code in a provisional response.  This functionality is needed
to resolve the "Heterogeneous Error Response Forking Problem", or
HERFP.  

This document is a product of the Session Initiation Protocol and the
Session Initiation Proposal Investigation Working Groups of the IETF.

This is now a Proposed Standard Protocol.

This document specifies an Internet standards track protocol for the
Internet community, and requests discussion and suggestions for
improvements.  Please refer to the current edition of the "Internet
Official Protocol Standards" (STD 1) for the standardization state
and status of this protocol.  Distribution of this memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.

