A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3261

        Title:      SIP: Session Initiation Protocol
        Author(s):  J. Rosenberg, H. Schulzrinne, G. Camarillo,
                    A. Johnston, J. Peterson, R. Sparks, M. Handley,
                    E. Schooler 
        Status:     Standards Track
        Date:       June 2002
        Mailbox:    jdrosen@dynamicsoft.com,
                    schulzrinne@cs.columbia.edu,
                    Gonzalo.Camarillo@ericsson.com, 
                    alan.johnston@wcom.com, jon.peterson@neustar.com, 
                    rsparks@dynamicsoft.com, mjh@icir.org,
                    schooler@research.att.com 
        Pages:      266
        Characters: 647976
        Obsoletes:  2543

        I-D Tag:    draft-ietf-sip-rfc2543bis-09.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3261.txt


This document describes Session Initiation Protocol (SIP), an
application-layer control (signaling) protocol for creating,
modifying, and terminating sessions with one or more
participants.  These sessions include Internet telephone calls,
multimedia distribution, and multimedia conferences.

SIP invitations used to create sessions carry session descriptions
that allow participants to agree on a set of compatible media types.
SIP makes use of elements called proxy servers to help route requests
to the user's current location, authenticate and authorize users for
services, implement provider call-routing policies, and provide
features to users.  SIP also provides a registration function that
allows users to upload their current locations for use by proxy
servers.  SIP runs on top of several different transport protocols.

This document is a product of the Session Initiation Protocol Working
Group of the IETF.

This is now a Proposed Standard Protocol.

This document specifies an Internet standards track protocol for
the Internet community, and requests discussion and suggestions
for improvements.  Please refer to the current edition of the
"Internet Official Protocol Standards" (STD 1) for the
standardization state and status of this protocol.  Distribution
of this memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.
