


DISPATCH Working Group                                        H. Kaplan 
Internet Draft                                              Acme Packet 
Intended status: Informational                                          
Expires: April 18, 2011                                October 18, 2010 
    
    
      Problems with the SIP Globally Routable User Agent URIs (GRUUs) 
                 draft-kaplan-dispatch-gruu-problematic-00
    
Status of this Memo
    
   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with 
   the provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents 
   at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as 
   reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt. 
    
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
 
   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 18, 2011.  
    
Copyright and License Notice
    
   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the 
   document authors.  All rights reserved. 
    
   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal 
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents 
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of 
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents 
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with 
   respect to this document.  Code Components extracted from this 
   document must include Simplified BSD License text as described in 
   Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without 
   warranty as described in the BSD License. 
    



 
 
Kaplan                  Expires April 18, 2011                [Page 1] 
Internet-Draft         Problems with SIP GRUUs           October 2010 
 

Abstract

   This document identifies some issues discovered in deployments of 
   the SIP GRUU mechanism defined in [RFC5627], cases in which GRUUs 
   may be harmful, and considerations for B2BUAs handling GRUUs. 
    
Table of Contents
    
   1. Introduction ..................................................2 
   2. Terminology ...................................................3 
   3. Problems with Access Proxies ..................................3 
   4. Problems with B2BUAs ..........................................5 
   5. Problems with Global Reachability .............................7 
      5.1. Access-Restricted Domains ................................8 
      5.2. Routing-Restricted Domains ...............................8 
      5.3. IPv6 Reachability ........................................9 
   6. Alternatives to GRUU ..........................................9 
   7. Conclusion ...................................................10 
   8. Security Considerations ......................................11 
   9. IANA Considerations ..........................................11 
   10. References ..................................................11 
      10.1. Informative References .................................11 
   Author's Address.................................................11 


1. Introduction
    
   The SIP GRUU mechanism defined in [RFC5627] is intended to provide a 
   SIP URI which can be used to reach a specific User Agent (UA) from 
   anywhere on the Internet.  A UA can obtain a GRUU through the 
   registration process, whereby the Registrar creates the GRUU and 
   passes it to the UA, and the UA can use that GRUU as a Contact URI 
   in subsequent non-REGISTER SIP requests, and other SIP entities can 
   use the GRUU to reach that specific UA in out-of-dialog requests.  
   Alternatively, a UA that is publicly reachable on the Internet can 
   create a self-made GRUU as described in [RFC5627]. 
    
   GRUUs are URIs with specific properties: they are intended to be 
   globally routable, meaning they could be used by any SIP device on 
   the Internet as the target of a request to reach the specific UA 
   assigned the GRUU, and they are valid for at least the duration of a 
   registration in the case of temp-GRUUs, or longer in the case of 
   public-GRUUs. 
    
   One use-case often cited for needing GRUUs is for call-transfer 
   scenarios, whereby the transferor REFERs a transferee to a transfer 
   target by giving it the GRUU of the transfer target in the Refer-To 
   header value, and may also use a GRUU of the transferee in the 
   Request-URI of an out-of-dialog REFER.  Because a SIP AoR may 
 
 
Kaplan                   Expires - April 2011                 [Page 2] 
Internet-Draft         Problems with SIP GRUUs           October 2010 
 
 
   represent multiple UAs, they cannot be used for some call-transfer 
   cases, and Contact URIs are used instead; GRUUs would be used in 
   such cases because they are globally routable forms of Contact URIs.  
   It is commonly assumed that GRUUs are necessary for such call-
   transfer scenarios to function, although in practice that has not 
   been the case. 
 
   GRUUs have not seen widespread adoption yet, but they have appeared, 
   and are even used frequently by at least one vendor.  Initial 
   deployments have uncovered some problems with using GRUUs, which 
   this document attempts to capture.  The MARTINI Working Group has 
   also considered making GRUUs a requirement for SIP Trunking, in 
   order to make call-transfer scenarios work, which this document 
   attempts to explain GRUU is neither necessary nor sufficient for.  
   Furthermore, there is confusion and debate with regards to what a 
   B2BUA should do with GRUU Contact-URIs, which this document tries to 
   provide some background considerations for. 
    
2. Terminology 
    
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119.  The 
   terminology in this document conforms to RFC 2828, "Internet 
   Security Glossary". 
    
   GRUU: Globally Routable User Agent URI, as defined in [RFC5627]. 
    
   UA: SIP User Agent. 
    
   Out-of-dialog request: a SIP request which is not sent in a dialog, 
   but may form a dialog.  For example an initial INVITE, SUBSCRIBE, 
   PUBLISH, MESSAGE, or REFER request; essentially, a request with no 
   To-tag. 
    
3. Problems with Access Proxies 
 
   A common deployment model for SIP Service Providers (SSPs) and 
   Enterprises with remote workers, is to deploy Proxies or SBCs 
   between registering UAs or IP-PBXs and the authoritative 
   Registrar(s).  For sake of brevity, this document will refer to any 
   such devices as "Access Proxies".  Such Access Proxies are session 
   stateful, may record-route or act as B2BUAs, and typically have 
   authorization or admission policies, but do not directly query the 
   Registrar database for AoR-to-Contact binding resolution 
   information.   
    
   If the Access Proxy receives a dialog-forming SIP Request from a 
   registered UA, then upstream mid-dialog requests to that UA will 
 
 
Kaplan                   Expires - April 2011                 [Page 3] 
Internet-Draft         Problems with SIP GRUUs           October 2010 
 
 
   cause the Access Proxy to follow [RFC3261] and route them to the 
   Request-URI of the mid-dialog request.  If that Request-URI is the 
   initial Contact-URI of the dialog-forming request, and it was a 
   GRUU, then the Access Proxy may fail to route it to the UA because 
   the GRUU identifies the Access Proxy's own domain rather than the 
   UA's address, and thus causes an unexpected spiral. 
    
   For example, suppose Alice is a registered UA of domain 
   "example.com", with a public GRUU of "sip:alice@example.com;gr=foo".  
   Alice sends Bob an INVITE request with her GRUU as the Contact-URI 
   of the INVITE, through her Access Proxy.  The Access Proxy inserts a 
   Record-Route of "sip:aproxy.example.com".  The INVITE establishes a 
   dialog, with Bob storing a route set of "sip:aproxy.example.com" and 
   a remote target of "sip:alice@example.com;gr=foo".  If Bob generates 
   a BYE to end the dialog, he will set the Request-URI of the BYE to 
   "sip:alice@example.com;gr=foo", with a Route header of 
   "sip:aproxy.example.com".  The Access Proxy receives the request, 
   pops the Route header, and will try to route using 
   "sip:alice@example.com;gr=foo", which will cause a loop. 
    
   The intention of [RFC5627] is for originating and terminating 
   Proxies to record-route in many cases, as described in section 6.2 
   of [RFC5627].  In particular, if the Access Proxy inserts a Record-
   Route header as described above, and it passes through an 
   authoritative Proxy-Registrar, then the authoritative Proxy-
   Registrar would also insert a Record-Route, and per the rules of 
   [RFC3261] and section 6.1 of [RFC5627], the authoritative Proxy-
   Registrar would replace the GRUU in the Request-URI of the BYE to be 
   the real registered Contact URI.  In such a case the Access Proxy 
   would receive the real registered Contact URI as the Request-URI, 
   and all would be good.  But what if the Access Proxy did not route 
   the request through an authoritative Registrar-Proxy, or what if the 
   Access Proxy were a B2BUA instead? 
    
   This type of scenario actually occurred in initial deployments.  In 
   the initial deployment case, the Access Proxy was not inserting a 
   Record-Route of itself, but was instead a B2BUA inserting a new 
   Contact-URI of itself, which it mapped back to the original (GRUU) 
   Contact-URI.  The authoritative Registrar-Proxy never sees the GRUU 
   Contact nor a Record-Route.  Therefore, in the initial deployment, 
   the B2BUA received its own Contact URI in the Request-URI of the 
   BYE, mapped it to "sip:alice@example.com;gr=foo", and failed to 
   resolve that because it did not have any special/new handling for 
   GRUUs. 
    
   Even if the Access Proxy had been Record-Routing, however, it would 
   have failed in certain cases.  A request from Alice to Bob need not 
   go to any Proxy with access to the Registration database.  For 
   example, Access Proxies can typically route calls for Emergency 
 
 
Kaplan                   Expires - April 2011                 [Page 4] 
Internet-Draft         Problems with SIP GRUUs           October 2010 
 
 
   numbers directly to gateways/peers, or Bob could simply be a 
   conference server known to the Access Proxy to which it can route 
   directly.  In such cases, no authoritative Registrar-Proxy would be 
   in the path to perform the mid-dialog Request-URI rewriting.  
   Neither [RFC3261] nor [RFC5627] require all requests from a UA to 
   route through that UA's authoritative Registrar-Proxy, and yet that 
   is the only way a GRUU model could work as currently defined. 
    
   The obvious solution is for the originating UA (Alice) to insert a 
   Record-Route of her actual/real registered Contact-URI in the 
   dialog-forming request.  Arguably this should have been the model 
   from the beginning for [RFC5627].  An uglier but sometimes easier to 
   deploy solution is for the Access Proxy to insert a Record-Route in 
   the dialog-forming request on the originating UA's (Alice's) behalf, 
   using the Via information as a pseudo-Contact.  This latter method 
   has issues if the originating UA is not directly communicating with 
   the Access Proxy (i.e., if there is another Proxy in-between).  
   Access Proxies which are B2BUAs with registration caching (e.g., 
   SBC's) can insert a Record-Route of the matched registered contact, 
   instead, to avoid such issues. 
    
4. Problems with B2BUAs 
    
   It is quite common for SIP requests to be processed by B2BUAs on 
   their way to the "final" UA destinations.  There are many types of 
   B2BUAs which may be in the path: IP-PBXs, Feature Servers, 
   Application Servers, Session Border Controllers, Transcoding 
   Servers, Call-Continuity Servers, etc. 
    
   The degree to which specific elements act as SIP Proxies vs. full 
   B2BUAs varies, but it is quite common for such servers to replace 
   the received Contact URI of requests with their own URI.  In fact, 
   arguably they *have to* replace the Contact, because by definition 
   they are the UAC of the request they create from a received request 
   on their UAS side.  From a logical perspective, the SIP request they 
   received as a UAS ends at them, and a brand new one is generated by 
   them on their UAC side.  In the extreme case, a B2BUA may be 
   considered the logical equivalent of two SIP-PSTN gateways connected 
   to each other with a PRI trunk. 
    
   Because B2BUAs replace the Contact URI of forwarded requests, the 
   final SIP UAS will not receive the GRUU of the original UAC, and may 
   not receive a GRUU at all.  The Contact URI it receives will be the 
   URI of the last B2BUA crossed before the request reached the UAS, 
   which may not be a GRUU nor have GRUU properties.  In particular, 
   the Contact URI may contain an IP Address or hostname which is not 
   reachable from everywhere on the Internet, and/or it may only be 
   usable for the duration of the dialog its request created. 
    
 
 
Kaplan                   Expires - April 2011                 [Page 5] 
Internet-Draft         Problems with SIP GRUUs           October 2010 
 
 
   Attempts have been made to resolve this by having B2BUAs not change 
   the Contact URI if it is a GRUU (i.e., has a 'gr' param).  The 
   rationale was that since a GRUU identifies a globally routable URI, 
   it would be more likely to succeed for out-of-dialog requests than a 
   URI of the B2BUA that would be specific to the B2BUA's interfaces. 
 
   However passing GRUUs through a B2BUA can only be done in very 
   specific conditions, and often with unforeseen consequences.  Since 
   any future out-of-dialog requests may use the GRUU as their target, 
   the B2BUA cannot expect to receive such requests if the GRUU is not 
   its own URI.  Although Record-Routing will keep in-dialog requests 
   reaching the B2BUA, one of the main use-cases of GRUUs is for call-
   transfer scenarios using out-of-dialog requests (REFER and INVITE 
   with [RFC3891] Replaces header), and there is no guarantee such out-
   of-dialog requests will go through the same B2BUA which processed 
   the original dialog. 
    
   In particular, if the B2BUA changed the Call-ID or tags of the 
   original dialog, as many do, then an out-of-dialog REFER or INVITE 
   with Replaces header won't work if it reaches the UA without passing 
   through the same B2BUA, because the dialog identifiers of the 
   Replaces won't be fixed by the B2BUA to match what the UA expects.  
   If the B2BUA performs "REFER termination", whereby it processes the 
   REFER on behalf of the UA instead of forwarding it on, then passing 
   on the GRUU of the UA won't always work.  If the B2BUA performs 
   IPv4-IPv6 interworking, SIP to/from SIP-I/SIP-T interworking, PRACK 
   to/from non-PRACK interworking, transport layer-type interworking, 
   transcoding, or possibly other forms of interworking, then passing 
   on the GRUU may not work unless the same type of interworking 
   function is guaranteed to be in the path for all requests to that 
   GRUU.  See later sections of this document for other cases in which 
   a B2BUA passing on the GRUU won't work. 
    
   Fundamentally, it is not logical for most B2BUAs to "pass on" a 
   GRUU.  The functions they perform are typically on behalf of the UA, 
   as if the functions were in the UA to begin with, and thus they 
   represent a logical "interface" of that UA and the Contact URI needs 
   to identify that specific "interface".  Furthermore, from a SIP 
   context perspective, the request ended at the B2BUA, and a new one 
   began - one belonging to the B2BUA - and generating a new request 
   using another device's Contact URI is bound to fail. 
    
   One option is for the B2UA to generate a self-made GRUU of its own, 
   which it can map to the Contact URI it received.  Unfortunately, by 
   definition such a GRUU's de-referenced B2BUA must be publicly 
   reachable on the public Internet, by *any device that receives it*, 
   on both IPv4 and IPv6.  Such is almost never the case, cannot be 
   known in advance, and may cause more issues than it solves.  
   Specifically, it may cause more issues if a downstream B2BUA 
 
 
Kaplan                   Expires - April 2011                 [Page 6] 
Internet-Draft         Problems with SIP GRUUs           October 2010 
 
 
   attempts to pass through the GRUU Contact when it would have 
   otherwise used its own Contact URI. (see later sections for 
   additional issues) 
    
   Instead, a logically similar model has been successfully deployed 
   using "Global Contacts", which are Contact URIs having the 
   properties of a GRUU, but not being a GRUU in syntax (i.e., without 
   a 'gr' param, and not indicating an AoR).  This has the benefit that 
   downstream B2BUAs/UAs will not treat the Contact as a special GRUU 
   case. Global Contacts are not always valid after their dialog is 
   terminated, but it remains to be seen if this will cause problems in 
   the future.  Currently the main use-case for GRUU-like properties is 
   for call-transfer scenarios, for which dialog lifetime is 
   sufficient. 
    
5. Problems with Global Reachability 
    
   The original intent of a GRUU was to be globally reachable, from 
   anywhere on the Internet.  If it weren't, then one would think it 
   would simply have the same behavior as normal non-GRUU URIs, and be 
   no worse than using a regular Contact URI.  Unfortunately, this 
   isn't always the case.  Section 4.5 of [RFC5627] has the following 
   statement: 
    
     Some UAs implement non-standard URI-handling mechanisms that 
     compensate for the fact that heretofore many contact URIs have not 
     been globally routable.  Since any URI containing the "gr" URI 
     parameter is known to be globally routable, a UA SHOULD NOT apply 
     such mechanisms when a contact URI contains the "gr" URI 
     parameter. 
    
   Furthermore, [RFC5589] prescribes sending a REFER outside of the 
   INVITE dialog if a GRUU is available, since with a GRUU the 
   Transferor "knows the Contact URI is routable outside the dialog".  
    
   Currently deployed networks that don't use or have GRUUs have 
   implemented alternate means of making call-transfer scenarios work.  
   If the UAs in such networks behave differently when they encounter a 
   GRUU, and the GRUU isn't actually routable for them, the scenario 
   will fail when it would have previously succeeded.  Furthermore, if 
   a B2BUA in the request path does not replace the Contact-URI 
   *because* it is a GRUU, then using a GRUU that is not actually 
   globally routable will cause failure, whereas inserting its own 
   Contact-URI would have otherwise worked. 
    
   In theory, creating a GRUU which is not globally routable is simply 
   a user error or system defect, however in practice it's difficult if 
   not impossible for the system or user to know a priori whether a 

 
 
Kaplan                   Expires - April 2011                 [Page 7] 
Internet-Draft         Problems with SIP GRUUs           October 2010 
 
 
   GRUU is globally routable or not.  The reasons for this are 
   described in the following sections. 
    
5.1. Access-Restricted Domains 
    
   In practice, even if they use SIP on the public Internet, most SIP 
   domains are access-restricted, meaning only authorized subscriber 
   UAs and known peers are allowed to send requests into the domain.  
   Any SIP request from unauthorized agents are rejected or discarded.  
   This is typically done with either layer-3/4 access control lists 
   (ACLs), SIP layer access controls, or digest authentication.   
    
   Section 4.3 of [RFC5627] describes the conditions required to use a 
   self-made GRUU, including that Firewall policies must allow requests 
   that reference a GRUU to pass into the network.  However, it is not 
   as clear that this condition even holds for Registrar-provided 
   GRUUs; the Registrar must not provide GRUUs if the GRUU cannot be 
   de-referenced and used by anyone, anywhere on the Internet, to reach 
   the Registrar.  But how would a Registrar know such a thing?  It 
   can't, because the access policies aren't all implemented in the 
   Registrar typically.  Only the domain administrator humans would 
   know this, and even then it may not be clear to them all the 
   conditions under which their domain must be available. 
    
   For example, one of the initial deployments of GRUUs involved an 
   Enterprise SIP-based domain, where the vendor of the Enterprise SIP 
   Registrar/Proxy and UAs used GRUUs by default.  As often occurs in 
   Enterprise deployments, a Firewall-type device was deployed between 
   the Registrar/Proxy and the public Internet, with rules to only 
   allow SIP in from known corporate branches, home office users, 
   partner sites, and their SIP Trunk providers.  By definition, the 
   Firewall's policies make GRUUs no longer globally routable to the 
   Enterprise, and thus it should not be using GRUUs.  But the 
   Enterprise IT personnel were not SIP protocol experts and had no 
   idea they needed to change their system configurations.  It is not 
   even clear the vendor of the Registrar/Proxy systems understands 
   those implications, because one would think they shouldn't make 
   GRUUs a default behavior given typical Enterprise deployments. 
    
5.2. Routing-Restricted Domains 
    
   A property of many deployed SIP domains is that they cannot simply 
   send SIP requests to anywhere on the public Internet.  For example 
   an Enterprise SIP domain with policies to only use their service 
   providers' SIP Trunks or known partners or users, or a SIP Service 
   Provider (SSP) with policies to only send requests to subscribers, 
   peers, and their Enterprise customer SIP Trunks.  They may even use 
   [RFC3263] procedures with DNS to route SIP requests externally, but 

 
 
Kaplan                   Expires - April 2011                 [Page 8] 
Internet-Draft         Problems with SIP GRUUs           October 2010 
 
 
   only to known domains with which they have a pre-existing 
   relationship. 
    
   From a high-level, such SIP domains are "routing-restricted", 
   meaning they can only route SIP requests based on specific local 
   policies.  Routing-restricted domains are ubiquitous in SSPs, and in 
   certain Enterprise vertical markets such as financial, medical and 
   government sectors. 
    
   The problem with using GRUUs is not that routing-restricted domains 
   can't provide GRUUs to its UAs for use as Contact-URIs in outbound 
   requests - technically they could if they were not also access-
   restricted, although most if not all routing-restricted domains are 
   also access-restricted.  The real problem is that SIP requests *sent 
   to* the routing-restricted domain can't use GRUUs for Contact-URIs, 
   because the routing-restricted domain itself cannot de-reference a 
   GRUU unless the GRUU's domain happens to be one it can route to 
   based on its local policies.  Since there is virtually no way for 
   the originating or receiving domain to know where a GRUU used in a 
   Contact-URI may end up going to, or what the local policies of a 
   domain that attempts to de-reference the GRUU are, they can't be 
   used anytime safely. 
    
5.3. IPv6 Reachability 
    
   The stipulation for GRUUs in [RFC5627] is that they be globally 
   reachable on the "public Internet".  Unfortunately, there are *two* 
   public Internets: one using IPv4 and one using IPv6.  One of the 
   non-obvious implications of "global reachability" is that the domain 
   of the GRUU must be reachable on both, because the GRUU may be 
   passed on to IPv6-only UAs or domains, or vice-versa. 
    
   In theory, the transition to IPv6 implies that at some point there 
   will be IPv6-only domains or UAs.  If they receive a GRUU which is 
   actually only available through IPv4, it cannot be de-referenced, 
   unless they employ an IPv4-IPv6 interworking function for both 
   signaling and media.  A GRUU-providing domain, however, has no idea 
   if an IPv6-only domain has such a function available. 
    
6. Alternatives to GRUU 
    
   The original motivation for defining GRUUs was to handle call-
   transfer scenarios, where a normal Contact URI of the established 
   dialog might not be usable by the transferor or transferee for 
   targeting out-of-dialog requests such as REFER or INVITE with 
   Replaces header.   
    
   For example, Alice calls Bob, who transfers her to Charlie by 
   calling Charlie and then sending Charlie a REFER to INVITE Alice.   
 
 
Kaplan                   Expires - April 2011                 [Page 9] 
Internet-Draft         Problems with SIP GRUUs           October 2010 
 
 
   Alternatively Alice could be the one issuing the REFER to Charlie to 
   INVITE Bob, but the issues are the same.  Either way, the REFER may 
   be out-of-dialog but needs to reach Charlie, and Charlie's out-of-
   dialog INVITE needs to reach Alice (or Bob). 
    
   In practice, this problem has been solved other ways than with 
   GRUUs.  The primary "solution" employed today, as far as this author 
   can tell, is to process the REFER in a B2BUA which has the dialog 
   information of the other dialog(s).  For example, an Enterprise IP-
   PBX which is in the SIP signaling path for all calls to/from Bob 
   would receive Bob's attended-transfer REFER to Charlie, accept it 
   and generate re-INVITEs to Alice and Charlie bridging the media for 
   the calls but without Alice or Charlie handling REFER or INVITE with 
   Replaces.  Because the IP-PBX processes the REFER itself, it need 
   never send an out-of-dialog request to a specific UA instance to 
   begin with.  The "solution", then, is to avoid the problem 
   altogether.  Since this type of solution also removes the need for 
   the transferee to support REFER and the transfer-target to support 
   the Replaces header, and hides the transferee's identity, it is very 
   popular. 
    
   Furthermore, due to the proliferation of B2BUAs in the signaling 
   path, it's not very common that a Contact URI is not routable-to by 
   a UA.  The odds are good that the Contact URI that Bob receives in a 
   request belongs to a B2BUA that is reachable by Bob and Charlie; and 
   thus when Bob or Charlie sends an out-of-dialog request to that 
   Contact URI, it can be reached. If not, then it's because Charlie is 
   outside of Bob's domain and thus Bob's REFER to Charlie goes back 
   through the B2BUA, or through another B2BUA which can also reach the 
   first B2BUA. It's rarely the case that there would be a Bob who 
   could refer a Charlie that cannot reach the same B2BUA.  It's 
   possible, of course, but highly unlikely in practice.  Therefore, 
   there has rarely been a problem for GRUU to solve.  Alternatively, 
   some B2BUAs can generate "Global Contacts", as described previously 
   in Section 4. 
    
    
7. Conclusion 
    
   In summary, the following points have been made: 
   -  Generating GRUUs which are not actually globally routable may 
     cause more harm than not using GRUUs 
   -  A GRUU generator has no practical means of determining if the 
     GRUU is globally routable, by every device which can receive it 
   -  B2BUAs should continue to replace Contact URIs, regardless of 
     them being a GRUU or not 
   -  Access Proxies/SBCs need to take special care when handling GRUU-
     based Contact requests 
    
 
 
Kaplan                   Expires - April 2011                [Page 10] 
Internet-Draft         Problems with SIP GRUUs           October 2010 
 
 
8. Security Considerations 
    
   There are no specific security issues for this document, since it 
   does not propose any new mechanism.  
    
    
9.   IANA Considerations 
    
   There are no requirements for IANA in this document. 
    
10.  References 
    
10.1.     Informative References 
 
    [RFC3261]  Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., Camarillo, G., Johnston, 
         A., Peterson, J., Sparks, R., Handley, M., and E. Schooler, 
         "SIP: Session Initiation Protocol", RFC 3261, June 2002. 
     
    [RFC3891] Mahy, R., Biggs, B., Dean, R., "The Session Initiation 
         Protocol (SIP) 'Replaces' Header", RFC 3891, September 2004.  
      
    [RFC5589] Sparks, R., Johnston, A., Petrie, D., "Session Initiation 
         Protocol (SIP) Call Control - Transfer", RFC 5589, June 2009. 
      
    [RFC5627] Rosenberg, J., "Obtaining and Using Globally Routable 
         User Agent URIs (GRUUs) in the Session Initiation Protocol 
         (SIP)", RFC 5627, October 2009. 
     
     
 
Author's Address
    
   Hadriel Kaplan
   Acme Packet
   100 Crosby Drive
   Bedford, MA 01703
    
   Email: hkaplan@acmepacket.com
    










 
 
Kaplan                   Expires - April 2011                [Page 11] 