


ENUM Working Group                                            H. Kaplan 
Internet Draft                                              Acme Packet 
Intended status: Informational                                  C. Pons 
Expires: January 11, 2011                                           KPN 
                                                          July 12, 2010 
    
    
                      Routing SIP Requests with ENUM 
                     draft-kaplan-enum-sip-routing-01 
    
    
Status of this Memo 
    
   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with 
   the provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents 
   at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as 
   reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt. 
    
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
 
   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 12, 2011.  
    
Copyright and License Notice 
    
   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the 
   document authors.  All rights reserved.  
        
   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal 
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents 
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of 
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents 
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with 
   respect to this document.  Code Components extracted from this 
   document must include Simplified BSD License text as described in 
   Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without 
   warranty as described in the BSD License. 
    

 
 
Kaplan                 Expires January 1, 2010               [Page 1] 
Internet-Draft           ENUM for SIP Routing                July 2010 
 
 
Abstract

   A common ENUM use-case is for hop-by-hop or domain-by-domain 
   "routing" of SIP requests, using private DNS trees and servers.  
   This document describes this use-case and the need for a source-
   based query/answer mechanism for such. 
    

Table of Contents
    
   1.    Terminology.................................................2 
   2.    Introduction................................................2 
      2.1.   Background.............................................3 
   3.    The Problem.................................................4 
      3.1.   Why ENUM-DNS vs. Other Protocols.......................5 
   4.    The Proposed Solution.......................................5 
      4.1.   Alternative Solutions..................................6 
   5.    Security Considerations.....................................6 
   6.    IANA Considerations.........................................6 
   7.    References..................................................6 
      7.1.   Normative References...................................6 
      7.2.   Informative References.................................7 
   Authors' Addresses................................................7 
   Acknowledgment....................................................7 


1. Terminology
    
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119.  The 
   terminology in this document conforms to RFC 2828, "Internet 
   Security Glossary". 
    
   For the purposes of this document and sake of simplicity, only the 
   ENUM/DNS NAPTR URI result for a SIP URI is discussed, but it applies 
   to H.323 and other URIs as well. 
    
   Prefix: in this document, the term "prefix" is just some arbitrary 
   number of the leading digits of an E.164 number, such as the country 
   code, or country plus region, or even including the local exchange 
   portion.  It does not mean additional pre-pended digits used only 
   for internal routing but which are not part of the called/calling 
   number, for which the term "prefix" is also commonly used. 
    
2. Introduction
    
   The E.164 number to URI DDDS (ENUM) application provides a mapping 
   from E.164-based "names" to various URIs, including SIP, H.323, and 
 
 
Kaplan                  Expires - January 2007                [Page 2] 
Internet-Draft           ENUM for SIP Routing                July 2010 
 
 
   others, as defined in [RFC3761].  The reader is assumed to be 
   familiar with ENUM and its normative documents.   
    
   The goal of this document is to describe one of the common uses of 
   ENUM today: SIP Request Routing.  SIP Routing using ENUM generally 
   works very well, but it still missing one important capability: 
   source-based queries and results, whereby the resultant routes are 
   based on the source of the SIP requests.  This source-based routing 
   problem is described in this document, without describing the 
   solution.  A solution has been proposed in another draft, [draft-
   source-uri], which has been implemented by multiple vendors and is 
   in use. 
    
2.1. Background 
    
   When it was originally created, ENUM DNS entries were intended to be 
   under the authority of the entity or person identified by the E.164 
   number, and be something the end user could populate.  For example, 
   for SIP the resultant URI would be the user's global SIP Address-of-
   Record URI, or even a specific SIP Contact URI of the user's SIP 
   User-Agent host.  This model is sometimes called "End User ENUM".  
   In practice, this model has seen fairly limited deployment or use, 
   for numerous reasons which will not be enumerated in this document. 
    
   Another model called "Infrastructure ENUM" or "Carrier ENUM", 
   described in [RFC5526], changes the authority model of the ENUM DNS 
   entries to make the registrant be the carrier-of-record, as opposed 
   to the end user.  In the Infrastructure ENUM model, the returned URI 
   was intended to represent a "point of interconnection" into the 
   carrier-of-record's SIP domain, such as an SBE. 
    
   While there are deployments of Infrastructure ENUM, in practice it 
   is not often deployed as originally defined.  The public DNS 
   database cannot reasonably be usable for URIs which represent 
   specific points of interconnection or ingress, because such URIs are 
   rarely usable in a global context; only carriers with direct access 
   to the interconnection points can use such URIs to reach the 
   carrier-of-record, and even then the interconnection points would be 
   different per originating carrier. 
    
   One could use specific DNS "views" for Infrastructure ENUM, to 
   return different answers per querying carrier IP Address range, but 
   that is difficult to accomplish in the public DNS, in a scalable 
   manner.  A more reasonable URI to return from the public DNS 
   database would be a globally reachable SIP Address-of-Record, but 
   one for which the carrier-of-record is the registrant.  
   Unfortunately, even that type of URI is difficult to use; both 
   because many carriers do not wish to publish such data in a public 

 
 
Kaplan                  Expires - January 2007                [Page 3] 
Internet-Draft           ENUM for SIP Routing                July 2010 
 
 
   database, and because in practice few Address-of-Records are 
   actually globally, directly, and publicly reachable. 
    
   An alternative model, often called "Private ENUM", is widely 
   deployed.  Private ENUM uses the DNS Protocol, but not the public 
   DNS Database.  Instead, the database either uses a private domain 
   suffix/apex reserved for this purpose and known to all participants, 
   or is provided by local DNS servers which do not tie into the public 
   IANA-based tree, or more commonly both privacy tactics are used.  
   The Private ENUM DNS servers typically reside in a private or 
   restricted IP network, and are only accessible to specific clients.  
   Such Private ENUM clients are typically constrained to be ones owned 
   and managed by the carrier, such as SIP Proxies, Application 
   Servers, PSTN Gateways, Soft-switches, and Session Border 
   Controllers.  
    
   Unlike Infrastructure ENUM, Private ENUM DNS database entries are 
   not registered and populated by the carrier-of-record for a given 
   E.164 number.  Instead, the private database's administrator (the 
   local carrier) directly provisions the entries for all E.164 numbers 
   it cares about, based on various indirect information data sources, 
   and sets the entry URI values relative to their specific "view".   
    
   In some cases the resolved URI still does not represent a point of 
   interconnection, such as when it is just used for Number Portability 
   or Calling Name resolution; in other cases it represents a specific 
   interconnection point: either for the peering SBE(s) or tandem PSTN 
   Gateway(s).  The interconnection URI identifies either a host, or 
   possibly also a Trunk Group.  When Private ENUM is used for local 
   interconnection point resolution for SIP requests, it is typically 
   described as providing an "ENUM Routing" service, or as "SIP Routing 
   using ENUM".   
    
3. The Problem 
    
   SIP routing based on private-ENUM resolution has been gaining ground 
   in some large SIP operator networks.  However, a need has arisen to 
   respond with different ENUM responses based on the source 
   originating number or domain of the SIP request.  There are various 
   reasons for this need, a non-exhaustive list of which are itemized 
   as follows: 
    
     . It is often cheaper to route calls from local source prefix 
        numbers to other local prefixes numbers in a given region 
        directly, whereas out-of-region sources going to the same 
        destination numbers of the same carrier may be cheaper or even 
        legally required to be sent through an interexchange or transit 
        provider, or even the PSTN. 
    
 
 
Kaplan                  Expires - January 2007                [Page 4] 
Internet-Draft           ENUM for SIP Routing                July 2010 
 
 
     . For interconnection traffic between carriers, where calls 
        coming from a specific region or originating peer need to be 
        routed through specific routes or border elements to the 
        terminating or next-peer, usually due to billing and 
        commercial-related reasons. 
    
     . For specific destination numbers, such as premium rate numbers, 
        where calls towards these specific destination numbers need to 
        be routed based on the originating region or ingress border 
        element, to a specific destination node or a specific border 
        element towards a next-peer, usually due to operational and 
        capacity management issues. 
 
     . For Emergency Services destination numbers, where the 
        originating information affects the chosen emergency center for 
        a call. 
    
3.1. Why ENUM-DNS vs. Other Protocols 
    
   A common question raised in the IETF regarding using DNS for SIP 
   routing is why use DNS to begin with, instead of another database 
   query protocol or even SIP itself (through SIP redirect servers).  
   In the authors' opinions, the following are the major advantages of 
   DNS which are driving the market for Private-ENUM: 
     1. Performance - DNS queries and responses are single-transaction, 
        compact size, efficiently parsed, and can be used over a 
        connectionless transport (UDP).  Compared to SIP Redirect and 
        other protocols, the performance gains can be drastic. 
     2. Scalability - DNS has an underlying database scalability model 
        built into the protocol itself, and taken advantage of by 
        ENUM's naming scheme, which does not natively exist in other 
        database protocols nor for SIP Redirect 
     3. Resiliency - since DNS uses a single request-response 
        transaction model and runs over UDP, it can be deployed using 
        an anycast addressing model 
     4. Interoperability - DNS is a simple, well-understood protocol 
        with significant maturity and developer experience 
     5. Time-to-market - most SIP devices already have DNS libraries, 
        and can leverage them for ENUM use fairly quickly 
    
    
4. The Proposed Solution 
    
   The proposed solution uses a new EDNS0 Option code, in [draft-
   source-uri], to add the source SIP URI information into the ENUM DNS 
   query.  The source URI would be the P-Asserted-Identity URI of the 
   SIP request to be routed, possibly including [RFC4904] Trunk-group 
   parameters from the originating trunk group, if applicable.  This 
   source URI info would be used by the responding DNS server to 
 
 
Kaplan                  Expires - January 2007                [Page 5] 
Internet-Draft           ENUM for SIP Routing                July 2010 
 
 
   "filter" its response based on the source information as 
   appropriate. 
    
4.1. Alternative Solutions 
    
   Today such source-based routing with ENUM is performed through 
   various means, which are usually cumbersome and error-prone.  These 
   mechanisms typically require the Private ENUM clients and servers to 
   agree on a common scheme, and thus require every SIP Proxy to know 
   and use the same proprietary scheme, which leads to interoperability 
   problems when multiple vendors are used. 
    
   A common example is where the SIP Proxies performing the lookup 
   change the ENUM base domain name suffix based on the source E.164 
   number leading digits, and thus the ENUM-DNS servers have a separate 
   zone per source prefix.  Such a scheme needs to be fixed and common; 
   for example that a 7-digit prefix length always be used for the name 
   suffix, instead of for only specific source or destination numbers; 
   the relevant source prefix cannot be a different length for 
   different numbers, prefixes, or call flows. 
    
   Another example is where the ENUM server returns all possible NAPTR 
   entries in the DNS response, with proprietary indicators in the 
   NAPTR URIs for the client SIP Proxy to choose from, using the SIP 
   source information it has.  The problem with this approach is that 
   the same selection algorithm needs to be supported by all clients, 
   and the DNS response size can grow very, very large.  For example, 
   some routing tables in North America need to have entries for 
   hundreds of North American Numbering Plan (NANP) area codes and 
   local-exchange prefixes, for the same destination number.  
    
    
5. Security Considerations 
    
   There are no specific security issues for this document, beyond 
   those already applicable to DNS and ENUM.  
    
    
6.   IANA Considerations 
    
   This document makes no request of IANA. 
    
7.   References 
    
7.1. Normative References 
 
   [EDNS0]  Vixie, P., "Extension Mechanisms for DNS (EDNS0)", RFC 
   2671, August 1999. 
    
 
 
Kaplan                  Expires - January 2007                [Page 6] 
Internet-Draft           ENUM for SIP Routing                July 2010 
 
 
   [RFC3261]  Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., Camarillo, G., Johnston, 
   A., Peterson, J., Sparks, R., Handley, M., and E. Schooler, "SIP: 
   Session Initiation Protocol", RFC 3261, June 2002. 
     
   [RFC3761]  Faltstrom, P., Mealling, M., "The E.164 to Uniform 
   Resource Identifiers (URI) Dynamic Delegation Discovery System 
   (DDDS) Application (ENUM)", RFC 3761, April 2004. 
     
   [RFC3966] Schulzrinne, H., "The tel URI for Telephone Numbers", RFC 
   3966, December 2004. 
    
   [RFC4904] Gurbani, V., Jennings, C., "Representing Trunk Groups in 
   tel/sip Uniform Resource Identifiers (URIs)", RFC 4904, June 2007. 
    
    
7.2. Informative References 
 
   [draft-source-uri] Kaplan, H.,  Reid, J., " EDNS Option Code for SIP 
   Source Reference", draft-kaplan-dnsext-enum-sip-source-ref-opt-code-
   00, July 2010. 

Authors' Addresses

   Hadriel Kaplan
   Acme Packet
   Email: hkaplan@acmepacket.com
 
   Colin Pons
   KPN
   Email: colin.pons@kpn.com
 
Acknowledgment 
    
   Funding for the RFC Editor function is provided by the IETF 
   Administrative Support Activity (IASA). 
    













 
 
Kaplan                  Expires - January 2007                [Page 7]