
STIR Working Group                                            H. Kaplan 
Internet Draft                                                   Oracle 
Intended status: Informational                        September 3, 2013 
Expires: March 30, 2014                                                 
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
    
    
                Secure Telephone Identity Revisited (STIR)  
     Frequently Repeated Information and Explanation Document (FRIED) 
                        draft-kaplan-stir-fried-00 
    
    
Abstract
    
   This document is a type of FAQ (Frequently Asked Questions) for new 
   STIR Working Group participants.  Since its inception three months 
   ago there have been over 1,500 emails on the mailing list, before 
   the WG was even formed.  Some of the emails repeat topics, because 
   newcomers cannot be expected to read all previous emails in the 
   archive.  This document is an attempt to capture some of the 
   previously asked and answered questions.  
    
   This document is written by one individual, is not intended to be 
   published as an RFC, and is only meant as a temporary FAQ while the 
   Working Group begins.  The document attempts to provide both high-
   level information for non-experts, as well as low-level information 
   for protocol experts. 
    
Status of this Memo
    
   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with 
   the provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents 
   at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as 
   reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt. 
    
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
 
 
Kaplan                    Expires March 2014                  [Page 1] 
Internet-Draft                STIR FRIED                September 2013 
 
 
 
   This Internet-Draft will expire on March 3, 2014.  
    
Copyright Notice
    
   Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the 
   document authors.  All rights reserved.  
        
   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal 
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents 
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of 
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents 
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with 
   respect to this document.  Code Components extracted from this 
   document must include Simplified BSD License text as described in 
   Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without 
   warranty as described in the Simplified BSD License. 
    
Table of Contents
    
   1. Introduction..................................................4 
   2. Terminology...................................................4 
   3. Background....................................................5 
      3.1. What's the general problem?..............................5 
      3.2. Aren't there existing solutions to this problem?.........5 
      3.3. Can't we use other info to detect robocalls?.............6 
      3.4. What's STIR trying to solve then?........................7 
      3.5. Is STIR sufficient to stop robocalls or fraud?...........7 
      3.6. Why focus on calling number, vs. other identities?.......7 
      3.7. Hasn't it always been possible to fake caller-id?........8 
      3.8. Why are the attacks growing now?.........................8 
      3.9. Is this a USA-specific problem?..........................8 
      3.10. Why will carriers adopt this?...........................8 
      3.11. Will countries do this for international calls to others?9 
      3.12. Isn't this the same problem email has for spam?........10 
      3.13. What scale does a solution need to achieve?............10 
   4. Behavioral changes...........................................11 
      4.1. Will invalid calling numbers be blocked?................11 
      4.2. Will calls from non-STIR-enabled carriers be blocked?...11 
      4.3. What difference or changes will consumers see?..........11 
      4.4. Will this prevent legitimate caller-agent calls?........12 
      4.5. Will doctors still be able to use their office number?..12 
      4.6. Will this prevent legitimate out-sourced call-centers?..13 
      4.7. Who needs to implement this new technology?.............13 
      4.8. What other industry organizations are involved?.........13 
   5. Calling Number vs. Calling Name..............................13 
      5.1. What is "calling number" vs. "calling name"?............13 
      5.2. Why isn't STIR validating calling names?................13 

 
 
Kaplan                    Expires March 2014                  [Page 2] 
Internet-Draft                STIR FRIED                September 2013 
 
 
      5.3. Why is it hard to validate calling names?...............14 
   6. Privacy......................................................14 
      6.1. Does STIR impact privacy?...............................15 
      6.2. How do anonymous calls work with STIR?..................15 
      6.3. But can't the carrier still determine the caller?.......15 
      6.4. Why do we need to hide the carrier's identity?..........15 
      6.5. Why do we need to hide subscriber identity info?........16 
      6.6. Why do we need to hide subscriber reachability info?....16 
   7. Solutions....................................................16 
      7.1. What are the proposed solutions so far, at a high-level?16 
      7.2. What does "in-band" vs. "out-of-band" mean?.............17 
      7.3. Why are there both an in-band and out-of-band solution?.17 
      7.4. Why can't we just do P-Asserted-Identity without STIR?..18 
      7.5. Why can't we just sign using a carrier-wide identity?...18 
      7.6. Why are we only focused on SIP?.........................19 
      7.7. What about other IP-based protocols?....................19 
      7.8. What SIP header is used for the calling number?.........19 
      7.9. Doesn't the SIP From or To URI string change along the path?
           20 
      7.10. Does STIR crypto-sign the SIP From and To URI headers?.20 
      7.11. Does STIR change SIP From or To URI headers?...........21 
   8. In-band Solution Questions...................................21 
      8.1. Don't we already have in-band with RFC 4474 SIP Identity?21 
      8.2. What will happen to RFC 4474?...........................21 
      8.3. What are the proposed in-band solutions so far?.........21 
      8.4. Why not just carry a certificate in the SIP message?....22 
   9. Out-of-band Solution Questions...............................23 
      9.1. What are the proposed out-of-band solutions?............23 
      9.2. What are the major advantages of an out-of-band solution?23 
      9.3. What are the major disadvantages of an out-of-band solution?
           23 
   10. Security Considerations.....................................23 
      10.1. What types of attackers are we worried about?..........23 
      10.2. What are the main threats we are worried about?........24 
      10.3. What types of DoS attacks are we worried about?........24 
      10.4. What types of cut-and-paste attacks are we worried about?25 
      10.5. Why are we not worried about MITM attacks?.............26 
      10.6. Why are we not worried about replay attacks?...........26 
      10.7. Is the call media (audio or video) secured by STIR?....26 
   11. General Security Terminology................................27 
      11.1. What is a private vs. public key?......................27 
      11.2. What does "cryptographically sign" mean?...............28 
      11.3. What is a certificate?.................................28 
      11.4. What is a PKI?.........................................29 
      11.5. What is a Web-PKI?.....................................30 
      11.6. What is wrong with the Web-PKI?........................30 
      11.7. What is an RPKI?.......................................31 
      11.8. What is DKIM?..........................................31 
      11.9. What is DNSSEC?........................................32 
 
 
Kaplan                    Expires March 2014                  [Page 3] 
Internet-Draft                STIR FRIED                September 2013 
 
 
      11.10. Which security model is STIR going to use?............33 
   12. Glossary....................................................33 
   13. IANA Considerations.........................................36 
   14. Acknowledgments.............................................36 
   15. References..................................................36 
      15.1. Informative References.................................36 
   Author's Address.................................................37 
    
    
1. Introduction
    
   The IETF process for forming new Working Groups involves getting a 
   group of interested individuals from various backgrounds together to 
   define a problem and discuss possible solutions.  There is a defined 
   process for forming the actual Working Group, but in general a 
   mailing list is created in advance so that interested individuals 
   can discuss things prior to the formal creation of the Working 
   Group.  Typically, prior to being a Working Group the volume of 
   emails in the list, and number of participants, is not high.  For 
   STIR, that has not been the case: there have been over 1500 emails 
   in the span of three months. 
    
   Since the STIR Working Group expects new participants to join in the 
   near future, repeating some of the more common questions and 
   background information is not efficient.  It is hoped that this 
   document avoids some duplication of questions and answers that might 
   occur. 
    
   Usually Working Groups create formal overview documents and problem 
   statements and so on as official Working Group documents.  That will 
   likely occur for STIR as well, but that takes time and rarely 
   explains things in concrete real-world terms non-experts can 
   understand.  This document is a less formal approach, using a FAQ-
   type model. 
    
   This is an Individual-Draft and the content is only based on the 
   view of one individual (the author). 
    
2. Terminology 
    
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119.  The 
   terminology in this document conforms to RFC 2828, "Internet 
   Security Glossary". 
    
   See section 12 for a glossary of terms related to STIR. 
    

 
 
Kaplan                    Expires March 2014                  [Page 4] 
Internet-Draft                STIR FRIED                September 2013 
 
 
3. Background 
    
3.1. What's the general problem? 
    
   The problem that drove the IETF to form the STIR Working Group is 
   the growth in unsolicited calls in the PSTN - whether it is calls to 
   legacy POTS landlines, mobile phones, VoIP-based phones, business 
   lines, etc.  The United States Federal Communications Commission 
   (FCC) approached several active IETF participants with expertise in 
   this area, to discuss the problem.  The group determined that a 
   necessary piece was missing from any possible solution: the validity 
   of the source telephone number.  The IETF formed a Working Group 
   with the goal of addressing that problem.  STIR is that Working 
   Group. 
    
   Some people have described the problem as "robocallers", but that 
   term includes automated dialers used for telemarketing, political, 
   emergency, and other types of legitimate automated calls.  The real 
   problem is both benign and malicious parties making phone calls to 
   people that don't want to receive their calls.  Thus it's both 
   legitimate telemarketing-type calls, as well as malicious calls made 
   for the purpose of fraud, blackmail, etc.  The number of such 
   malicious cases has risen dramatically in recent years, leading to 
   growing dissatisfaction and in some cases significant loss of money 
   or even potential loss of life [ems-attacks]. 
    
   Note that the STIR work is not aimed at blocking "legitimate" 
   automated dialers, as that requires regulatory policy decisions, not 
   just technical mechanisms.  STIR's focus is quite narrow, as 
   described in Section 3.4. 
    
3.2. Aren't there existing solutions to this problem? 
    
   No.  Numerous solutions have been attempted to combat such attacks, 
   with varying levels of success.  The United States Federal Trade 
   Commission (FTC) even sponsored an open "Robocall Challenge" for 
   solutions to prevent illegal robocalls [robo-challenge].   
    
   Every solution proposed to solve the problem, however, ultimately 
   ends up creating some form of whitelist and/or blacklist reputation 
   model; in some cases the lists are created from crowd-sourced 
   reputations, in some cases from captcha-type tests, and in others 
   from a pay-to-play model. 
    
   Regardless of any solution's merits, or how the whitelist/blacklist 
   is created, in the end they all rely on the ability to match future 
   call attempts to some form of "list" to decide whether the call 
   attempt is good or bad.  Therefore, all any attacker has to do is 
   generate a call attempt that either looks like a good actor on the 
 
 
Kaplan                    Expires March 2014                  [Page 5] 
Internet-Draft                STIR FRIED                September 2013 
 
 
   whitelist, or does not look like a bad actor on the blacklist.  
   Doing so is fairly trivial today in the PSTN, both in SIP and SS7-
   based technologies.  Robocallers can generate constantly random 
   Caller-IDs to avoid blacklists, and can spoof known good Caller-IDs 
   to match whitelists. 
    
   In general, most solutions use the source telephone number of the 
   call (the calling party number) carried by the protocol signaling to 
   determine which list a call belongs in.  Obviously this is only 
   useful if the calling number is in fact available and legitimate: 
   that it truly identifies the call originator, that it is not being 
   randomly changed for every call, and is not spoofing a legitimate 
   user. 
    
   A fundamental requirement of any solution to robocall-type attacks, 
   therefore, is for the called parties or their service providers to 
   have a means of verifying the source identity of received call 
   attempts. 
    
   Note that verifying source identity is not, by itself, sufficient to 
   solve the attacks.  It is only a necessary precursor: a tool that 
   can be used to then build actual solutions with, such as reputation-
   based systems; or it might even just be useful in tracing back the 
   source and securing their entry-path in order to prevent future 
   attacks.  Clearly a legitimate/valid source number does not prove 
   the caller does not have malicious intentions. 
    
3.3. Can't we use other info to detect robocalls? 
    
   Some existing solutions use more than just the calling number 
   information to classify calls, such as the peering trunk the call 
   was received from; but using any other information is going to fail 
   as well, ultimately.  Using additional information may work for 
   specific service providers today, but that is more due to the nature 
   of their particular robocaller attacks today, and the nature of 
   those specific service provider deployments today.  If many large 
   service providers were to try using additional information to 
   prevent robocallers, the nature of the attacks would quickly change 
   to bypass the filter-rules. 
    
   In general, calls arriving at carriers from peering interconnections 
   contain virtually no distinguishing data.  Part of the reason for 
   this is due to the way legacy SS7 technology works; part of it is 
   due to the way interconnection has grown in the past decade.  The 
   only truly distinguishing data is the calling number, whether it is 
   the number to be displayed or the billing number.  Even tracking the 
   transit carrier trunk the call comes in from is not sufficient to 
   distinguish legitimate vs. malicious calls; legitimate calls from 

 
 
Kaplan                    Expires March 2014                  [Page 6] 
Internet-Draft                STIR FRIED                September 2013 
 
 
   the same source number can arrive from different transit peers, and 
   often do today. 
    
3.4. What's STIR trying to solve then? 
    
   The problem that STIR focuses on is not how to prevent attacks or 
   unsolicited calls in the PSTN-type network, but rather how to 
   validate the source telephone number of call requests; the source 
   telephone number that would be used for Caller-ID display, Calling 
   name (LIDB or CNAM) lookups, billing, or similar functions.  The 
   source number may represent a specific human or device, or it may 
   represent a corporation or service. 
    
   In this context, the STIR goal is to determine whether the 
   originating device or system is authorized to use the source 
   telephone number identity claimed in a given request.  In other 
   words: when someone makes a call using a telephone number, can they 
   really claim to represent that number? 
    
   If we can get that problem solved, then we can use that knowledge as 
   a tool to build reputation systems and other techniques to truly 
   prevent malicious attacks; as well as allow people to use other 
   means to block unsolicited legitimate calls.  It also gives us a 
   tool to help track down the offending parties more quickly or 
   easily. 
    
3.5. Is STIR sufficient to stop robocalls or fraud? 
    
   No. It's a necessary piece of the puzzle, but by itself STIR won't 
   stop them.  See the answer to question 3.4.  Note also that STIR 
   just verifies the calling number is valid; malicious parties can 
   still obtain valid E.164 numbers and use them to attack.  For 
   example, in some countries one can buy SIM cards in bulk or in 
   vending machines without any identification, and then use the SIM 
   cards in SIM-boxes to perform bulk calling.  Each call would use a 
   valid E.164 calling number of the SIM card. 
    
3.6. Why focus on calling number, vs. other identities? 
    
   Because it's a real problem today, and telephone numbers are used by 
   billions of devices and people.  There are many forms of identity: 
   calling names, email-style 'user@domain' names, social networking 
   usernames, trademarks, etc.  But the current problem at-hand is the 
   "PSTN", whether it be legacy SS7-based or SIP-based, and telephone 
   numbers are the main form of identifier.  Calling names are also 
   used in the PSTN, of course, but STIR is focused on the number (see 
   section 5). 
    

 
 
Kaplan                    Expires March 2014                  [Page 7] 
Internet-Draft                STIR FRIED                September 2013 
 
 
3.7. Hasn't it always been possible to fake caller-id? 
    
   Yes.  The legacy PSTN has traditionally allowed business PBXs 
   connected with PRI trunks to generate whatever calling number they 
   wanted to for outbound calls.  This was, and continues to be, 
   necessary to allow organizations to generate calls using a main 
   "corporate" type number, even from third parties; for example from 
   outsourced call-centers and branch offices. 
    
   This requirement or need is being maintained for any STIR solution.  
   That's why we describe it as "an identity they're authorized to use" 
   instead of as "their identity" - it may not be the telephone number 
   used to reach back to them, but it is a number they were either 
   directly assigned by the numbering authority, or that the real 
   number "owner" grants them the right to use for making calls. 
    
3.8. Why are the attacks growing now? 
    
   Multiple factors have contributed to the growth:  
     o  the decreasing costs of making phone calls 
     o  the decreasing cost, complexity, time, and resources required 
        to connect to the PSTN trust-network with PRI-type service, 
        such as SIP trunks 
     o  the growth in unregulated and over-the-top VoIP providers 
     o  the availability of open-source software capable of making 
        robocalls with configurable source numbers 
    
   It should be noted that malicious robocalls are generated from 
   various entry points into the PSTN trust-network: for example legacy 
   PRI trunks, SIP and H.323 trunks, SIM-card boxes or gateways, and 
   subscriber VoIP accounts. 
    
3.9. Is this a USA-specific problem? 
    
   No. The USA is one of the several countries for which the factors 
   listed in the answer to question 3.8 have reached large scale, so it 
   is one of the first to have the problem so far.  It has already 
   become a growing problem in other countries [ofcom-work], and will 
   undoubtedly impact many more countries in the near future. 
    
3.10.     Why will carriers adopt this? 
    
   Besides the potential of federal regulation or mandates, there are 
   other motivations for carriers to implement solutions to reduce 
   unsolicited calls - at least malicious ones.  Fraudulent and 
   unsolicited calls lead to widespread customer dissatisfaction, and 
   investigation is extremely expensive and time-consuming. 
    

 
 
Kaplan                    Expires March 2014                  [Page 8] 
Internet-Draft                STIR FRIED                September 2013 
 
 
   In general, most paying subscribers expect the Caller-ID number they 
   see to be valid; and customer support is an expensive way of 
   handling false or invalid Caller-IDs.  A loss of faith in the PSTN 
   impacts the value for all carriers.  If it becomes like email, with 
   constant calls from nefarious sources, the impact will be severe.  
    
   Furthermore, some types of carrier customers even pay extra for 
   receiving Caller-ID number and calling name information; for example 
   business often pay for such services for calls they receive.  If the 
   calling number becomes largely untrustworthy, and likewise the 
   calling name (which is based on the calling number), then the amount 
   carriers can charge for such services diminishes. 
    
   Non-malicious yet unsolicited calls are more difficult: the 
   originating and transit carriers have a monetary incentive to let 
   such calls be made, and terminating carriers frequently have a legal 
   obligation to let such calls reach their destination.  In some 
   countries there are "do-not-call" lists, but not all countries have 
   such models and even for ones that do not all of them are strongly 
   enforced or enforceable.  It might require regulatory policy changes 
   to truly block such calls. 
    
   For calls from unknown or invalid numbers, several possible actions 
   might occur: the numbers can be "anonymized" (shown to users as 
   'unknown'), or sent to voicemail, or routed to an Interactive Voice 
   Response (IVR) system to perform a captcha test or to explain the 
   problem and provide help or resolution support.  These are just 
   examples of what might change. 
    
   Furthermore, third-party reputation systems might allow consumers 
   the ability to block unsolicited yet legal calls, for example 
   through smartphone apps that consumers can control. (see the end of 
   question 3.4) 
    
3.11.     Will countries do this for international calls to others? 
    
   That's unknown, but likely yes.  There are some strong motivations 
   for them to do so.  Ultimately most nations want to have their 
   legitimate international calls delivered, as well as have their 
   calling number displayed.  If STIR becomes widely deployed in a 
   country, such as the United States, and malicious calls continue to 
   arrive from a given country-code, then the US carriers can start 
   anonymizing or outright blocking the calls. 
    
   International Telephony Denial of Service (TDOS) attacks have 
   already occurred against carriers in the US, with randomized 
   originating numbers from the foreign country-code; to stop it the 
   carriers throttled *all* calls from the attacking country-code until 
   the attack stopped.  Governments should not want such measures to be 
 
 
Kaplan                    Expires March 2014                  [Page 9] 
Internet-Draft                STIR FRIED                September 2013 
 
 
   adopted by other nation's carriers for their calls, for obvious 
   reasons. 
    
3.12.     Isn't this the same problem email has for spam? 
    
   Yes, the general problem is similar.  The specifics for phone calls 
   are actually easier in some respects, and harder in others. 
    
   Email has a more difficult challenge because any email client can 
   send emails to any email server, anywhere on the Internet, directly 
   over IP; and they can claim any domain name they wish, even 
   legitimately by buying domain names for virtually free.  Phone calls 
   are slightly easier because E.164 numbers are slightly more 
   difficult to acquire, and in practice there are only a limited 
   number of pre-established connections between carriers through which 
   call requests can be sent; carriers do not accept call requests from 
   just anyone anywhere directly. 
    
   On the other hand email has an easier time determining whether a 
   message is spam, because the email message contains a lot more 
   useful data for determining it, such as the message body of text.  
   If the email spam filter gets it wrong, it's not a huge deal - false 
   positives and false negatives are commonplace in email; if the phone 
   system rejects good calls, though, it can lead to lawsuits or even 
   loss of life. 
    
3.13.     What scale does a solution need to achieve? 
    
   World-wide, there are approximately 220 E.164 country-codes, ~20,000 
   carriers of various types or sizes, and on the order of ~100 Million 
   enterprises or businesses.   
    
   For E.164 phone numbers World-wide: there are ~7 Billion mobile 
   numbers in service (of which ~1.5B are smart-phones), and an 
   additional ~1.5 Billion numbers from land lines and other types of 
   phone service.  The number of E.164 numbers has been growing by ~500 
   Million numbers per year for the past decade.  The number of just 
   mobile numbers now exceeds the global population so the growth rate 
   is expected to taper off, unless they get used for other things such 
   as machine-to-machine (M2M) communications and if those technologies 
   grow. 
    
   For any given country-code, the largest one (China) has ~1.5 Billion 
   E.164 numbers in use; followed by India with ~1 Billion, and the USA 
   with ~500 Million. 
    
    


 
 
Kaplan                    Expires March 2014                 [Page 10] 
Internet-Draft                STIR FRIED                September 2013 
 
 
4. Behavioral changes 
    
4.1. Will invalid calling numbers be blocked? 
    
   No, not initially.  There will be some false positives at the 
   beginning, and blocking calls is a "big deal".  Even if STIR works 
   perfectly and is deployed everywhere, it might require regulatory 
   policy changes for carriers to be able to actually block calls 
   without specific customer consent.   
    
   Instead, calls can be "anonymized" (shown to users as 'unknown'), or 
   sent to voicemail, or routed to an Interactive Voice Response (IVR) 
   system to perform a captcha test or to explain the problem and 
   provide help or resolution support.  These are just some examples of 
   what might be done; the STIR Working Group standards will not 
   dictate what specific action to perform in such cases, but leave it 
   up to implementers to decide instead. 
    
4.2. Will calls from non-STIR-enabled carriers be blocked? 
    
   No, not initially.  For one thing it will take time to deploy STIR 
   technology, fix issues, etc.; without a "flag day" where everyone 
   starts using it, we can't reasonably block or even anonymize such 
   calls. 
    
   Once it's up and running in a few service providers, though, those 
   service providers may be able to determine which calling numbers 
   *should* be using STIR, because the technology allows that to be 
   known.  This allows STIR-supporting service providers to "protect" 
   their numbers from being spoofed by malicious parties.  For example 
   a bank can make sure no one else can falsely claim its numbers, by 
   having its numbers in the STIR databases. 
    
   Therefore if the service providers receive calls from such 
   "protected" calling numbers, and the call is not using STIR, then 
   that call can be anonymized, blocked, or routed to an attendant. 
    
   As more service providers implement STIR, more and more calling 
   numbers become "protected", and more and more calls are using STIR.  
   At some point, calls still not using STIR can be anonymized or 
   routed to an IVR; or even blocked if regulators allow it. 
    
4.3. What difference or changes will consumers see? 
    
   The general long-term goal is to reduce the number of unsolicited 
   calls to consumers, and the short-term goal is to reduce and easily 
   trace-back malicious ones.  Individual consumers might not perceive 
   any difference, although the number of complaints should decrease 
   overall. 
 
 
Kaplan                    Expires March 2014                 [Page 11] 
Internet-Draft                STIR FRIED                September 2013 
 
 
    
   From a phone-display perspective, however, there have been 
   discussions on whether to add something to displays to show a 
   validated calling number vs. a legacy calling number.  Due to 
   limitations of legacy POTS technology, the current Caller-ID display 
   is quite limited.  A single character, such as the '*' asterisk or 
   '?' question mark might make sense to add for received calls that 
   don't use STIR.  Alternatively, changing the number or name display 
   to 'unknown' has also been discussed.  This topic is still under 
   discussion. 
    
   For calls from unknown or invalid numbers, several possible actions 
   might occur: the numbers can be "anonymized" (shown to users as 
   'unknown'), or sent to voicemail, or routed to an Interactive Voice 
   Response (IVR) system to perform a captcha test or to explain the 
   problem and provide help or resolution support.  These are just 
   examples of what might change. 
    
   It should be noted that the STIR Working Group mechanism is not a 
   self-contained solution, but rather a tool to enable solutions to 
   achieve the long-term goals.  See question 3.4.  
    
4.4. Will this prevent legitimate caller-agent calls? 
    
   No.  A caller-agent is a person or organization that makes calls on 
   behalf of someone else, using the calling number of the entity 
   they're representing.  This is a generic concept, and applies to 
   many different real-world use-cases.  For example an out-sourced 
   call-center making calls on behalf of a business, or a survey center 
   making calls on behalf of a political party or politician, or a 
   remote employee making calls on behalf of a company or organization. 
    
   There are many ways in which this happens today, some of which STIR 
   does not affect whatsoever.  The one scenario that STIR affects is 
   when the caller-agent uses a calling number it wasn't authorized 
   directly by its carrier to use.  The proposed solutions provide ways 
   to support that, but it might require the caller-agent and the 
   entity it represents to perform additional steps to authorize such 
   use.  This topic is still under debate in the Working Group. 
    
4.5. Will doctors still be able to use their office number? 
    
   Yes.  The concern arise with regard to the ability to let doctors 
   and others to make calls using their personal phone with calling 
   number of their office number.  This is covered in the answer to 
   question 4.4. 
    


 
 
Kaplan                    Expires March 2014                 [Page 12] 
Internet-Draft                STIR FRIED                September 2013 
 
 
4.6. Will this prevent legitimate out-sourced call-centers? 
    
   No.  See the answer to question 4.4. 
    
4.7. Who needs to implement this new technology? 
    
   In general, the target operators of the STIR in-band solutions are 
   the carriers.  Certain types of businesses, government agencies, and 
   other organizations might need to implement the technology as well.  
   For example outbound call-centers might prefer to implement it, 
   rather than having their carriers do it. 
    
4.8. What other industry organizations are involved? 
    
   Currently the participants and monitors of the STIR Working Group 
   include members from 3GPP, ATIS, ETSI, CableLabs, FCC, FTC, CRTC, 
   OFCOM, IMTC, and the SIP-Forum.  The IETF has an official liaison 
   process but generally prefers to handle such things as informally as 
   possible. 
    
   The outcome of the STIR Working Group is expected to trigger changes 
   and additional work in some of the aforementioned organizations. 
    
5. Calling Number vs. Calling Name 
    
5.1. What is "calling number" vs. "calling name"? 
    
   In the STIR Working Group the source identity being validated is 
   really the calling telephone number, and only the number.  The 
   "calling name" is a textual description people see when they receive 
   a phone call, distinct from the calling number.  This is either a 
   human or company name, or a geographic location (e.g., city and 
   state).  Frequently this text string is determined by the carrier 
   receiving the call, through either a LIDB or CNAM lookup process. 
    
5.2. Why isn't STIR validating calling names? 
    
   Validating calling names is a much harder problem to solve, as 
   described in the answer to question 5.3.  The scope of the STIR 
   Working Group is constrained to validating calling numbers, because 
   it is something we know we can achieve in a reasonable timeframe.   
    
   A separate mailing list has been created for a research-team to 
   discuss validating calling names: cnit@ietf.org.  The results of 
   this research team might lead to an extension to STIR, or a separate 
   solution for calling name validation. 
    
   In the meantime, a STIR-validated calling number does improve things 
   even for calling name, because the calling number is typically used 
 
 
Kaplan                    Expires March 2014                 [Page 13] 
Internet-Draft                STIR FRIED                September 2013 
 
 
   by the terminating carrier to determine calling name from a 
   database.  Thus a validated calling number at least means the 
   calling name database lookup is querying for the right entry.  Of 
   course if the name in the database is invalid, STIR does not help. 
    
5.3. Why is it hard to validate calling names? 
    
   It has more challenges with regard to business pricing models; and 
   the existing architecture and mechanisms for calling name restrict 
   the types of validation solutions we could expect wide adoption for.  
   Even more importantly, a human or business 'name' has far more 
   challenges for determining validity, and will likely never be as 
   secure or accurate as a calling number. 
    
   With calling numbers, there is a defined authority model.  At a 
   global level, the ITU defines country-code authority, so that 
   Germany can't be authoritative for UK numbers, for example.  Within 
   each country-code the national numbering administrators are the 
   authority, and they assign numbers to carriers, who are then 
   authoritative for specific numbers, and so on.  Calling numbers are 
   also unique, in that no two people or entities in the World have the 
   same number; one can be an agent representing the other, but only 
   one entity "owns" the number. 
    
   Calling names, on the other hand, don't have these properties.  
   There are many people with the same name, and many businesses with 
   the same name.  There is no defined global authority for human or 
   business names; sometimes there is a name authority for a given 
   country, but sometimes there is not (e.g., in the US each state is 
   partially authoritative for business names).  Even trademarks may or 
   may not be registered in numerous trademark databases, none of which 
   are authoritative globally, and multiple entities can own the same 
   trademark. 
    
6. Privacy 
    
   The term "privacy" is a bit overloaded, but in the STIR context it 
   relates to the following separate issues: 
     o  the ability for users to make anonymous calls to others 
     o  hiding the caller's identity from carriers for anonymous calls 
     o  hiding which carriers own which telephone numbers from the 
        general public 
     o  hiding the identity of telephone subscribers from the general 
        public, including direct IP reachability information 
    
   Those issues are explained in the answer to questions in this 
   section. 
    

 
 
Kaplan                    Expires March 2014                 [Page 14] 
Internet-Draft                STIR FRIED                September 2013 
 
 
6.1. Does STIR impact privacy? 
    
   No.  STIR does not make privacy any worse or better.  The properties 
   of privacy in the PSTN (SIP or SS7) remain the same whether STIR is 
   deployed or not. 
    
6.2. How do anonymous calls work with STIR? 
    
   The same way it works without STIR.  Today, there are two basic 
   models for anonymous calls in the PSTN: a call is generated without 
   a calling number, or a call is generated with a calling number that 
   the carrier does not send or display to the receiving end.  Both of 
   these models are already supported by SS7 and SIP, and STIR does not 
   change them.  If a call is made without a calling number, STIR 
   doesn't identify anything; if a call is generated with a calling 
   number the carrier needs to hide, STIR supports that as well. 
    
6.3. But can't the carrier still determine the caller? 
    
   Yes, insofar as they already can today for anonymous calls.  STIR 
   makes it no worse or better. 
    
6.4. Why do we need to hide the carrier's identity? 
    
   If someone knew all the telephone numbers a carrier has, they could 
   use the information for malicious purposes.  For example, a 
   malicious attacker could target the carrier's customers if they knew 
   of a specific vulnerability of the carrier.  Another example is a 
   competitor could call all of the carrier's customers with a special 
   discount offer for the purpose of getting them to switch their 
   carrier.  Furthermore, knowing how many telephone numbers a carrier 
   has gained or lost allows one to estimate the carrier's quarterly 
   revenue growth or loss in advance of public disclosure, enabling 
   illegal stock market trading. 
    
   In general most carriers have access to databases that identify the 
   carrier-of-record for every telephone number in their country-code.  
   This is available today in the databases used for routing, billing, 
   and calling name purposes.  But the carriers with such access are 
   under legally binding terms regarding what they can do with such 
   data. 
    
   For STIR, this is a concern if a public-key or certificate lookup 
   database is openly accessible on the public Internet.  In such a 
   case, it must not reveal the carrier-of-record for telephone 
   numbers.  It is trivial to create scripts to query the entire 
   database and learn every number for a given carrier. 
    

 
 
Kaplan                    Expires March 2014                 [Page 15] 
Internet-Draft                STIR FRIED                September 2013 
 
 
6.5. Why do we need to hide subscriber identity info? 
    
   The concern relates to preventing reverse-number lookups: the 
   ability to learn the name of the individual, business, or 
   organization based on their phone number.  There is also a concern 
   with being able to determine the names of individuals with unlisted 
   numbers. 
    
   Although this type of information is sometimes already available on 
   public websites, some countries have very strict privacy laws that 
   forbid such information from being publicly available; and in 
   general there are many cases where it is inappropriate and dangerous 
   to reveal the particular user, business, or organization of a given 
   phone number. 
    
6.6. Why do we need to hide subscriber reachability info? 
    
   The concern relates to hiding IP address information, such that one 
   could send call requests directly to the subscriber and bypass the 
   carriers.  Some may view this concern as an anti-consumer business 
   protection policy, but in practice there is a real security and 
   privacy concern with exposing general consumer phone-service devices 
   to the public Internet.  Most people pay carriers for phone service, 
   and do not expect to be exposing their home computer to attack; nor 
   do they expect to be providing their physical location, which can be 
   determined from IP addresses. 
    
7. Solutions 
    
   Starting in this section and beyond, the term "source identity" 
   refers to the calling phone number as the "identity".  The calling 
   name is not included, and is not in-scope for STIR (see section 5).  
   The "source identity verification information" is the information 
   used to determine the validity of the calling number for the call 
   request; for example the calling number, called number, timestamp, 
   and credentials. 
    
7.1. What are the proposed solutions so far, at a high-level? 
    
   There is more than one proposed solution.  There are two very 
   different proposed solution architectures: an "in-band" approach and 
   an "out-of-band" approach.  The in-band one sends verification 
   information in the call signaling, while the out-of-band one sends 
   it some other way over the Internet.  Just for the in-band there are 
   at least two different proposed mechanisms as well, [draft-ikes] and 
   [draft-4474bis], but at a very high level they are similar. 
    


 
 
Kaplan                    Expires March 2014                 [Page 16] 
Internet-Draft                STIR FRIED                September 2013 
 
 
   At a high level both the in-band and out-of-band approaches have 
   some common properties:  
     o  there is some common authority or authorities for a given 
        E.164 country-code, which everyone uses and trusts 
     o  the authority authorizes originators of calls to claim 
        telephone numbers in the country-code, using credentials for 
        each E.164 number 
     o  the call originators make calls using the credentials they've 
        been given for the E.164 number(s) 
     o  the receivers of calls verify the credentials with the common 
        authority, and thus determines that the originator could claim 
        the E.164 number 
    
   The different solutions have different types of "credentials" and 
   how they're stored, retrieved, etc. 
    
   The different solutions have different expectations for who the 
   central "authority" is, who the "originators" are, and who the 
   "receivers" are.  In the two in-band solutions, the authority is 
   generally assumed to be the national numbering administrator for a 
   given country-code, or an agent of theirs; the originators and 
   receivers are expected to be service providers, and possibly also 
   large enterprise PBXs.  In the out-of-band solution, the authority 
   is not yet clearly articulated; the originators and receivers are 
   expected to be end-user devices such as smartphones, and possibly 
   also large enterprise PBXs. 
    
   To be clear, both architectural approaches allow end-user devices to 
   participate in the process; the difference is more around the 
   assumptions and pragmatic considerations based on who the expected 
   implementers and operators of the technologies will be in general. 
    
7.2. What does "in-band" vs. "out-of-band" mean? 
    
   Calls are generated using signaling protocols, such as SIP, SS7 and 
   ISDN.  An "in-band" solution carries the source identity validation 
   information in the call signaling, for example in a new SIP header 
   or in SS7 ISUP parameters.  An "out-of-band" solution exchanges the 
   source identity validation information through some other means over 
   the Internet, separately from the call signaling. 
    
7.3. Why are there both an in-band and out-of-band solution? 
    
   The STIR Working Group could not come to agreement on which model 
   would more likely succeed in getting widely deployed.  To make 
   progress, the group decided to do both: work on the in-band first, 
   followed by the out-of-band, and let the market decide. 
    

 
 
Kaplan                    Expires March 2014                 [Page 17] 
Internet-Draft                STIR FRIED                September 2013 
 
 
7.4. Why can't we just do P-Asserted-Identity without STIR? 
    
   The SIP 'P-Asserted-Identity' (PAI) header defined in [RFC3325] is 
   widely deployed, and identifies the source caller identity that the 
   originating carrier asserts it to be.  In other words, user devices 
   don't generate this header; carriers generate this header.  
   Therefore it is tempting to simply trust this header to be accurate.  
   Unfortunately we know that won't work, because we already know that 
   some originating carriers allow malicious originators (robocallers) 
   to generate whatever SIP headers they wish to. 
    
   A solution to that problem was proposed a few years ago, but is 
   untenable - see question 7.5. 
    
7.5. Why can't we just sign using a carrier-wide identity? 
    
   Most carriers are trustworthy when it comes to generating legitimate 
   calling numbers and names.  The PSTN has been running for decades 
   without the issues reaching the magnitude they have today.  It is 
   tempting to simply have a carrier sign the call request with the 
   identity of the carrier itself, instead of having to use specific 
   credentials for every E.164 number it manages; we could just base 
   the number's validity on the trustworthiness or reputation of the 
   entire carrier. 
    
   A potential solution was described in [draft-asserter], such that 
   the originating carrier signs the PAI header using a private key for 
   the whole carrier.  This would have been simpler than the currently 
   proposed STIR solutions.  We don't believe this would have really 
   solved the problem, however, because in order to stop fake calling 
   numbers in such a model, the terminating carrier would need to 
   anonymize all calls from the originating carrier once the 
   originating carrier was determined to be "untrustworthy".  Concerns 
   have been raised about the legal difficulty with deciding an entire 
   originating service provider is untrustworthy, especially in an 
   international context. 
    
   For example, if AT&T received a call request from Deutsche Telecom 
   (DT), and it was signed using a certificate for DT, of course AT&T 
   would trust the validity of any German calling number that DT claims 
   it to be from.  But would AT&T trust German numbered calls from 
   Freenet GMBH, or WU-Solutions Ltd.?  How many bad calls would it 
   take to decide one of those is untrustworthy?  What if Freenet, and 
   completely legitimate German carrier, exceeded the threshold and 
   AT&T decides to start anonymizing or blocking their calls?  Imagine 
   the issues that would raise legally and politically. 
    
   Because of these sorts of challenges, basing caller-id decision on 
   originating carrier reputations was determined to be impractical.  
 
 
Kaplan                    Expires March 2014                 [Page 18] 
Internet-Draft                STIR FRIED                September 2013 
 
 
   Instead, STIR simply prevents a carrier from being able to claim a 
   number it isn't assigned or authorized to claim.  Since the 
   authority is already performed today in each country-code, doing it 
   this way is legally and politically defensible. 
    
7.6. Why are we only focused on SIP? 
    
   Because for phone-type service it is the communication protocol most 
   carriers and enterprises are migrating to today, and have been for 
   the past decade.  It is not focused on any particular type of 
   carrier, vertical market segment, or any particular region of the 
   World.  SS7 and ISDN continue to exist, clearly, but there is no 
   significant vendor product development in that technology, nor does 
   there appear to be any desire by carriers to invest more in it. 
    
   One of the proposed in-band solutions, [draft-ikes], does include 
   SS7 and ISDN support for STIR in a transparent manner for some 
   scenarios; and the out-of-band solution would also work across SS7 
   and ISDN.  The focus of STIR remains, however, on SIP as the main 
   in-band protocol to support. 
    
7.7. What about other IP-based protocols? 
    
   There are other real-time communications IP-based protocols: for 
   example XMPP, H.323, BICC, and soon WebRTC.  WebRTC is not an inter-
   domain protocol, but rather relies on other protocols such as SIP or 
   XMPP for inter-domain communications.  XMPP is mostly used for 
   instant messaging and group chat, but does have some voice and video 
   calling abilities (a.k.a., Jingle).  H.323 is still being used, 
   mostly in the video conferencing market, but also in some enterprise 
   PBX markets in certain parts of the World.  BICC is still being used 
   in specific mobile operator interconnection trunks in certain parts 
   of the World; although most 3GPP and LTE mobile operators have 
   either already migrated to SIP or are in the process of doing so. 
    
   Any of these technologies could define their own calling number 
   validation mechanism someday.  One of the proposed in-band STIR 
   solutions, [draft-ikes], is designed to be able to work through any 
   protocol, including XMPP, H.323, BICC, and WebRTC.  It does not, 
   however, define the details for how the verification information 
   would be encoded in those protocols' messages, but leaves that up to 
   other Working Groups or other Standards Development Organizations 
   (SDOs) to do. 
    
7.8. What SIP header is used for the calling number? 
    
   In general most devices use the SIP From header's URI username as 
   the source calling number.  In some cases the P-Asserted-Identity 

 
 
Kaplan                    Expires March 2014                 [Page 19] 
Internet-Draft                STIR FRIED                September 2013 
 
 
   header field is used instead.  There are some proprietary headers in 
   use as well, but they're far less common. 
    
   Interestingly, while the headers to use for calling and called 
   numbers will be in the STIR RFCs, it is not necessary to use them as 
   they appear on-the-wire to make STIR work correctly.  See question 
   7.10. 
    
7.9. Doesn't the SIP From or To URI string change along the path? 
    
   Yes.  In many inter-carrier call cases today, the SIP To and From 
   URIs change, sometimes drastically.  There are many reasons this 
   occurs, some of which are documented in [draft-uris-change].  Even 
   in SS7, the logical equivalent of this is performed as part of 
   Global Title Translation. 
    
   Regardless, STIR works even when the To and From URI strings are 
   changed.  It does this because it does not cryptographically sign 
   the literal encoded strings, but instead the abstract logical E.164 
   numbers they represent.  See question 7.10. 
    
7.10.     Does STIR crypto-sign the SIP From and To URI headers? 
    
   No, not really.  STIR signs the abstract logical E.164 numbers they 
   represent.  The signer and verifier each sign a "canonical" E.164 
   number, which is not necessarily the exact string they send or 
   receive on-the-wire in the SIP messages, but is instead the 
   equivalent identity as an E.164 number. 
    
   For example, even if the To and/or From URI strings only contain a 
   national or local number, or are encoded as 'sip:<number>@domain' 
   format without a 'user=phone' parameter; if the STIR verifier treats 
   it as a telephone number, then it verifies it as the E.164-
   equivalent numbers.  Likewise, the signer cryptographically signs 
   the E.164-equivalent numbers. 
    
   If the originator didn't intend it to be a telephone number, or 
   intended it to be a different one, then the STIR verification will 
   fail.  In such a case, however, the verification *should* fail, 
   because by definition the verifier should not believe it to be the 
   telephone number it thinks it is.  Since the existing problem in 
   deployed SIP networks is not one of syntactic encoding confusion, 
   but instead one of malicious intent, there does not appear to be an 
   interoperability problem with determining the source number even 
   though the From and To URIs are changed along the SIP signaling 
   path. 
    


 
 
Kaplan                    Expires March 2014                 [Page 20] 
Internet-Draft                STIR FRIED                September 2013 
 
 
7.11.     Does STIR change SIP From or To URI headers? 
    
   No.  The carriers can do whatever they do today.  If they change 
   them today, for whatever reason, then they can continue to change 
   them; if they don't change them, then they can continue to not 
   change them. 
    
    
8. In-band Solution Questions 
    
8.1. Don't we already have in-band with RFC 4474 SIP Identity? 
    
   No.  SIP Identity per [RFC4474] has not been deployed, would not 
   have solved the problem for telephone numbers in particular, and 
   cannot solve the problem in the existing deployments.  A solution to 
   the problem must avoid the issues SIP Identity would have had, had 
   it been attempted. 
    
   In particular, [RFC4474] signed portions of the SIP message that are 
   frequently changed by middleboxes.  These portions did not need to 
   be signed to achieve just the goal of source identity telephone 
   number validation, so the new proposals sign much less.  Also, 
   [RFC4474] was really only applicable for user@domain email-style SIP 
   names, not telephone numbers.  There are some other problems with 
   [RFC4474], but those were the big ones. 
    
8.2. What will happen to RFC 4474? 
    
   It might be deprecated and replaced with the STIR WG output, or 
   simply left alone and ignored.  This is still TBD. 
    
8.3. What are the proposed in-band solutions so far? 
    
   There have been several proposed solutions to the STIR problem over 
   the years, and more recently additional proposed candidates have 
   emerged in STIR: [draft-ikes] and [draft-4474bis], with [draft-
   cider] as a proposed database model.  Note these are all individual 
   drafts, and the Working Group has not truly begun discussing them in 
   detail yet. 
    
   The proposed solutions generally follow a model similar to 
   [RFC4474]: the originating SIP domain generates a cryptographic 
   signature over source identity information using a private key, and 
   inserts the signature along with the relevant information in a SIP 
   header(s) of the SIP message; the receiver of the SIP message then 
   uses the public key counterpart to verify the signature for the same 
   source identity information. 
    

 
 
Kaplan                    Expires March 2014                 [Page 21] 
Internet-Draft                STIR FRIED                September 2013 
 
 
   The public key retrieved by the verifier is identified to be valid 
   for the given source identity (i.e., valid for a given phone 
   number), though how this retrieval and key-validity is done differs 
   between solutions, as described later. 
    
   The specific SIP fields signed by the solutions differ from 
   [RFC4474], in order to make the solutions work in real-world 
   deployments.  This changes the threats and attack vectors they can 
   protect against.  For example man-in-the-middle and replay attacks 
   are easier to perform than in [RFC4474], but this is not considered 
   a significant threat for existing deployments. 
    
   The proposed solutions separate the mechanism used for generating, 
   sending, and verifying the source identity assertion, from the 
   mechanism used for retrieving the public key and verifying the key 
   represents an authorized entity for the assertion.  For example, 
   [draft-ikes] specifies how to cryptographically sign and send the 
   assertion in SIP headers, and perform signature verification when 
   receiving those headers; but [draft-cider] specifies how the 
   verifier retrieves the public key and can know it is valid for the 
   source identity being asserted.  [draft-4474bis] specifies both in 
   the same document, but still logically separates the functions. 
    
   The [draft-cider] proposal uses a DNS-based mechanism similar to 
   DKIM.  For telephone numbers, a common domain anchor is used for all 
   numbers in a given country-code, and an ENUM-style naming schema is 
   used for a DNS tree under the anchor.  DNSSEC is then used to 
   provide digital signature chaining from the anchor down, and each 
   telephone number is a DNS node with a TXT RR of the public key value 
   used by STIRSEC. 
    
   Alternatively, [draft-4474bis] proposes a Certificate Authority 
   model similar to the Web-PKI, whereby a certificate is retrieved via 
   HTTP from a URL encoded in an Identity-Info header in the received 
   SIP message.  For telephone numbers in particular, [draft-4474bis] 
   proposes the specific telephone number or range be encoded in a [to-
   be-decided] field of the certificate, instead of a host or domain 
   name.  It is not clear how the verifier knows the CA is 
   authoritative for that telephone number, as this portion of the 
   solution is still a work in progress for [draft-4474bis]. 
    
8.4. Why not just carry a certificate in the SIP message? 
    
   Carrying an X.509 certificate in a SIP INVITE request creates two 
   problems: the message size grows (a LOT), and multi-part MIME isn't 
   supported by many SIP systems.  Therefore, including an X.509 
   certificate in the message would present a significant barrier for 
   adoption.  Furthermore, if malicious originators can simply send the 
   certificate in the INVITE, then compromised keys could be easily 
 
 
Kaplan                    Expires March 2014                 [Page 22] 
Internet-Draft                STIR FRIED                September 2013 
 
 
   used until the certificate lifetime expires (typically years); or 
   would require everyone to check certificate revocation lists (CRLs) 
   that can grow very large for the STIR use-case. 
    
    
9. Out-of-band Solution Questions 
    
9.1. What are the proposed out-of-band solutions? 
    
   The only currently proposed out-of-band solution is [draft-oob].  
   Note it is still a work in progress, and only an individual draft.  
   The Working Group has not discussed it yet in detail. 
    
9.2. What are the major advantages of an out-of-band solution? 
    
   The major advantage is it can avoid carriers, avoid middleboxes, and 
   it works across legacy SS7, ISDN, or any call signaling technology, 
   because it is not carried in the call signaling. 
    
9.3. What are the major disadvantages of an out-of-band solution? 
    
   There are many, potentially.  But until the proposal becomes more 
   concretely defined it is difficult to really know.  There is also 
   considerable disagreement in the Working Group regarding the 
   disadvantages, so they will not be listed here in order to avoid a 
   bias. 
    
    
10.  Security Considerations 
    
   This document is only a FAQ-type informational document, and thus no 
   security considerations apply to the document itself.  A security 
   document will be produced by the STIR Working Group, but this 
   section covers some high-level questions or concerns that have been 
   raised for the general concept of STIR. 
    
   Questions related to privacy are covered in section 6. 
    
10.1.     What types of attackers are we worried about? 
    
   The main actors we're worried about are malicious originators of 
   call requests into the existing PSTN-type network-of-trust.  This 
   includes malicious users, such as PRI-style SIP trunk customers, 
   VoIP subscribers, and over-the-top VoIP users; the type of access 
   they have doesn't matter as much as that they generate calls and are 
   not themselves carriers. 
    
   Some originating "providers" are known to be malicious in some ways 
   as well - not to their own users, but they are knowingly complicit 
 
 
Kaplan                    Expires March 2014                 [Page 23] 
Internet-Draft                STIR FRIED                September 2013 
 
 
   in allowing their users to generate false calling numbers.  Note 
   these aren't regulated or traditional carriers, but rather non-
   traditional providers of outbound calling service.  For example some 
   specialty providers with a business model of letting their customers 
   generate fake calling numbers, ostensibly for non-malicious 
   purposes.  The concern isn't that these types of providers are 
   active attackers themselves, but rather that they purposefully want 
   to enable unauthorized calling number use by their customers. 
    
   We are also worried about malicious receivers of calls, inasmuch as 
   they might be able to generate new outbound calls using STIR 
   verification information from calls they previously received.  For 
   example, it is trivial to get a bank or other business to call you 
   by simply filling out a web form for sales or service help; if you 
   could re-use that call's STIR information to make outbound calls 
   pretending to be the bank, then that would be a problem.  This form 
   of attack is called a cut-and-paste attack. 
    
   We are not worried about transit carriers being malicious. Transit 
   carriers may be indifferent or sloppy, but not actively malicious.  
   Likewise terminating carriers (the carriers receiving calls and 
   delivering them to end users) are not malicious, since they act on 
   behalf of their customer subscribers receiving the calls. 
    
    
10.2.     What are the main threats we are worried about? 
    
   The assumptions so far have been: 
     o  We are worried about denial-of-service (DoS) attacks, of a 
        certain form (see question 10.3) 
     o  We are worried about cut-and-paste attacks, of a certain form 
        (see question 10.4) 
     o  We are not worried about obfuscation attacks 
     o  We are not worried about man-in-the-middle (MITM) attacks   
     o  We are not worried about replay attacks 
    
   Details of the above are discussed in other questions and answers in 
   this document section. 
    
10.3.     What types of DoS attacks are we worried about? 
    
   Denial of Service (DoS) attacks come in many forms, and as the name 
   suggests it is a class of attack with the goal of denying service to 
   others.  Some people use the term DoS to mean message flooding or 
   high call rate attacks, but those are just specific types of 
   resource exhaustion-based DoS attack. 
    
   For STIR, one DoS concern is an attack on the STIR infrastructure, 
   such as the PKI database.  But that form of attack is unlikely, and 
 
 
Kaplan                    Expires March 2014                 [Page 24] 
Internet-Draft                STIR FRIED                September 2013 
 
 
   even if it succeeds it doesn't prevent phone calls; it just may 
   prevent the calls from being verified and thus cause them to be 
   anonymized. 
    
   Another form of DoS attack is a malicious party sending SIP messages 
   with invalid or valid STIR information in the hopes of consuming 
   extra resources on the attack target (a form of resource exhaustion 
   attack).  This is possible, but the amount of processing overhead 
   for just STIR isn't expected to be significantly more than general 
   call processing overhead, so STIR doesn't make it worse than before. 
    
   Another, slightly tangential DoS attack, is one where malicious 
   parties send SIP messages with valid or invalid STIR information for 
   the purpose of triggering reputation systems to black-list a valid 
   number.  In other words the goal is to impact the reputation of a 
   legitimate number such as a business' number.  That attack is not 
   really a role for SIR to prevent, however, as much as it is for a 
   reputation system to avoid. 
    
10.4.     What types of cut-and-paste attacks are we worried about? 
    
   A "cut-and-paste" attack has multiple meanings in the security 
   world.  Traditionally it meant replacing some piece of information 
   in a message, file, or whatever, to cause something bad to happen; 
   for example being able to replace a portion of an encrypted message 
   or file such that it still decrypts but the resulting cleartext is 
   different.  One of the purposes of cryptographically signing 
   something is to prevent such changes from being possible (without 
   being detected). 
    
   In the STIR context a cut-and-paste attack means the ability to 
   change any of the SIP message that isn't signed, such that you could 
   attack another target with that message in some way.  Since very 
   little of the SIP message is actually digitally signed, so much 
   could be changed that the a cut-and-paste attack can be viewed a 
   different way: can an attacker take the digitally signed STIR 
   information, and re-use it in a brand new message of the attacker's 
   creation. 
    
   In STIR we don't really worry about a MITM performing a cut-and-
   paste attack (see question 10.5), but rather a malicious user 
   receiving a valid STIR call and using that STIR information to 
   perform an attack.  We know there are malicious users, and we know 
   they can easily get a high-value caller to call them; for example 
   they could get a bank or large corporation to call them by filling 
   out a web-form for sales or service.  If they can re-use the STIR 
   information from the received bank call, to call someone else 
   pretending to be the bank, then that would be a problem. 
    
 
 
Kaplan                    Expires March 2014                 [Page 25] 
Internet-Draft                STIR FRIED                September 2013 
 
 
   The biggest concern identified thus far is a cut-and-paste attack 
   whereby the malicious receiver of a call re-uses the STIR 
   information in such a way that it appears like a call-forwarding 
   event has occurred.  Call-forwarding is a common service supported 
   in the PSTN, and is often performed within enterprise PBXs.  Since 
   the malicious parties today are attaching to the PSTN-trust network 
   using PBX-type trunks, they would be allowed to perform call-
   forwarding (as opposed to, for example, residential and mobile 
   subscribers who cannot perform it directly on their phones). 
    
   Since call-forwarding is very common feature, the STIR mechanism has 
   to allow it to happen; but this means STIR itself cannot prevent 
   malicious parties from performing call-forwarding, which means it is 
   susceptible to a cut-and-paste attack that mimics a call-forwarding 
   event.  There are some solutions to this, but they're not very 
   palatable. 
    
10.5.     Why are we not worried about MITM attacks? 
    
   The current communication model for the PSTN makes it difficult to 
   become an active or passive MITM.  If an attacker can become a MITM, 
   however, calling number validation is the least of the problems we 
   need to worry about.  If it were easy to prevent a MITM attack for 
   STIR we would likely do so, but in practice it's impossible if we 
   want to make STIR deployable. 
    
10.6.     Why are we not worried about replay attacks? 
     
   Replay attacks are when the same call request is sent again and 
   again, as a form of attack.  The only actors who could do this are 
   the call originator, originating carrier, transit carriers, and 
   terminating carrier.  The call originator and originating carrier 
   can do it no matter what we do, since the originator can simply re-
   sign requests at will.  The transit and terminating carriers have no 
   motivation to do it, and we've already assumed they're not 
   malicious. 
    
10.7.     Is the call media (audio or video) secured by STIR? 
     
   No.  STIR only verifies the calling number, not media.  Media in the 
   PSTN cannot be securely identified nor protected from eavesdropping, 
   in practice; nor has that been an actual problem so far.  SIP 
   provides some level of media security with SRTP, but in practice 
   that is only used hop-by-hop and only for certain hops; it is not 
   truly secure end-to-end generally. 
    
   Again, this has not been a real issue needing to be fixed in the 
   PSTN.  It has been an issue in the sense that communications in the 
   PSTN are not secure from the carriers themselves, but they can learn 
 
 
Kaplan                    Expires March 2014                 [Page 26] 
Internet-Draft                STIR FRIED                September 2013 
 
 
   almost as much useful information from the call signaling meta-data, 
   such as the Call Detail Records, as they can from the words spoken 
   during the call. 
    
   Furthermore, legally authorized wiretapping is a general requirement 
   for the PSTN.  One of the properties wiretapping regulations 
   sometimes require is to not appear any different to the suspect 
   being monitored; enabling users to detect that the media is not 
   secure end-to-end would not fulfill that requirement. 
    
    
11.  General Security Terminology 
    
   Some participants in STIR Working Group might not be familiar with 
   the security mechanisms being discussed.  There are several security 
   experts participating in the work, but to help others follow the 
   general concepts, this section attempts to answer some very basic 
   concept questions. 
    
   **WARNING**: this section's answers are not completely accurate or 
   comprehensive, nor are they intended to be.  The answers have been 
   overly simplified to provide the rough general ideas and concepts 
   without bogging down in details. 
    
11.1.     What is a private vs. public key? 
    
   A private key and public key refer to the two separate, 
   mathematically linked sets of numbers used by public-key 
   cryptography, also known as asymmetric key cryptography.  The 
   mathematical relationship is such that something encrypted by one 
   key can only be decrypted by the other key; but it is 
   computationally extremely hard to determine what the other key is 
   when you only have one of them.  The private key refers to the one 
   kept secret and never revealed to anyone else, while the public key 
   is the one everyone else can see and use. 
    
   It's a bit confusing because most public websites refer to a 
   "public" key as being used for encryption, while a "private" key is 
   used for decryption.  This is what occurs when public-key 
   cryptography is used for message encryption - i.e., to prevent 
   anyone from reading the message.  For example this is how PGP uses 
   public key cryptography.  For cryptographic digital signatures, 
   however, the key uses are different: the private key is used for 
   signing (similar to encrypting), while the public key is used for 
   verifying (similar to decrypting). 
    
   For digital signatures, therefore, the private key is used to "sign" 
   something such as a message or string; while the public key is 
   useable by everyone else to verify the signature.  So long as the 
 
 
Kaplan                    Expires March 2014                 [Page 27] 
Internet-Draft                STIR FRIED                September 2013 
 
 
   private key is never revealed to anyone else, receivers of the 
   signed message can know that the holder of the private key signed 
   it, by using the public key to verify the signature.  Only the 
   private key twin of the public key could have created the signature. 
    
   In the case of STIR, what this means is that a call originator 
   generates a private and public key; the private key they keep to 
   themselves, and the public key counterpart they make available to 
   everyone else in some way.  When the originator signs call-related 
   information, the call receiver can use the public key to verify the 
   originator truly signed it.  By itself, however, this doesn't prove 
   the originator is authorized to claim the E.164 number.  For that we 
   need a way for some trusted authority of phone numbers to say: "this 
   public key can claim this E.164 phone number".  This is accomplished 
   in one of two proposed ways: either a certificate model as in 
   [draft-4474bis], or a DKIM-like model as in [draft-cider]. 
    
11.2.     What does "cryptographically sign" mean? 
    
   The technical details don't matter; if you need to know, check 
   Wikipedia or read the relevant RFCs.  At a high-level the general 
   concept is a simple one, and is similar to traditional handwritten 
   signatures: someone signs something with a signature only they could 
   have created, and other people can verify the signature without 
   themselves being able to create or forge the same signature.  In 
   theory only the original signer could have created the same 
   signature.  Of course handwritten signatures are easy to forge, but 
   cryptographic signatures are (in theory) nearly impossible to forge 
   unless the private key has been compromised. 
    
   Unlike human signatures, digital signatures use private and public 
   keys which are just numbers and don't represent an identity by 
   themselves.  Something else is needed to tie an identity with the 
   public key used for verifying the signature.  This is somewhat 
   similar to showing a Passport or Driver's license to prove your 
   signature really represents you.  In the web SSL or TLS world, that 
   something else is an X.509 certificate.  In the email DKIM world, 
   that something else is an entry in the Domain Name System (DNS). 
    
11.3.     What is a certificate? 
    
   A digital certificate is an electronic "document" that contains some 
   form of identity information and a public key, and is signed by a 
   Certificate Authority (CA).  If you trust the CA, then by verifying 
   the CA's signature for the certificate essentially tells you that 
   the public key belongs to the identity in the certificate.  This is 
   somewhat analogous to a passport: if you trust the government 
   issuing the passport, and you verify the passport is not forged, 

 
 
Kaplan                    Expires March 2014                 [Page 28] 
Internet-Draft                STIR FRIED                September 2013 
 
 
   then you know that the person's name is tied to the picture and the 
   handwritten signature in the passport. 
    
   In order to verify the certificate, the CA's public key must also be 
   known, since that is used to verify the signature of the certificate 
   itself.  That CA signature's public key is in another certificate, 
   typically a "root certificate".  A root certificate has no higher 
   authority, and is either unsigned or self-signed by the CA.  It is 
   typically pre-installed in systems that trust the CA, such as web 
   browsers, and updated periodically. 
    
   Digital certificates can also be used in a signing chain of trust, 
   whereby a root CA signs the certificate of an intermediate CA, which 
   is then used to sign the certificate of someone else.  The final 
   certificate used by end organizations or devices is called an "end-
   entity" certificate. 
    
   In the web world, there are approximately 160 trusted CAs around the 
   World.  The identity being claimed in end-entity certificates are 
   domain or host names, such as 'www.example.com'.  Your web browser 
   uses the public key in the certificate bound to that name during the 
   SSL or TLS handshake to determine that it's really talking to 
   www.example.com, for example. 
    
   For STIR, one of the proposed solutions [draft-4474bis] uses 
   certificates to prove E.164 authorization.  The idea would be to 
   make the identity in the certificate be an E.164 number (or range), 
   and the public key would be used for verifying the signature 
   contained in the SIP message.  The call receiver can then know the 
   originator can claim the E.164 number, because the SIP message was 
   signed with a private key whose public key counterpart is in the 
   certificate with the authorized E.164 number. 
    
   The CAs for such STIR-based certificates could be either trusted 3rd 
   parties, or the national numbering authorities for each country-
   code.  For specific details, refer to [draft-4474bis]. 
    
11.4.     What is a PKI? 
    
   A Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) is an abstract term representing 
   the collection of architecture, mechanisms, policies, and properties 
   used for binding things to public keys and providing for their 
   distribution, revocation and usage.  The "things" being bound to 
   public keys may be identities of some kind, resource identifiers, 
   objects, etc. 
    
   The most common example of a PKI is the "Web-PKI", which an X.509-
   based PKI that binds fully-qualified domain names to public keys 
   using X.509 digital certificates.  This is so prevalent that the 
 
 
Kaplan                    Expires March 2014                 [Page 29] 
Internet-Draft                STIR FRIED                September 2013 
 
 
   term "PKI" is often used synonymously with X.509-based PKIs and in 
   particular the Web-PKI; but there are other types of PKIs, including 
   ones that don't use digital certificates at all.  DKIM, for example, 
   is essentially a PKI based on DNS without using X.509 certificates. 
    
11.5.     What is a Web-PKI? 
    
   The Web-PKI is the Public Key Infrastructure used to bind fully-
   qualified domain names (e.g., 'www.example.com') to public keys, 
   using X.509 digital certificates.  It is most frequently used for 
   HTTP-based SSL or TLS (i.e., HTTPS).  For example, it is used as 
   part of the protocol used by your browser when you go to a website 
   using 'https://www.example.com', so that your browser can determine 
   it really is talking to www.example.com. 
    
   The Web-PKI's certificates are signed by "trusted" CAs, which are 
   merely companies or organizations that most other entities trust to 
   practice good policies for the domain names they sign certificates 
   for.  [RFC3647] defines some practices they should follow, but the 
   IETF does not audit or police the CAs to follow the practices. 
    
   There are approximately 160 trusted CAs around the World that many 
   popular web browsers trust and include the root certificates for.  
   There have, however, been problems with the Web-PKI model.  See 
   question 11.6. 
    
11.6.     What is wrong with the Web-PKI? 
    
   The technology of X.509-based digital certificates is sound, but the 
   way they're used in Web-PKI has been shown to be dangerous.  Issues 
   have occurred due to compromised Certificate Authorities and their 
   impact on all domain names.  The most famous example of this is the 
   former Certificate Authority DigiNotar. 
    
   Certificate Authorities are not themselves authoritative for domain 
   names or any portion of the domain name space, therefore any trusted 
   CA can sign a certificate for any domain name whatsoever, and 
   everyone must blindly trust their validity.  A malicious CA or an 
   attacker that has a CA's signing private key can generate a digital 
   certificate claiming to be any domain name at all, even for names 
   the CA never previously signed for.  This means that the compromise 
   of one CA impacts everyone; even organizations that do not and have 
   never trusted the CA. 
    
   To address this problem, the IETF has defined DANE in [RFC6698], 
   which puts the Web-PKI certificates in DNS, in the DNS domain name 
   entry that the certificate claims to bind to a public key.  Since 
   DNS is the authority for domain names, and by virtue of its 
   structure it provides a way to scope or restrict the names being 
 
 
Kaplan                    Expires March 2014                 [Page 30] 
Internet-Draft                STIR FRIED                September 2013 
 
 
   claimed, the problems a compromised CA or DNS registrar could create 
   are limited. Using DNSSEC to sign the DNS domain entries could 
   arguably remove the need for CAs altogether someday.  Using both, 
   however, provides a two-factor authentication model, since both the 
   DNS and a trusted CA would need to be compromised. 
    
   For STIR, the Web-PKI model's problems are only a concern if any CA 
   is allowed to claim any phone number.  It is assumed that this would 
   not be possible; instead, a certificate delegation chain would be 
   used whereby a national numbering authority would only delegate 
   specific CAs to be able to sign for specific phone numbers or 
   ranges. 
    
11.7.     What is an RPKI? 
    
   A Resource Public Key Infrastructure (RPKI) is a type of X.509-based 
   PKI used for binding "resources" to public keys, where the resources 
   are IP addresses or prefixes or BGP Autonomous System (AS) numbers.  
   This is mostly used for the purpose of securing the Internet routing 
   infrastructure through BGPSEC, but also for securing neighbor 
   discovery in IPv6. 
    
   In order to bind multiple IP Addresses and AS numbers, the RPKI 
   defines an extension to X.509 certificates.  This extension must be 
   understood and supported by verifiers, so it is not compatible with 
   Web-PKI type certificates. 
    
   For STIR, such a model could be employed where the "resources" are 
   E.164 numbers or ranges.  The specifics of how the RPKI is managed 
   and deployed for BGP using RSYNC, however, might not make sense for 
   STIR. 
    
11.8.     What is DKIM? 
    
   DomainKeys Identified Mail (DKIM) is a form of PKI used for 
   verifying source domain names in received email messages, based on 
   [RFC6376].  It is not typically described as a PKI, but for all 
   intents and purposes it defines one.  Instead of using X.509 digital 
   certificates, DKIM simply puts the public keys in DNS, in the DNS 
   domain name entries the public key is used for.  In this way, it 
   provides a binding of email source domain name to a public key. 
    
   The "Certificate Authority" is the DNS itself, with a chain of trust 
   delegation based on the DNS delegation hierarchy.  For example, if 
   you receive an email from "alice@example.com" signed using DKIM, 
   there will be a public key in the DNS entry for 'example.com' 
   (technically it's in '<selector>._domainkey.example.com' but that's 
   not important for this simple explanation). 
    
 
 
Kaplan                    Expires March 2014                 [Page 31] 
Internet-Draft                STIR FRIED                September 2013 
 
 
   Typically DKIM is deployed with just normal DNS records, and DNSSEC 
   is not required.  DNS is susceptible to forged answers, however, so 
   DNSSEC can be used as well to prevent this.  With DNSSEC, the DNS 
   entries are signed in a similar fashion as digital certificates; 
   this results in a cryptographically secure PKI with several benefits 
   over a Web-PKI style model. 
    
   For STIR, one of the proposed solutions [draft-cider] uses a DKIM-
   style DNS model to prove E.164 authorization.  The idea is to 
   convert E.164 numbers to domain names in an ENUM-like model, and the 
   E.164 number's DNS entry contains the public key to be used for 
   verifying the signature contained in the SIP message.  The call 
   receiver can then know the originator can claim the E.164 number, 
   because the SIP message was signed with a private key whose public 
   key counterpart is in the DNS entry for the authorized E.164 number. 
    
   The DNS delegation hierarchy could be used to delegate each country-
   code to their respective numbering authorities or someone the 
   carriers trust, and the carriers in that country-code would populate 
   the public keys.  The physical DNS servers would be run by the 
   trusted party or the national numbering authority, or a company they 
   contract to do so.  For specific details, refer to [draft-cider]. 
    
11.9.     What is DNSSEC? 
    
   Domain Name System Security Extensions (DNSSEC) defines a means for 
   the DNS infrastructure to be cryptographically secured from forgery.  
   It defines the procedures for the DNS hierarchy to be signed in a 
   chained model from the root down to each node, and defines the 
   additional DNS Resource Records (RRs) for signatures and public keys 
   to do so. 
    
   For example, IANA signs the DNS root and public keys for the 
   administrators of top-level domains ('.com', '.net', etc.), and the 
   administrators of the top-level domains use their private keys to 
   sign their records as well as the public keys for each of their 
   registered subdomain owners, who then use their private keys to sign 
   their entries, and so on. 
    
   When a client performs a DNS query for a resource record of a domain 
   name, a signature can be returned along with the resource record in 
   the same DNS response message; the signature uses a public key of 
   the parent domain, creating a chain ultimately leading back up to 
   the DNS root. 
    
   In this way it's similar to the chain of trust created by Web-PKI 
   trusted root CAs signing intermediate CAs, who then sign end-entity 
   certificates.  But in DNSSEC there are no X.509 certificates - the 

 
 
Kaplan                    Expires March 2014                 [Page 32] 
Internet-Draft                STIR FRIED                September 2013 
 
 
   DNS records create the same type of information without certificates 
   and without third-party trusted CAs. 
    
   For STIR, this is only applicable in the sense that a DNS-based 
   E.164 PKI such as [draft-cider] could use DNSSEC to protect its 
   responses from being forged, if DNS forgery is a concern. 
    
11.10.    Which security model is STIR going to use? 
    
   This is still being discussed.  There are benefits and drawbacks for 
   each proposed solution, and many factors to consider.  Some of the 
   variables involve non-technical issues, such as ease of adoption for 
   carriers vs. ease of adoption for end user devices such as 
   smartphones; or issues regarding the different vendor 
   implementations that might perform STIR, as well as market forces. 
    
    
12.  Glossary 
    
   The following terminology definitions are employed in this document 
   and in the STIR Working Group. 
    
   Attack - An attack is an action that attempts to violate the 
   security policy of a system, e.g., by exploiting a vulnerability.  
   There is often a many to one mapping of attacks to vulnerabilities, 
   because many different attacks may be used to exploit a 
   vulnerability. 
    
   BICC - Bearer-Independent Call Control, a call signaling protocol 
   similar to SS7/ISUP, but that can create non-TDM-circuit media 
   channels; for example it's frequently used with voice over ATM 
   (Asynchronous Transfer Mode), as well as voice over IP. 
    
   Calling Number - the telephone number of the caller. 
    
   Calling Name - the textual name of the caller, or a geographic 
   region the caller's number is based in.  Calling name is not 
   available for all calls, nor in all countries.  It is a popular 
   feature for calls in the US. 
    
   Captcha - Completely Automated Public Turing test to tell Computers 
   and Humans Apart, a term used to describe a test to determine if the 
   user is a human or not.  Typically one sees this on a web site form, 
   with a distorted word displayed that the user must type in the form.  
   For calls, a captcha is usually a set of simple questions asked in 
   audio, that the caller must be able to answer correctly, for example 
   a math question that the user must then answer by pressing the 
   correct digits. 
    
 
 
Kaplan                    Expires March 2014                 [Page 33] 
Internet-Draft                STIR FRIED                September 2013 
 
 
   Carrier - An organization managing (and typically selling) SIP 
   services to another Carrier, SIP Service Provider (SSP), enterprises 
   or businesses, and consumers.  Carriers are not necessarily 
   regulated entities, and there are non-traditional ones such as over-
   the-top service providers.  In this document both regulated carriers 
   and any type of phone service providers are called "carriers". 
    
   Certification Authority (CA) - An entity that issues digital 
   certificates (e.g., X.509 certificates) and vouches for the binding 
   between the data items in a certificate. 
    
   CNAM - Calling Name Delivery, a feature enabling delivery of a 
   calling name for the call.  CNAM is typically provided by the 
   terminating carrier querying either the LIDB in SS7 using TCAP, or a 
   third-party CNAM database provider. 
    
   DANE - DNS-Based Authentication of Named Entities, a technology used 
   to retrieve X.509 Certificates from DNS, based on RFC 6698.  See the 
   answer to question 11.6. 
    
   DKIM - DomainKeys Identified Mail, a technology used to assert a 
   source domain name identity for email, using cryptographic 
   signatures, by putting the public keys in DNS.  See question 11.8. 
    
   DNS - Domain Name System, a distributed database used in the 
   Internet for resolving domain names to addresses, as well as other 
   resource types. 
    
   E.164 number - a phone number in international ITU-T E.164 format, 
   which is understood by the originating and receiving entities to 
   represent a globally unique number, regardless of any syntactic 
   encoding for a domain portion.  Changing the domain portion would 
   not fundamentally change the identity of the resource. 
    
   ECC - Elliptic Curve Cryptography, a type of public-key cryptography 
   based on mathematical properties of elliptic curves, as opposed to 
   those of prime numbers as is used in the more common RSA algorithm. 
    
   Email-style name - a 'user@domain' format identity, for which the 
   user portion is scoped to the domain portion; removing or changing 
   the domain portion would fundamentally change the identity of the 
   user. 
    
   H.323 - a VoIP protocol from the ITU, most commonly used today in 
   video conferencing applications, as well as voice applications. 
    
   IVR - Interactive Voice Response, a technology for machine-to-human 
   communications, typically implemented using a media server playing 
   out pre-recorded audio instructions and asking for feedback from 
 
 
Kaplan                    Expires March 2014                 [Page 34] 
Internet-Draft                STIR FRIED                September 2013 
 
 
   humans using the keypad or voice commands.  For example, automated 
   airline reservation systems are usually based on IVR. 
    
   LIDB - Line Information DataBase, a set of databases in the SS7 
   network with information for telephone numbers, such as the calling 
   name, payment policy, phone type, etc.  LIDB servers are run by 
   carriers and third-party administrators, and are queried using TCAP.  
   They are mostly common in the US and Canada. 
    
   Man in the Middle (MITM) - A MITM is an entity that is able to 
   examine and modify traffic between two (or more) parties on a 
   communication path. 
    
   NANP - North American Numbering Plan, the telephone numbering plan 
   for the +1 international calling code, for approximately 20 
   countries and territories in North America (the USA, Canada, 
   Jamaica, etc.). 
    
   PBX - Private Branch Exchange, a system providing voice service to a 
   business or organization that owns the PBX. 
    
   PKI - Public Key Infrastructure, see question 11.4. 
    
   POTS - Plain Old Telephone Service, the legacy analog phone service 
   typically provided to residential subscribers. 
    
   PRI - Primary Rate Interface, a specific telecom service line type, 
   based on ISDN, usually used for connecting a PBX to a carrier's 
   switch. 
    
   PSTN - Public Switched Telephone Network, the connection of voice 
   service networks and devices, historically based on circuit-switch 
   technology using SS7 in the core and POTS, GSM, PRI and other 
   technologies for access.  With regards to STIR, the SIP-based 
   service providers and equipment is also considered part of the PSTN. 
    
   Robocaller - an automated call-generating system, typically 
   implemented in software.  Robocallers can be legitimate, for example 
   political campaign calling systems, or local school announcement 
   systems; but they can also be used for malicious purposes.  
    
   SIP - Session Initiation Protocol, as defined by [RFC3261] and its 
   extensions, is the dominant Voice over IP protocol in use in the 
   PSTN, both in carriers as well as in enterprise markets. 
    
   SMS - Short Message Service, the text messaging application used on 
   mobile phones. 
    

 
 
Kaplan                    Expires March 2014                 [Page 35] 
Internet-Draft                STIR FRIED                September 2013 
 
 
   Source identity - the E.164 number, number code, or email-style name 
   used for identifying the originator of a message to the receiving 
   user; i.e., the identity used for "Caller-ID". 
    
   Spiral - a call spiral is a scenario where a call request gets 
   routed/forwarded through the same system or administrative domain 
   multiple times, without actually being an error condition.  This can 
   occur due to call-forwarding or number portability. 
    
   STIR - Secure Telephone Identity Revisited, the name of the IETF 
   Working Group addressing calling number validation.  This document 
   also uses it for the name of the solution mechanism. 
    
   XMPP - Extensible Messaging and Presence Protocol, an XML-based 
   protocol primarily used for session-based instant messaging, and 
   also for basic voice over IP sessions. 
    
    
13.  IANA Considerations 
    
   This document makes no request of IANA. 
    
14.  Acknowledgments 
    
   The types of questions and answers in this document arise from email 
   discussions in the STIR mailing list over the past few months, from 
   many individuals.  No emails were used for direct copy and pasting 
   content, however. 
 
15.  References 
    
15.1.     Informative References 
    
    [RFC3325] Jennings, C., Peterson, J., Watson, M., "Private 
         Extensions to the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) for 
         Asserted Identity within Trusted Networks", RFC 3325, November 
         2002. 
     
    [RFC3261] Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., Camarillo, G., Johnston, 
         A., Peterson, J., Sparks, R., Handley, M., and E. Schooler, 
         "SIP:  Session Initiation Protocol", RFC 3261, June 2002. 
     
    [RFC3647] Chokhani, S., et al, " Internet X.509 Public Key 
         Infrastructure Certificate Policy and Certification Practices 
         Framework", RFC 3647, November 2003. 
     
    [RFC4474] Peterson, J., and Jennings, C., "Enhancements for 
         Authenticated Identity Management in the Session Initiation 
         Protocol (SIP)", RFC 4474, August 2006. 
 
 
Kaplan                    Expires March 2014                 [Page 36] 
Internet-Draft                STIR FRIED                September 2013 
 
 
     
    [RFC6376] Crocker, D., Hansen, T., and Kucherawy, M., "DomainKeys 
         Identified Mail (DKIM) Signatures", RFC 6376, September 2011. 
     
    [RFC6698] Hoffman, P., Schlyter, J., "The DNS-Based Authentication 
         of Named Entities (DANE) Transport Layer Security (TLS) 
         Protocol: TLSA", RFC 6698, August 2012. 
     
    [ems-attacks] https://krebsonsecurity.com/2013/04/dhs-warns-of-
         tdos-extortion-attacks-on-public-emergency-networks 
     
    [ofcom-work] http://stakeholders.ofcom.org.uk/consultations/silent-
         calls/joint-action-plan 
     
    [robo-challenge] http://robocall.challenge.gov 
     
    [draft-asserter] Kaplan, H., "Private Extensions to the Session 
         Initiation Protocol (SIP) for Asserter Identification within 
         Trusted Networks", draft-kaplan-sip-asserter-identity, March 
         2009. 
     
    [draft-ikes] Kaplan, H., "An Identity Key-based and Effective 
         Signature for Origin-Unknown Types", draft-kaplan-stir-ikes-
         out, July 2013. 
     
    [draft-4474bis] Peterson, J., Jennings, C., Rescorla, E., 
         "Authenticated Identity Management in the Session Initiation 
         Protocol (SIP)", draft-jennings-dispatch-rfc4474bis, July 
         2013. 
     
    [draft-cider] Kaplan, H., "A proposal for Identity in a DNS-based 
         Entrusted Registry (CIDER)", draft-kaplan-stir-cider, July 
         2013. 
     
    [draft-oob] Rescorla, E., "Secure Caller-ID Fallback Mode", draft-
         rescorla-stir-fallback, July 2013. 
     
    [draft-uris-change] Kaplan, H., "Why URIs Are Changed Crossing 
         Domains", draft-kaplan-sip-uris-change, February 2008. 
     
 
Author's Address
    
   Hadriel Kaplan
   Oracle
   Email: hadriel.kaplan@oracle.com
 
    

 
 
Kaplan                    Expires March 2014                 [Page 37]