Network Working Group                                Young Lee (Huawei)       
Internet Draft                                   Greg Bernstein (Grotto) 
Intended status: Informational            Ning So (University of Texas) 
                                                    Tae Yeon Kim (ETRI) 
                                                    Kohei Shiomoto (NTT) 
                                     Oscar Gonzalez de Dios (Telefonica) 
                                          
                                                                        
                                    
                                                          March 3, 2011 
                                      
    Research Proposal for Cross Stratum Optimization (CSO) between Data 
                           Centers and Networks 


          draft-lee-cross-stratum-optimization-datacenter-00.txt  


Status of this Memo 

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the 
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.        

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 3, 2011. 

Copyright Notice 

   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the 
   document authors. All rights reserved. 

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal 
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents 
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of 
 
 
 
Lee & Bernstein, et al. Expires September 3, 2011              [Page 1] 

Internet-Draft        Cross Stratum Optimization             April 2011 
    

   publication of this document. Please review these documents 
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect 
   to this document.  

Abstract 

   Data Centers offer various application services to end-users such as 
   video gaming, cloud computing and others. Since the data centers used 
   to provide application services are distributed geographically around 
   a network, many decisions made in the control and management of 
   application services, such as where to instantiate another service 
   instance or to which data center out of several a new client is 
   assigned, can have a significant impact on the state of the network. 
   Conversely the capabilities and state of the network can have a major 
   impact on application performance.  

   Currently application decisions are made with very little or no 
   information concerning the underlying network used to deliver those 
   services. Hence such decisions may be sub-optimal from both 
   application and network resource utilization and quality of service 
   objectives. This document proposes a research program into cross 
   stratum application/network optimization focusing on the challenges 
   and opportunities presented by data center based applications and 
   carriers networks.  

Table of Contents 

    1. Introduction..................................................2 
   2. Key Issues in Data Centers and Clouds..........................4 
      2.1. Some Obstacles of Cloud Computing.........................5 
      2.2. Changes in Network Access from Data Centers and Clouds....5 
      2.3. Virtual Machine Migration.................................6 
      2.4. Entities Involved.........................................6 
      2.5. Load Balancing............................................7 
      2.6. End-user capability and communication.....................7 
   3. Deployed Applications, Services, and Products..................8 
   4. Research Program...............................................9 
      4.1. Tentative Research Deliverables..........................10 
   5. References....................................................11 
      5.1. Informative References...................................11 
   Author's Addresses...............................................15 
   Intellectual Property Statement..................................15 
   Disclaimer of Validity...........................................16 
    
1. Introduction 

   This document describes a research program on the automation of 
   certain interactions between data center based distributed 
     

   Lee & Bernstein            Expires September 3, 2011  [Page 2] 

Internet-Draft        Cross Stratum Optimization             April 2011 
    

   applications and the supporting networking infrastructure. Data 
   center based applications are used to provide a wide variety of 
   services such as video gaming, cloud computing [Nurmi], grid 
   application [GFD-122] and others. High-bandwidth video applications 
   such as remote medical surgery, live concerts and sporting events are 
   also emerging. This document is mainly concerned with data center 
   applications that in aggregate or individually make substantial 
   bandwidth demands on the network. In addition these applications may 
   desire specific bounds on QoS related parameters such as latency and 
   jitter.  

   Figure 1 shows a network diagram of an example data center based 
   application. Data centers come in an extreme variety of sizes and 
   configurations but all contain compute servers, storage and 
   application control of some sort.  

                        ,-----.     --------------- 
     ----------        / App   \   |         DC 1  | 
    | End-user |. . .>( Control )  |      o o o    | 
    |          |       \       /   |       \|/     | 
     ----------         `-----'    |        O      | 
          |                         ----- --|------ 
          |                                 | 
          |                                 | 
          |       --------------------------|-- 
          |      /                      PE1 |  \ 
          |     /        ...................O   \     -------------- 
          |    |       .                         |   | o o o   DC 2 | 
          |    | PE4 .                      PE2  |   |  \|/         | 
           ----|---O.........................O---|---|---O          | 
               |     .                           |   |              | 
               |      .           PE3            |    -------------- 
                \      ..........O   Carrier    / 
                 \               |   Network   / 
                  ---------------|------------- 
                                 | 
                         --------|------ 
                        |        O      | 
                        |       /|\     | 
                        |      o o o    | 
                        |          DC 3 | 
                         --------------- 
                                      
       Figure 1. Data center based application architecture example 
    

   This research is concerned with a subset of "cross stratum 
   optimization" (CSO) opportunities, e.g., combined optimization of 
     

   Lee & Bernstein            Expires September 3, 2011  [Page 3] 

Internet-Draft        Cross Stratum Optimization             April 2011 
    

   resources in the application and network stratum. We use the term 
   stratum here to broadly differentiate the layers of most concern to 
   the application and to the network in general. 

   In the application stratum we are concerned with and limiting the 
   scope of this research to those distributed applications offered via 
   data centers. In particular, this project does not intend to cover 
   applications delivered in a strictly peer to peer manner. Application 
   resources can be roughly categorized into computing resources, i.e., 
   servers of various types and granularities (VMs, memory, disk) and 
   content, e.g., video, audio, databases, large data sets, etc..  

   By the network stratum we mean the "network layer" (IP) and below, 
   e.g., MPLS, SDH, OTN, WDM. The network stratum has resources that 
   include routers, switches, and links. We are particularly interested 
   in further unleashing the potential presented by MPLS and GMPLS 
   control planes at the lower network layers in response to the high 
   aggregate or individual demands from the application layer. 

   The four main cross stratum optimization opportunities of this 
   research project are:  

     1.  Resource optimization (application and network) 

     2.  Responsiveness to quickly changing demands  

     3.  Enhanced service resilience (via cooperative recovery 
        techniques between application and network) 

     4.  Quality of application experience (QoE) enhancement (via better 
        use of existing network and application resources) 

   In the following document we first give a brief overview of data 
   center technology for network oriented readers, describe the current 
   state of application/network integration from the deployment, and 
   standards points of view, an then conclude with a more detailed 
   description of the research thrusts (optimization, resilience, QoE) 
   from the perspective of an IRTF project. 

2. Key Issues in Data Centers and Clouds 

   This section provides some key issues related to data centers and 
   cloud computing that motivate the need for cross stratum optimization 
   between applications and networks.  




     

   Lee & Bernstein            Expires September 3, 2011  [Page 4] 

Internet-Draft        Cross Stratum Optimization             April 2011 
    

2.1. Some Obstacles of Cloud Computing  

   There are many drivers for the move towards data center based 
   application services. They include reducing maintenance costs, energy 
   costs, flexibility, scalability, etc...   

   Reference [Armb] offers a very timely and readable review of cloud 
   computing practice and potential. Though here we do not differentiate 
   between cloud computing and medium and small data center based 
   computing that utilize modern virtualization techniques and possibly 
   other cloud computing techniques [Nurmi]. From their "top ten 
   obstacles and opportunities for cloud computing" we see that over 
   half have significantly involvement of the network. 

     1. Availability/Business Continuity  

     3. Data Confidentiality and Auditability 

     4. Data Transfer Bottlenecks 

     5. Performance Unpredictability 

     8. Scaling Quickly 

     9. Reputation Fate Sharing 

2.2. Changes in Network Access from Data Centers and Clouds  

   At the high side of data center size we begin to see significant 
   changes in network access, e.g., from a drop-off of an optical metro 
   ring (a wavelength or two), to an end destination in a long haul DWDM 
   system (many wavelengths, multiple fibers). These changes have been 
   partly driven by the consolidation effort of existing smaller size 
   data centers into Super Data Centers in the government IT 
   infrastructure and carriers.  

   Another factor that contributes to high-speed network access is due 
   to emerging applications that require high bandwidth such as sporting 
   events, live converts, 3D video applications, remote medical surgery 
   and so on.  

   These changes provide still more motivation to enable the application 
   layer to take advantage of the dynamic networking features offered by 
   network capability such as MPLS/GMPLS. 




     

   Lee & Bernstein            Expires September 3, 2011  [Page 5] 

Internet-Draft        Cross Stratum Optimization             April 2011 
    

2.3. Virtual Machine Migration 

   A key enabler for data center cost savings, consolidation, 
   flexibility and application scalability has been the technology of 
   compute virtualization or Virtual Machines (VMs)[XEN]. A VM to the 
   software application looks like a dedicated processor with dedicated 
   memory and dedicated operating system. In modern data centers or 
   "computing clouds" the smallest unit of computing resource is the VM 
   [Nurmi]. In public data centers one can buy computing capacity in 
   terms of VMs for a particular amount of time. Though different VM 
   configurations may be offered that are optimized for different types 
   of processing (e.g., memory intensive, throughput intensive)[EC2]. 

   VMs offer not only a unit of compute power but also as an 
   "application environment" that can be replicated, backed up and moved 
   [Clark]. Although VM migration started in the LAN, Wide area VM 
   migration has also been discussed in the literature, e.g., [Brad]. 
   The impact of VM migration on the network and hence other services 
   has just recently been studied along with some mitigation approaches 
   [Stage].  

   Virtual machine migration has a variety of modes: (i) scheduled vs. 
   dynamic; (ii) bulk vs. sequential; (iii) point-to-point vs. point-to-
   multi-point. Network capability can impact virtual machine migration 
   strategy. For certain mission critical applications, bandwidth 
   guarantee as well as performance guarantee must be provided by the 
   network. Make-before-break capability is also critical to support 
   seamless migration.  

   For certain applications such as disaster recovery, bulk migration is 
   required on the fly, which may necessitate concurrent computation and 
   path setup dynamically.  

2.4. Entities Involved  

   We have the data center provider, a possibly separate application 
   provider, and the user (See Figure 2). Note that the data center 
   provider and the application provider may be potential competitors. 
   In addition network providers may also offer data center services, 
   making them potential competitors to an independent data center 
   provider. Hence, for cross stratum optimization, understanding of 
   various trust relationships is important when developing interfaces 
   application/network interfaces.  

   Figure 2 illustrates key entities involved. 



     

   Lee & Bernstein            Expires September 3, 2011  [Page 6] 

Internet-Draft        Cross Stratum Optimization             April 2011 
    

    ------------       ---------------------- 
   |  End-User  |-----| Application Provider |----- 
    ------------       ----------------------      | 
          |                       |                | 
          |            ----------------------      | 
          |           | Data Center Provider |     | 
          |            ----------------------      | 
          |                       |                | 
          |            ----------------------      | 
           -----------|   Network Provider   |----- 
                       ---------------------- 
    
                  Figure 2: Key Entities involved in CSO 
 
2.5. Load Balancing  

   As the application servers are distributed geographically across many 
   Data Centers for various reasons (e.g., load balancing), the decision 
   as which server to select for an application request from end-users 
   has many factors that can negatively affect the quality of experience 
   (QoE) of the users if not done correctly. One of the major drivers 
   for operating multiple Data Centers is allowing the application to be 
   closer to the end-users, so that the overall service performance and 
   the user experience can be enhanced.    

   Among the key factors to be considered in choosing the server for an 
   application or instantiating VM include: 

     . The utilization of the servers; 

     . The underlying network loading conditions within a data center 
        (LAN); 

     . The underlying network loading conditions between data centers 
        (MAN/WAN); 

     . The underlying network conditions between the end-user and data 
        center.  

2.6. End-user capability and communication  

   As there are plethora of end-user terminal types (e.g., desktop 
   device, PDA, mobile phones, etc.), it is important for application to 
   capture end-user device capability and preference. For some 
   applications, the same user may have multiple devices. In such case, 

     

   Lee & Bernstein            Expires September 3, 2011  [Page 7] 

Internet-Draft        Cross Stratum Optimization             April 2011 
    

   seamless device to device transition needs to be provided by 
   application providers to ensure acceptable QoE to the end-users. 

   For other applications, codec capability and/or terminal screen 
   dimension of end-user devices may also have impact on QoS and 
   bandwidth requirements.  

   Hence, the interface between end-user and application may need to be 
   enhanced to capture these aspects. 

3. Deployed Applications, Services, and Products 

   Most current methods are associated with IP networks. For instance, 
   Akamai and other content distribution networks (CDN) carriers, have 
   used some IP network knowledge to optimize their application overlay 
   network usage. When selecting the surrogate (cache or mirror) 
   location from the client location, many CDN providers use network 
   latency via a probing technique or proximity based on static 
   configuration to determine the optimal surrogate location. These 
   overlays are not closely integrated with carrier's network real load 
   condition such as link bandwidth utilization and availability. For 
   many current and emerging applications that require stringent QoS and 
   bandwidth guarantee, current CDN infrastructure is not well suited 
   for meeting such service need.  

   The IETF ALTO WG has focused on overlay optimization among peers by 
   utilizing information about topological proximity and appropriate 
   geographical locations of the underlay networks. With this method, 
   the optimization generally occurs in selecting peer location which 
   will help reduce IP traffic unnecessarily traversing IP service 
   providers. Current scope of this work does not address general 
   problems this document has been discussing such as the selection of 
   application servers based on resource availability and usage of the 
   underlying networks.   

   In some cases, application controllers can estimate network load 
   based on ping latency, and network topology based on trace routes in 
   the Internet, based on the assumption that the underlying transport 
   network is an IP network, and the routing is based on simple IP 
   forwarding.  

   In regards to load balancing, DNS redirect technique is currently 
   used to redirect end-user request to certain servers that host end-
   user application.   

   In the current Intra-Data Center network, the server selection for an 
   application/VM is done by load-balancer. The load balancer is aware 
   of a certain level of server usage data (e.g., the number 
     

   Lee & Bernstein            Expires September 3, 2011  [Page 8] 

Internet-Draft        Cross Stratum Optimization             April 2011 
    

   simultaneous instances of the application usage) and distributes the 
   application requests based on that data.  

   However, the current load balancing technology is insufficient in 
   providing an optimal decision across multiple VLANs and multiple Data 
   Centers. This capability is often referred to as global load 
   balancing.  

   First of all, there is no good mechanism for the communication 
   exchange among load balancers located in different Data Centers. This 
   implies that load balancers from different vendors cannot communicate 
   to each other.   

   Secondly, load balancers know little about the underlying network 
   conditions listed in the previous section.  Nor is it user condition 
   aware.  

   When migrating existing VMs/applications from one data center to 
   another, the underlying network load condition in LAN/MAN/WAN can be 
   constraining factors. Migration of VMs/applications, for instance, 
   typically requires a high-speed data transfer across LAN/MAN/WAN to 
   minimize service impact. Application controllers responsible for this 
   operation is not aware of LAN/MAN/WAN network conditions.  

 

4. Research Program 

   In the previous sections we have looked at key issues in Data Center 
   and Cloud Computing and some commercial service deployments on a 
   variety of cross layer optimization problems. 

   A common theme to the previous work was that sharing information 
   between the application and network stratums can lead to more optimal 
   solutions to the challenges facing distributed applications. In 
   addition to sharing information, both the application layer and 
   network may possess capabilities that are can very useful to each 
   other if appropriate access can be arranged, e.g., the dynamic high 
   bandwidth services that are enabled by MPLS/GMPLS. 

   Hence this research project is focused on the interfaces and services 
   that could be used between the application and network stratum to 
   address the four main problem thrusts of: 

     1.  Joint application/network Resource optimization (global load 
        balancing) 


     

   Lee & Bernstein            Expires September 3, 2011  [Page 9] 

Internet-Draft        Cross Stratum Optimization             April 2011 
    

     2.  Responsiveness to quickly changing demands from/to application 
        to/from network 

     3.  Enhanced service resilience (via cooperative recovery 
        techniques between application and network) 

     4.  Quality of application experience (QoE) enhancement (via better 
        use of existing network and application resources) 

   Even though algorithms play a big part of optimization, in thrust (1) 
   we are concerned with the information that could be shared to promote 
   optimization and various optimization criteria rather than specific 
   algorithms. Note that this is similar to the approach taken with 
   MPLS-TE, GMPLS and PCE where specific algorithms are not 
   standardized.  

4.1. Tentative Research Deliverables 

       a)  Baseline network/application model - general enough to 
          include most cases of interest but no more. 

       b)  Survey the various "trust or lack of" in the relationships 
          between various key players in both the application and 
          network stratum. Include a survey of various "summarization", 
          "abstraction", or other techniques that can reduce the level 
          of "trust" needed at an interface.  

       c)  Survey of the data center/cloud based applications -
          investigate the commonality and differences with respect to 
          their impact on network infrastructure.  

       d)  Define key interfaces and their functionality and relate 
          these to current standards and potential future standards. 

       e)  Investigation and report on the role of TE based network 
          infrastructure (MPLS, GMPLS) in providing support to dynamic 
          application loads, scaling and QoE enhancement. 

       f)  Report on mechanisms for application level support for 
          network recovery and network support for application recovery. 

       g)  Investigate the time frames and responsiveness of interest 
          to application/network interaction. For example what do 
          various applications need, what can the network provide, can 
          other techniques such as time based "load shifting" be 
          utilized. 


     

   Lee & Bernstein            Expires September 3, 2011  [Page 10] 

Internet-Draft        Cross Stratum Optimization             April 2011 
    

   
5. Security Considerations  

   TBD 

6. IANA Considerations 

   This informational document does not make any requests for IANA 
   action. 

      

7. References 

7.1. Informative References 

   [Armb]   M. Armbrust et al., "A view of cloud computing," 
             Communications of the ACM, vol. 53, p. 50-58, Apr. 2010. 

   [Brad]   R. Bradford, E. Kotsovinos, A. Feldmann, and H. Schioberg, 
             "Live wide-area migration of virtual machines including 
             local persistent state," in Proceedings of the 3rd 
             international conference on Virtual execution environments, 
             San Diego, California, USA, 2007, pp. 169-179. 

   [Carter]  R. L. Carter and M. E. Crovella, "Server selection using 
             dynamic path characterization in wide-area networks," in 
             INFOCOM '97. Sixteenth Annual Joint Conference of the IEEE 
             Computer and Communications Societies. Proceedings IEEE, 
             1997, vol. 3, pp. 1014-1021 vol.3. 

   [Chamber] C. Chambers and W.-chang Feng, "Patch scheduling for on-
             line games," in Proceedings of 4th ACM SIGCOMM workshop on 
             Network and system support for games, Hawthorne, NY, 2005, 
             pp. 1-6. 

   [Clark]   C. Clark et al., "Live migration of virtual machines," in 
             Proceedings of the 2nd conference on Symposium on Networked 
             Systems Design & Implementation - Volume 2, 2005, pp. 273-
             286. 

   [CostCloud] A. Greenberg, J. Hamilton, D. Maltz, and P. Patel, "The 
             cost of a cloud: research problems in data center 
             networks," ACM SIGCOMM, Vol. 39, Number1, January 2009. 




     

   Lee & Bernstein            Expires September 3, 2011  [Page 11] 

Internet-Draft        Cross Stratum Optimization             April 2011 
    

   [GFD-122] Tiziana Ferrari (editor), "Grid Network services Use Cases 
             from the e-Science Community", GFD-I-122, Open Grid Forum, 
             December 12, 2007. 

   [Gargo]   S. Gargolinski, C. S. Pierre, and M. Claypool, "Game server 
             selection for multiple players," in Proceedings of 4th ACM 
             SIGCOMM workshop on Network and system support for games, 
             Hawthorne, NY, 2005, pp. 1-6. 

   [Grampin] E. Grampin, A. Castro, M. German, F. Rodriguez, G. Tejera, 
             and M. Sanguinetti, "A PCE-based Connectivity Provisioning 
             Management Framework," in Network Operations and Management 
             Symposium, 2007. LANOMS 2007. Latin American, 2007, pp. 76-
             83. 

    [Habib]    I.W. Habib, Qiang Song, Zhaoming Li, and N. S. V. Rao, 
             "Deployment of the GMPLS control plane for grid 
             applications in experimental high-performance networks," 
             Communications Magazine, IEEE, vol. 44, no. 3, pp. 65-73, 
             2006. 

   [Kris]    P. Krishnan, D. Raz, and Y. Shavitt, "The cache location 
             problem," Networking, IEEE/ACM Transactions on, vol. 8, no. 
             5, pp. 568-582, 2000. 

   [Krishna] B. Krishnamurthy, C. Wills, and Y. Zhang, "On the use and 
             performance of content distribution networks," in 
             Proceedings of the 1st ACM SIGCOMM Workshop on Internet 
             Measurement, San Francisco, California, USA, 2001, pp. 169-
             182. 

   [Kurc]    A. R. Kurc, D. Raz, and Y. Shavitt, with Cheng Jin, 
             "Constrained mirror placement on the Internet," Selected 
             Areas in Communications, IEEE Journal on, vol. 20, no. 7, 
             pp. 1369-1382, 2002. 

   [Martini] B. Martini, V. Martini, F. Baroncelli, K. Torkman, and P. 
             Castoldi, "Application-Driven Control of Network Resources 
             in Multiservice Optical Networks," Optical Communications 
             and Networking, IEEE/OSA Journal of, vol. 1, no. 2, p. 
             A270-A283, 2009. 

   [Meng]    X. Meng, V. Pappas, and L. Zhang, "Improving the 
             Scalability of Data Center Networks with Traffic-aware 
             Virtual Machine Placement," in 2010 Proceedings IEEE 
             INFOCOM, San Diego, CA, USA, 2010, pp. 1-9. 

    
     

   Lee & Bernstein            Expires September 3, 2011  [Page 12] 

Internet-Draft        Cross Stratum Optimization             April 2011 
    

   [Nurmi]   D. Nurmi et al., "The Eucalyptus Open-Source Cloud-
             Computing System," in Cluster Computing and the Grid, 2009. 
             CCGRID '09. 9th IEEE/ACM International Symposium on, pp. 
             124-131, 2009. 

   [Qiu]     V. N. Padmanabhan and G. M. Voelker, with Lili Qiu, "On the 
             placement of Web server replicas," in INFOCOM 2001. 
             Twentieth Annual Joint Conference of the IEEE Computer and 
             Communications Societies. Proceedings. IEEE, 2001, vol. 3, 
             pp. 1587-1596 vol.3. 

   [Quax]   P. Quax, J. Dierckx, B. Cornelissen, G. Vansichem, and W. 
             Lamotte, "Dynamic server allocation in a real-life 
             deployable communications architecture for networked 
             games," Proceedings of the 7th ACM SIGCOMM Workshop on 
             Network and System Support for Games,  Worcester, 
             Massachusetts: ACM, 2008, pp. 66-71. 

   [Ratnas]  S. Ratnasamy, M. Handley, R. Karp, and S. Shenker, 
             "Topologically-aware overlay construction and server 
             selection," in INFOCOM 2002. Twenty-First Annual Joint 
             Conference of the IEEE Computer and Communications 
             Societies. Proceedings. IEEE, 2002, vol. 3, pp. 1190-1199 
             vol.3. 

   [RFC2261] D. Harrington, et al., "An Architecture for Describing SNMP 
             Management Frameworks," January, 1998. 

   [RFC2265] B. Wijnen, et al., "View-based Access Control Model (VACM) 
             for the Simple Network Management Protocol (SNMP)," 
             January, 1998. 

   [Stage]   A. Stage and T. Setzer, "Network-aware migration control 
             and scheduling of differentiated virtual machine 
             workloads," in Proceedings of the 2009 ICSE Workshop on 
             Software Engineering Challenges of Cloud Computing, 2009, 
             pp. 9-14. 

   [Tang]    Xueyan Tang, "On replica placement for QoS-aware content 
             distribution," in INFOCOM 2004. Twenty-third AnnualJoint 
             Conference of the IEEE Computer and Communications 
             Societies, 2004, vol. 2, pp. 806-815 vol.2. 

   [WoWHrs] P. Tarng, K. Chen, and P. Huang, "An analysis of WoW 
             players' game hours," Proceedings of the 7th ACM SIGCOMM 
             Workshop on Network and System Support for Games,  
             Worcester, Massachusetts: ACM, 2008, pp. 47-52. 

     

   Lee & Bernstein            Expires September 3, 2011  [Page 13] 

Internet-Draft        Cross Stratum Optimization             April 2011 
    

   [WoWAct] M. Suznjevic, M. Matijasevic, and O. Dobrijevic, "Action 
             specific Massive Multiplayer Online Role Playing Games 
             traffic analysis: case study of World of Warcraft," 
             Proceedings of the 7th ACM SIGCOMM Workshop on Network and 
             System Support for Games, Worcester, Massachusetts: ACM, 
             2008, pp. 106-107. 

   [XEN]    P. Barham et al., "Xen and the art of virtualization," in 
             Proceedings of the nineteenth ACM symposium on Operating 
             systems principles, pp. 164-177, 2003. 

   [Y.1541]  Network performance objectives for IP-based services, 
             February, 2002. 

   [Y.2011]  General principles and general reference model for Next 
             Generation Networks, October, 2004.  

   [Y.2012]  Functional Requirements and architecture of the NGN, April, 
             2010. 

    



























     

   Lee & Bernstein            Expires September 3, 2011  [Page 14] 

Internet-Draft        Cross Stratum Optimization             April 2011 
    

    
Author's Addresses 

    
    
   Young Lee (Editor) 
   Huawei Technologies 
   1700 Alma Drive, Suite 500 
   Plano, TX 75075 
   USA 
   Phone: (972) 509-5599 
   Email: ylee@huawei.com 
 
   Greg M. Bernstein (Editor) 
   Grotto Networking 
   Fremont California, USA 
   Phone: (510) 573-2237 
   Email: gregb@grotto-networking.com 
 
   Ning So (Editor) 
   Univerity of Texas at Dallas  
   Email: ningso@yahoo.com 
    
 
   Tae Yeon Kim 
   ETRI 
   tykim@etri.or.kr 
 
   Kohei Shiomoto 
   NTT 
   Email : shiomoto.kohei@lab.ntt.co.jp 
 
   Oscar Gonzalez de Dios 
   Telefonica 
   Email : ogondio@tid.es 
    
    
    
Intellectual Property Statement 

   The IETF Trust takes no position regarding the validity or scope of 
   any Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be 
   claimed to pertain to the implementation or use of the technology 
   described in any IETF Document or the extent to which any license 
   under such rights might or might not be available; nor does it 
   represent that it has made any independent effort to identify any 
   such rights.  

     

   Lee & Bernstein            Expires September 3, 2011  [Page 15] 

Internet-Draft        Cross Stratum Optimization             April 2011 
    

   Copies of Intellectual Property disclosures made to the IETF 
   Secretariat and any assurances of licenses to be made available, or 
   the result of an attempt made to obtain a general license or 
   permission for the use of such proprietary rights by implementers or 
   users of this specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR 
   repository at http://www.ietf.org/ipr 

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement 
   any standard or specification contained in an IETF Document. Please 
   address the information to the IETF at ietf-ipr@ietf.org. 

Disclaimer of Validity 

   All IETF Documents and the information contained therein are provided 
   on an "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE 
   REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE 
   IETF TRUST AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL 
   WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY 
   WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION THEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE 
   ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS 
   FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 

Acknowledgment 

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the 
   Internet Society. 

    

 
















     

   Lee & Bernstein            Expires September 3, 2011  [Page 16] 
