Network Working Group                                            Y. Lee  
Internet Draft                                                   F. Xia   
                                                                 Huawei 
                                                           G. Bernstein 
                                                      Grotto Networking 
Intended status: Informational                                          
Expires: January 2011                                                   
                                    
                                                           July 4, 2010 
                                      
              Problem Statement for Cross-Layer Optimization  

            draft-lee-cross-layer-optimization-problem-00.txt 

                                      


                                      
Status of this Memo 

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the 
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.        

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 4, 2011. 

Copyright Notice 

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the 
   document authors. All rights reserved. 

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal 
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents 
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of 
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents 
 
 
 
Lee & Xia & Bernstein  Expires January 4, 2011                 [Page 1] 

Internet-Draft      Cross-Layer Optimization (CLO)            July 2010 
    

   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with 
   respect to this document.  Code Components extracted from this 
   document must include Simplified BSD License text as described in 
   Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without 
   warranty as described in the Simplified BSD License. 

Abstract 

   Due to the lack of layer interaction between networked applications 
   and the network during service provisioning, many application 
   services can make poor use of network resources or not achieve their 
   overall quality of service objectives.  

   This document describes the general problem of cross layer 
   optimization. Cross-layer optimization (CLO) involves the overall 
   optimization of application layer and network resources by providing 
   an interface for interactions and exchanges between the two layers. 
   The potential gains of cross layer optimization are illustrated via 
   examples from content delivery systems, video on demand systems, and 
   grid computing.  

Table of Contents 

     
   1. Introduction......................................... 2 
      1.1. Terminology and Glossary........................... 3 
      1.2. Application Resources and Service Profile............. 4 
      1.3. Network Capabilities.............................. 5 
   2. Network Application Examples ........................... 6 
      2.1. File Distribution Systems.......................... 6 
      2.2. Streaming Content Distribution Systems............... 7 
      2.3. Conferencing and Gaming ........................... 8 
      2.4. Grid Computing................................... 9 
   3. Problem Statement and Opportunities...................... 9 
      3.1. Topology Related Processes........................ 10 
      3.2. Load and Traffic Adaptive Processes................. 11 
      3.3. Provisioning Processes........................... 11 
   4. Security Considerations............................... 12 
   5. References......................................... 12 
   Author's Addresses..................................... 15 
   Intellectual Property Statement .......................... 15 
   Disclaimer of Validity.................................. 16 
    
1. Introduction 

   Application layer services by their very nature utilize application 
   layer resources, and the underlying network resources. Application 
   layer services can involve a variety of application layer resources 
     

   Lee & Xia & Bernstein   Expires January 4, 2011 [Page 2] 

Internet-Draft      Cross-Layer Optimization (CLO)            July 2010 
    

   such as data storage, computation, specialized server capabilities, 
   and large data sets. However, the provisioning of network 
   applications typically includes minimal or no information about the 
   state of underlying network resources. For example if an application 
   client can obtain a desired large data set (file, video, database, 
   etc...) from a choice of many different servers, the application 
   service will take into account the current status and load on the 
   servers but only minimal network considerations, e.g., topological 
   proximity, connectivity, ping latency, rather than current link 
   bandwidth utilization or other quality of service parameters (e.g., 
   delay and jitter).  

   In addition application services may make significant demands on 
   network resources such as bandwidth and may have a variety of quality 
   of service requirements. Due to the lack of layer interaction between 
   networked applications and the network during service provisioning, 
   many application services can make poor use of network resources or 
   not achieve their overall quality of service objectives.  

   This document describes the general problem of cross layer 
   optimization. Cross-layer optimization (CLO) involves the overall 
   optimization of application layer and network resources by providing 
   an interface for interactions and exchanges between the two layers. 
   The potential gains of cross layer optimization are illustrated via 
   examples from content delivery systems, video on demand systems, and 
   grid computing.  

   1.1. Terminology and Glossary 

   Application Layer -- The highest layer in the OSI or TCP/IP protocol 
   models. 

   Application Profile -- The characteristics of the application from a 
   network traffic perspective and the QoS requirements that the 
   application service will require from the network. 

   Application Resources -- Non-network resources critical to achieving 
   the application service functionality. Examples include: caches, 
   mirrors, application specific servers, content, large data sets, 
   etc... 

   Application Service -- A networked application offered to a variety 
   of clients.  

   Network Layer - All layers below and including layer 3 in the OSI 
   protocol model that can contribute to meeting the requirements of an 
   application service. This includes MPLS and GMPLS controlled 
   networks. 
     

   Lee & Xia & Bernstein   Expires January 4, 2011 [Page 3] 

Internet-Draft      Cross-Layer Optimization (CLO)            July 2010 
    

   Network Resources -- Any layer 3 or below resources such as 
   bandwidth, connections, links, connection processing, etc... 

   1.2. Application Resources and Service Profile 

   Current and emerging application resources can be grouped into a 
   number of categories as follows:  

  o  Live data sources -- such as video or audio from live sporting or 
     entertainment events, data feeds from radio telescopes used in 
     very long baseline interferometry, large particle physics 
     experiments such as the LHC, etc... 

  o  Processing Resources -- such as raw computational capability for 
     cloud computing, transactional capabilities for e-commerce, 
     transcoding capabilities for video and audio, etc... 

  o  Storage Resources -- disk farms, tape libraries, etc...  

  o  Content/Data Sets -- video, audio, commercial, scientific, etc... 

   These application resources may be distributed around a network from 
   each other or from users/clients. The scope of a network application 
   can be within a building, within an enterprise, within an autonomous 
   system or distributed amongst multiple autonomous systems. 

   Application profile defines the characteristics of the application 
   from a network traffic perspective and the QoS requirements that the 
   application service will require from the network. 

  Each application is associated with the sources from which the 
  application resources originate and the consuming locations (e.g., 
  client locations) of the application resources. Application service 
  profiles can be characterized by the following categories: 

   o  Location profile: locations of both the clients and the sources 

   o  QoS profile: (i) Delay Intolerant; (ii) Jitter Intolerant; (iii) 
      Packet Drop Sensitive  

   o  Connectivity profile: (i) P-P; (ii) P-MP; (iii) MP-MP; (iv) Any 
      cast, etc.  

   o  Directionality profile: (i) uni-directional; (ii) bi-directional  

   o  Bandwidth profile: bandwidth required for the connectivity  

   o  Duration of service profile: service time of the application 
     

   Lee & Xia & Bernstein   Expires January 4, 2011 [Page 4] 

Internet-Draft      Cross-Layer Optimization (CLO)            July 2010 
    

   1.3. Network Capabilities  

   Depending on the application, its nature, and related quality of 
   service, the underlying network is required to have different 
   capabilities. For our purposes here, network resources and 
   capabilities can be categorized as follows: 

   o  Bandwidth guarantee --- the ability of the network to make 
      bandwidth guarantee for the application service.  

   o  QoS and SLA -- the ability of the network to deliver a given 
      amount of QoS and live up to service level agreements on that QoS. 
      Typical QoS may involve delay, jitter, maximum single incident 
      outage time, yearly total outage time, etc... 

   o  Configurability -- the ability to reconfigure/reoptimize various 
      aspects of the network and the timeliness in which changes can 
      occur.  

   o  Adaptability --- the ability to adapt changes due to changes of 
      service demand or application/network congestion/failure.  

   The ability to optimize the utilization of both application layer 
   resources and network resources while meeting service goals will be 
   highly dependent on the nature of the application and the properties 
   of the network.  

   However, there is basic information that could be exchanged across 
   application and network layers, and possible configuration agility 
   that could apply to a wide variety of network applications. The 
   following is a non-exhaustive list of some underlying network types 
   over which application services are transported and the information 
   that could be shared to promote cross layer optimization:  

   1. Raw best effort IP network: network resource related location 
      information of clients and application resources is of prime 
      interest; some notions of available bandwidth could be helpful for 
      example some applications could make use of information on time of 
      day (TOD) variations for scheduling. 

   2. Raw best effort IP network with tunable weights: In the intra-
      domain case traffic variations have sometimes been accommodated 
      with the variation of IGP weights [REF]. For network applications 
      with a significant and somewhat predictable load such techniques 
      could be beneficial in addition to basic network resource related 
      location information as mentioned above.  


     

   Lee & Xia & Bernstein   Expires January 4, 2011 [Page 5] 

Internet-Draft      Cross-Layer Optimization (CLO)            July 2010 
    

   3. Diff-Serv capable IP network: filtering and PHB could be adjusted 
      based on network application needs. Server choices could be 
      influenced by existing "bandwidth allocations". Previously 
      mentioned techniques could also be applied. 

   4. MPLS-TE and/or GMPLS enabled networks: These networks are designed 
      to provide configurability and bandwidth/QoS guarantees. For the 
      application types that require stringent bandwidth/QoS 
      requirements, these networks are well suited for such cross layer 
      optimization. 

   Section 2 describes some major classes of network applications and 
   the cross layer optimization opportunities they can present. Section 
   3 offers a problem statement based on basic processes and interfaces, 
   and then describe how this work relates to other work within the IETF 
   and other standard development organizations (SDOs). 

    

2. Network Application Examples 

   We group application examples by increasing complexity in terms of 
   resource optimization and quality of service (profile) requirements. 
   In the following we look at file distribution systems, streaming 
   content distribution systems (live and on-demand), and grid computing 
   applications. 

   2.1. File Distribution Systems 

   File distribution systems began by accelerating the download of web 
   pages, particularly those with images, and expanded to include 
   software, audio and, video file delivery. These are also known as 
   content distribution systems, but we will use the name file 
   distribution system to emphasize that these are concerned with the 
   transfer of entire files and are not concerned with streaming 
   services (covered in the next section). As such these applications 
   have the fewest network QoS requirements. Goals of these system 
   include reduction of latency to clients, offloading originating 
   server, and conservation of network resources. Such systems have been 
   set up as overlays on existing network infrastructures. Commonly 
   encountered optimization problems with network implications include: 

  o  Cache and Mirror placement problem  

  o  Efficient transfer of content to servers  

  o  Client to server assignment problem  

     

   Lee & Xia & Bernstein   Expires January 4, 2011 [Page 6] 

Internet-Draft      Cross-Layer Optimization (CLO)            July 2010 
    

   The cache placement problem is concerned with what content to 
   allocate to which cache servers based on their proximity to clients 
   and their loading [Cache]. Mirrors differ from caches in that a 
   client is only directed to a mirror if it has the desired content 
   [Mirror]. The mirror or server replica placement problem is concerned 
   with where to place a number of server given a fixed number of 
   possible sites [Mirror],[Replica]. Depending upon the relationship 
   between the file distribution service provider and the network 
   provider the cache assignment problem comes in two flavors, a general 
   problem formulation with relatively arbitrary server placement and a 
   specific formulation for Transparent En-Route Caches which are placed 
   along the route from the client to the originating file server and 
   work transparently from the client perspective [Cache]. All the 
   processing placement optimizations work with some type of network 
   topological information, e.g., relative link cost network models. 
   However, exact network models are not always necessary to achieve 
   significant performance improvements [Topo]. 

   The efficient transport of the original content to the "replication" 
   servers may be important when the amount of material becomes large. 
   We will revisit this issue in the grid computing applications 
   section. 

   In assignment or selection of a content server for a particular 
   client one would ideally take into account both current server load 
   and network latency between client and server [Topo]. In the 
   streaming case we will also need to worry more about bandwidth and 
   QoS. 

    

   2.2. Streaming Content Distribution Systems 

   Steaming services come in two basic flavors, live and on-demand. In 
   addition many variants in between these two extremes are created when 
   pause or replay functionality is included in a live streaming 
   service. Streaming services are different from file download in a 
   number of ways. First, the commencement of content consumption does 
   not require an entire file to be downloaded. Second minimum bandwidth 
   and QoS requirements are needed between the client and the server to 
   render such services viable. Hence such services have a non-trivial 
   service profile. 

   By "live streaming" here we mean that the client is willing to 
   receive the stream at its current play out point rather than at some 
   pre-existing start point. A key network issue for live streaming 
   services is whether multi-casting takes place at the application or 
   network level. For example in carrier operated IPTV networks IP 
     

   Lee & Xia & Bernstein   Expires January 4, 2011 [Page 7] 

Internet-Draft      Cross-Layer Optimization (CLO)            July 2010 
    

   multi-casting is beginning to be used [IPTV]. In the case of an 
   independent live video distribution service, one may make use of an 
   overlay network of servers that provide the multi-casting.  

   Examples of optimization problems for a live streaming service 
   include: 

  o  Server selection problem (application based multi-cast) or leaf 
     attachment problem (network based multi-cast)[ServMulti] 

  o  Server placement problem (application based multi-cast) or tree 
     construction (network based multi-cast). 

   On-demand services provide additional technical challenges. Service 
   providers wish to avoid long start up service delays to retain 
   customers, while at the same time batch together requests to save on 
   server costs. A number of additional optimization decisions and 
   problems typically arise in the on-demand applications in addition to 
   those seen in live streaming: 

  o  Client stream sharing technique 

  o  Batch or Multicast Server selection problem 

   The on-demand streaming services as opposed to the live streaming 
   services also has a set of problems similar to those seen in file 
   distribution: (a) data allocation problem: when and where should we 
   pre-stock video files, (b) on-demand server placement problem (where 
   to put and how much capacity), and (c) efficient (cost effective and 
   timely) transfer of content to servers. 

   2.3. Conferencing and Gaming 

   When we look at the complexity of the overall application 
   connectivity, video and audio conferencing take us from the point-to-
   multipoint scenario of streaming content distribution to a 
   multipoint-to-multipoint situation. In addition, we see an additional 
   hard QoS constraint on latency. Both conferencing and gaming are 
   characterized by bi-directional connection and asymmetric bandwidth 
   from/to the server location to/from the user location.  Video and 
   audio conferences may for non-technical reasons be limited in scope 
   to a few handfuls of clients. Gaming applications, however, can push 
   the scalability limits of both server and network technologies.   

   Gaming, in particular massively multi-player online games (MMOGs), 
   has the connectivity and QoS requirements of conferencing but many 
   more issues related to the scale of application. Note that as a part 
   of game play many gamers utilize audio conferencing services such as 
     

   Lee & Xia & Bernstein   Expires January 4, 2011 [Page 8] 

Internet-Draft      Cross-Layer Optimization (CLO)            July 2010 
    

   Ventrilo [VENT] and hence would generate well modeled audio 
   conferencing traffic. Due to scalability concerns [GameServ] and 
   player desires [MPSel], server selection can be more complicated than 
   in the streaming content distribution case.  

   In summary conferencing and gaming have optimization problems similar 
   to those seen in file and streaming content distribution, but the 
   scale of gaming, its latency requirements, and it revenue generating 
   potential make it worthy of individual study for cross layer 
   optimization. 

   2.4. Grid Computing 

   Grid computing has requirements for large file transfer somewhat 
   similar to our file distribution systems but most likely with reduced 
   fanout but with much larger file sizes. In addition grid computing 
   may have a "streaming" requirement similar to the streaming content 
   distribution systems but again with significantly reduced fanout and 
   sometimes extremely large bandwidth requirements. For example current 
   estimates of the streaming traffic produce by one antenna in the 
   proposed Square Kilometer Array (SKA) [SKA] is approximately 160Gbps 
   with the array consisting of approximately 3000 antennas.  

   Reference [GFD-122] details a number of grid use cases including 
   visualization, large data streaming coordinated with job execution, 
   High Energy Physics file replica management, health care, distributed 
   manufacturing and maintenance, super computing, and Very Long 
   Baseline Interferometery (radio astronomy). In some cases these 
   applications run over shared research networks such as Internet2 
   [VLBI]. 

   We note that some instantiations of grid computing produce problems 
   very similar to those already discussed, others other push technology 
   limits in terms of data rates and/or data set sizes and hence could 
   benefit from the latest techniques such as GMPLS and its extensions 
   for controlling very high speed network infrastructure [WSON]. 

3. Problem Statement and Opportunities 

   The previous examples show the benefits that can accrue when both 
   application layer and network layer resources are jointly considered 
   for optimization. The key missing piece in all these situations is an 
   appropriate interface/architecture that could accommodate this joint 
   optimization while meeting the business, technical and security 
   constraints that may be inherent in the relationship between the 
   application and network provider. 


     

   Lee & Xia & Bernstein   Expires January 4, 2011 [Page 9] 

Internet-Draft      Cross-Layer Optimization (CLO)            July 2010 
    

   ITU-T Y.2011 NGN and Y.2111 Resource and Admission Control Functions 
   (RACF) discuss NGN service stratum separation from NGN transport 
   stratum. ITU-T Y.2012 defines application network interface (ANI) 
   which provides a channel for interactions and exchanges between 
   applications and NGN elements. This interface is similar to the CLO 
   interface. Y.2012 however does not address any details on the 
   functionality and information requirements and control flows of the 
   interface.  

   Since it is premature at this point to dictate any particular 
   architecture or interface it will be instead pointed out in this 
   section, as the examples have previously shown, the type of 
   information/control flows needed and currently unavailable as inputs 
   or outputs to various cross layer optimization processes.  

   3.1. Topology Related Processes 

   As seen in the previous sections, the fundamental processes of server 
   selection and content placement can have dramatically better outcomes 
   if some type of network topology information is known concerning 
   clients and servers. For example, location mapping information for 
   servers and clients from a network perspective would flow from the 
   application layer to the network layer using this interface so that 
   the network may be able to provide some performance estimates 
   concerning the routes associated with the given location mapping 
   information. 

   In more complex or resource "hungry" scenarios knowing something 
   about the capabilities of the network infrastructure can be used to 
   determine the viability of a particular application prior to any 
   attempts to reserve network resources for its support. Some level of 
   network topology that depicts the network bandwidth availability for 
   the requested servers-clients pairs would be useful if the network is 
   capable of traffic-engineering.   

   This "topology" information does not need to be exact. Indeed various 
   levels of abstraction/virtualization may be helpful since if the 
   application provider and network provider may be different 
   organizational or business entities where neither party may wish to 
   divulge detailed information. 

   Most current methods are associated with IP networks. For instance, 
   Akamai and other content distribution networks (CDN) carriers, has 
   used some IP network knowledge to optimize their application overlay 
   network usage. When selecting the surrogate location from the client 
   location, many CDN providers use network latency via a probing 
   technique or proximity based on static configuration to determine the 
   optimal surrogate location. These overlays are not closely integrated 
     

   Lee & Xia & Bernstein   Expires January 4, 2011 [Page 10] 

Internet-Draft      Cross-Layer Optimization (CLO)            July 2010 
    

   with carrier's network real load condition such as link bandwidth 
   utilization and availability. For many current and emerging 
   applications that require stringent QoS and bandwidth guarantee, 
   current CDN infrastructure is not well suited for meeting such 
   service need. 

   IETF ALTO WG has been focusing on overlay optimization among peers by 
   utilizing information about topological proximity and appropriate 
   geographical locations of the underlay networks. With this method, 
   the optimization generally occurs in selecting peer location which 
   will help reduce IP traffic unnecessarily traversing IP service 
   providers. Current scope of this work does not address general 
   problems this document has been discussing such as the selection of 
   application servers based on resource availability and usage of the 
   underlying networks.  

    

   3.2. Load and Traffic Adaptive Processes 

   Load and traffic adaptive processes can be facilitated using an 
   interface from the network to the CLO entity in the application 
   layer. It concerns the current QoS being delivered, the network 
   loading impacts, etc. of the network application so that the CLO if 
   necessary can make adjustments, e.g., change client server 
   relationships, change criteria for allocating clients to servers, 
   change bandwidth allocation/reservation level, etc...  

   Re-optimization of network application based on application feedback 
   and network monitoring has not been properly defined in any of the 
   existing interfaces. By allowing this type of information flow 
   between the application layer and the network layer, adaptive and 
   agile process would be enabled to better meet the performance 
   objectives for certain applications.  

    

   3.3. Provisioning Processes 

   If the network is configurable, an interface such that the CLO entity 
   can use this configurability. For example, in MPLS-TE networks, we 
   would like the network CLO entity to be able to initiate connection 
   setup on behalf of the various application entities, e.g., clients 
   and servers. 

   The UNI interface defined for GMPLS networks are currently defined 
   for network equipment rather than interacting with higher layer 

     

   Lee & Xia & Bernstein   Expires January 4, 2011 [Page 11] 

Internet-Draft      Cross-Layer Optimization (CLO)            July 2010 
    

   services. It tends not to extend fully between application resources 
   and/or clients.  

    

4. Security Considerations  

   TBD 

5. References 

[Cache]   P. Krishnan, D. Raz, and Y. Shavitt, "The cache location 
          problem," Networking, IEEE/ACM Transactions on,  vol. 8, 2000, 
          pp. 568-582. 

[GameMirror]   S.D. Webb, S. Soh, and W. Lau, "Enhanced mirrored servers 
          for network games," Proceedings of the 6th ACM SIGCOMM 
          workshop on Network and system support for games,  Melbourne, 
          Australia: ACM, 2007, pp. 117-122. 

[GameServ]P. Quax, J. Dierckx, B. Cornelissen, G. Vansichem, and W. 
          Lamotte, "Dynamic server allocation in a real-life deployable 
          communications architecture for networked games," Proceedings 
          of the 7th ACM SIGCOMM Workshop on Network and System Support 
          for Games,  Worcester, Massachusetts: ACM, 2008, pp. 66-71. 

[GameTrf] J. Farber, "Network game traffic modeling," Proceedings of the 
          1st workshop on Network and system support for games, 
          Braunschweig, Germany: ACM, 2002, pp. 53-57. 

[GroupGame] K. Vik, C. Griwodz, and P. Halvorsen, "Applicability of 
          group communication for increased scalability in MMOGs," 
          Proceedings of 5th ACM SIGCOMM workshop on Network and system 
          support for games, Singapore: ACM, 2006, p. 2. 

[IPTV]    A.A. Mahimkar, Z. Ge, A. Shaikh, J. Wang, J. Yates, Y. Zhang, 
          and Q. Zhao, "Towards automated performance diagnosis in a 
          large IPTV network," Proceedings of the ACM SIGCOMM 2009 
          conference on Data communication, Barcelona, Spain: ACM, 2009, 
          pp. 231-242. 

[Mirror]  E. Cronin, S. Jamin, Cheng Jin, A. Kurc, D. Raz, and Y. 
          Shavitt, "Constrained mirror placement on the Internet," 
          Selected Areas in Communications, IEEE Journal on,  vol. 20, 
          2002, pp. 1369-1382. 



     

   Lee & Xia & Bernstein   Expires January 4, 2011 [Page 12] 

Internet-Draft      Cross-Layer Optimization (CLO)            July 2010 
    

 [MPSel]  S. Gargolinski, C.S. Pierre, and M. Claypool, "Game server 
          selection for multiple players," Proceedings of 4th ACM 
          SIGCOMM workshop on Network and system support for games,  
          Hawthorne, NY: ACM, 2005, pp. 1-6. 

[PartState] P.B. Beskow, K. Vik, P. Halvorsen, and C. Griwodz, "Latency 
          reduction by dynamic core selection and partial migration of 
          game state," Proceedings of the 7th ACM SIGCOMM Workshop on 
          Network and System Support for Games,  Worcester, 
          Massachusetts: ACM, 2008, pp. 79-84. 

[Replica] Lili Qiu, V. Padmanabhan, and G. Voelker, "On the placement of 
          Web server replicas," INFOCOM 2001. Twentieth Annual Joint 
          Conference of the IEEE Computer and Communications Societies. 
          Proceedings. IEEE, 2001, pp. 1587-1596 vol.3. 

[ServVoD] N. Carlsson and D.L. Eager, "Server selection in large-scale 
          video-on-demand systems," ACM Trans. Multimedia Comput. 
          Commun. Appl.,  vol. 6, 2010, pp. 1-26. 

[ServStream]M. Guo, M.H. Ammar, and E.F. Zegura, "Selecting among 
          replicated batching video-on-demand servers," Proceedings of 
          the 12th international workshop on Network and operating 
          systems support for digital audio and video,  Miami, Florida, 
          USA: ACM, 2002, pp. 155-163. 

[ServMulti] Zongming Fei, M. Ammar, and E. Zegura, "Multicast server 
          selection: problems, complexity, and solutions," Selected 
          Areas in Communications, IEEE Journal on,  vol. 20, 2002, pp. 
          1399-1413. 

[SKA]     P.E. Dewdney, P.J. Hall, R.T. Schilizzi, and T.J.L.W. Lazio, 
          "The Square Kilometre Array," Proceedings of the IEEE,  vol. 
          97, 2009, pp. 1482-1496. 

[Stream]  D. Eager, M. Vernon, and J. Zahorjan, "Minimizing bandwidth 
          requirements for on-demand data delivery," Knowledge and Data 
          Engineering, IEEE Transactions on,  vol. 13, 2001, pp. 742-
          757. 

[Topo]    S. Ratnasamy, M. Handley, R. Karp, and S. Shenker, 
          "Topologically-aware overlay construction and server 
          selection," INFOCOM 2002. Twenty-First Annual Joint Conference 
          of the IEEE Computer and Communications Societies. 
          Proceedings. IEEE, 2002, pp. 1190-1199 vol.3. 

[VENT]    http://www.ventrilo.com/ 

     

   Lee & Xia & Bernstein   Expires January 4, 2011 [Page 13] 

Internet-Draft      Cross-Layer Optimization (CLO)            July 2010 
    

[VLBI]    http://www.internet2.edu/science/vlbi.html  

[WoWHrs]  P. Tarng, K. Chen, and P. Huang, "An analysis of WoW players' 
          game hours," Proceedings of the 7th ACM SIGCOMM Workshop on 
          Network and System Support for Games,  Worcester, 
          Massachusetts: ACM, 2008, pp. 47-52. 

[WoWAct]  M. Suznjevic, M. Matijasevic, and O. Dobrijevic, "Action 
          specific Massive Multiplayer Online Role Playing Games traffic 
          analysis: case study of World of Warcraft," Proceedings of the 
          7th ACM SIGCOMM Workshop on Network and System Support for 
          Games,  Worcester, Massachusetts: ACM, 2008, pp. 106-107. 

[GFD-122] Tiziana Ferrari (editor), "Grid Network services Use Cases 
          from the e-Science Community", GFD-I-122, Open Grid Forum, 
          December 12, 2007. 

[CDN2001] B. Krishnamurthy, C. Wills, and Y. Zhang, "On the use and 
          performance of content distribution networks," Proceedings of 
          the 1st ACM SIGCOMM Workshop on Internet Measurement, San 
          Francisco, California, USA: ACM, 2001, pp. 169-182. 

 

























     

   Lee & Xia & Bernstein   Expires January 4, 2011 [Page 14] 

Internet-Draft      Cross-Layer Optimization (CLO)            July 2010 
    

    
Author's Addresses 

   Young Lee 
   Huawei Technologies 
   1700 Alma Drive, Suite 500 
   Plano, TX 75075 
   USA 
    
   Phone: (972) 509-5599 
   Email: ylee@huawei.com 
    
    
   Frank Xia 
   Huawei Technologies 
   1700 Alma Drive, Suite 500 
   Plano, TX 75075 
   USA 
    
   Phone: (972) 509-5599 
   Email: xiayangsong@huawei.com 
    
   Greg M. Bernstein 
   Grotto Networking 
   Fremont California, USA 
       
   Phone: (510) 573-2237 
   Email: gregb@grotto-networking.com 
    
Intellectual Property Statement 

   The IETF Trust takes no position regarding the validity or scope of 
   any Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be 
   claimed to pertain to the implementation or use of the technology 
   described in any IETF Document or the extent to which any license 
   under such rights might or might not be available; nor does it 
   represent that it has made any independent effort to identify any 
   such rights.  

   Copies of Intellectual Property disclosures made to the IETF 
   Secretariat and any assurances of licenses to be made available, or 
   the result of an attempt made to obtain a general license or 
   permission for the use of such proprietary rights by implementers or 
   users of this specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR 
   repository at http://www.ietf.org/ipr 

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
     

   Lee & Xia & Bernstein   Expires January 4, 2011 [Page 15] 

Internet-Draft      Cross-Layer Optimization (CLO)            July 2010 
    

   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement 
   any standard or specification contained in an IETF Document. Please 
   address the information to the IETF at ietf-ipr@ietf.org. 

Disclaimer of Validity 

   All IETF Documents and the information contained therein are provided 
   on an "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE 
   REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE 
   IETF TRUST AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL 
   WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY 
   WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION THEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE 
   ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS 
   FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 

Acknowledgment 

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the 
   Internet Society. 

    



























     

   Lee & Xia & Bernstein   Expires January 4, 2011 [Page 16] 
