 
Internet Research Task Force                             Gyu Myoung Lee 
Internet Draft                                         Institut TELECOM 
Intended status: Informational                             Jungsoo Park 
Expires: April 2012                                                ETRI 
                                                              Ning Kong 
                                                                  CNNIC 
                                                            Noel Crespi 
                                                       Institut TELECOM 
                                                       October 31, 2011 
 
                                      
           The Internet of Things - Concept and Problem Statement 
                  draft-lee-iot-problem-statement-03.txt 


Status of this Memo 

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the 
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.   

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts. 

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html 

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 30, 2012. 

 

Copyright Notice 

   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the    
   document authors. All rights reserved. 

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal 
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents 
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of 
   publication of this document. Please review these documents carefully, 
   as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect to this 
   document.
 
 
Lee, et al.            Expires April 30, 2012                 [Page 1] 
 
    The Internet of Things - Concept and Problem Statement   October 2011 
                                                                       
                                    
   Abstract 

   This document explains the concept of the Internet of Things and 
   several characteristics of objects. In addition, this document 
   specifies problems considering technical issues for the IoT. Based on 
   this, this document discusses a new architectural framework in order 
   to solve problems. 

Conventions used in this document 

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119. 

































 
 
Lee, et al.            Expires April 30, 2012                 [Page 2] 
  
    The Internet of Things - Concept and Problem Statement   October 2011 
                                                                       
                                    
    

Table of Contents 

   1. Introduction ................................................ 4 
   2. Concept of IoT .............................................. 4 
      2.1. Basic concept of the IoT................................ 4 
      2.2. Classification and characteristics of objects........... 6 
      2.3. Purpose / applications.................................. 7 
   3. Features of the IoT ......................................... 7 
      3.1. Overall aspects......................................... 7 
      3.2. Applications/services aspects........................... 7 
      3.3. Networking aspects...................................... 7 
      3.4. Link/physical layer aspects............................. 8 
      3.5. Smart/connected objects aspects ........................ 8 
      3.6. Smart environment aspects............................... 8 
   4. Problems .................................................... 8 
      4.1. Identifier for objects and services..................... 8 
      4.2. Object naming .......................................... 9 
      4.3. Security/privacy/authority.............................. 9 
      4.4. Presence (of people; of devices) ....................... 10 
      4.5. Geographic location (self-identification of location)... 10 
      4.6. Discovery/search ....................................... 11 
      4.7. Tracking and mobility support of mobile object.......... 11 
      4.8. Data processing /computing ............................. 12 
      4.9. Heterogeneous networking environment (IP and non-IP, etc)12 
      4.10. Global connectivity (IP-based) ........................ 13 
      4.11. Scalability ........................................... 13 
      4.12. Autonomics (self-configuring, intelligence for control) 14 
      4.13. Constraint objects .................................... 14 
      4.14. Web Services .......................................... 15 
      4.15. Various volumes of data traffic ....................... 15 
   5. Architectural implications .................................. 15 
      5.1. Vertical vs. Horizontal ................................ 16 
      5.2. Architectural considerations in the service perspective. 16 
      5.3. Common infrastructure in the networking perspective..... 17 
      5.4. Consolidated layered architecture for IoT .............. 17 
   6. Security Considerations ..................................... 18 
   7. IANA Considerations ......................................... 18 
   8. References .................................................. 18 
      8.1. Normative References.................................... 18 
      8.2. Informative References ................................. 18 
   Appendix I: Case study on typical use cases of the IoT.......... 19 
   Appendix II: Relationships with existing working groups in IETF. 19 
   Author's Addresses ............................................. 19 


 
 
Lee, et al.            Expires April 30, 2012                 [Page 3] 
    
    The Internet of Things - Concept and Problem Statement   October 2011 
                                                                       
                                    
    
1. Introduction 

   The Internet of Things (IoT) [1-3] is a novel paradigm that is 
   becoming popular with research and industries. The basic idea is that 
   IoT will connect objects around us to provide seamless communication 
   and contextual services provided by them. Development of RFID tags, 
   sensors, actuators, mobile phones make it possible to materialize IoT 
   which interact and co-operate each other to make the service better 
   and accessible anytime, from anywhere.   
   There are so many applications that are possible because of IoT. For 
   individual users, IoT brings useful applications like home automation, 
   security, automated devices monitoring and management of daily tasks. 
   For professionals, automated applications provide useful contextual 
   information all the time to help on their works and decision making. 
   Industries with sensors and actuators operations can be rapid, 
   efficient and more economic. Managers who need to keep eye on many 
   things can automate tasks connection digital and physical objects 
   together. Every sectors energy, computing, management, security, 
   transportation are going to be benefitted with this new paradigm.  
   Development of several technologies made it possible to achieve the 
   vision of Internet of things. Identification technology such as RFID 
   allows each object to represent uniquely by having unique identifier.  
   Identity reader can read any time the object allows real time 
   identification and tracking. Wireless sensor technology allows 
   objects to provide real time environmental condition and context. 
   Smart technologies allow objects to become more intelligent which can 
   think and communicate. Nanotechnologies are helping to reduce the 
   size of the chip incorporating more processing power and 
   communication capabilities in a very small chip. 
   This document explains the concept of IoT and several characteristics 
   of objects. In addition, this document specifies problems considering 
   technical issues for the IoT. The main objective of this document is 
   to develop a new architectural framework in order to solve problems 
   with feasible technological solutions.  

    

2. Concept of IoT 

2.1. Basic concept of the IoT 

   o Definition of the "IoT" 


 
 
Lee, et al.            Expires April 30, 2012                 [Page 4] 
    
    The Internet of Things - Concept and Problem Statement   October 2011 
                                                                       
                                    
      The "Internet of Things (IoT)" refers to the networked 
      interconnection of everyday objects. An "IoT" means "a world-wide 
      network of interconnected objects uniquely addressable, based on 
      standard communication protocols" [5]. 

      Internet: The original "Internet" is based on the TCP/IP protocol 
      suite but any network based on the TCP/IP protocol suite cannot 
      belong to the Internet because private networks and 
      Telecommunication networks are not part of the Internet even 
      though they are based on the TCP/IP protocol suite. In the 
      viewpoint of IoT, the "Internet" considers the TCP/IP suite and 
      non-TCP/IP suite at the same time. 

       

   o Definition and scope of "things" 

      In the IoT, "things" are very various such as computers, sensors, 
      people, actuators, refrigerators, TVs, vehicles, mobile phones, 
      clothes, food, medicines, books, etc. These things are classified 
      as three scopes: people, machine (for example, sensor, actuator, 
      etc) and information (for example clothes, food, medicine, books, 
      etc). These "things" should be identified at least by one unique 
      way of identification for the capability of addressing and 
      communicating with each other and verifying their identities. In 
      here, if the "thing" is identified, we call it the "object." 

       

   o Visions of IoT and Goals for new architecture/framework 

      In terms of standardization, a new paradigm of IoT implies many 
      visions depending on expertise of standardization bodies. Commonly 
      we focus on the deployment of a new generation of networked 
      objects with communication, sensory and action capabilities for 
      numerous applications with a vision "from simple connected objects 
      as sensor networks to more complex and smarter communicated 
      objects as in the envisioned IoT" [6]. In the IETF/IRTF 
      perspective, one of our visions is to provide global 
      interoperability via IP for making heterogeneous/constraint 
      objects very smart. 

      We are investigating a new architectural framework to support 
      scalability and interoperability for IoT as a research item. The 
      goals for this are to identify several problems of existing 
      protocols and find possible solutions for solving these problems. 

 
 
Lee, et al.            Expires April 30, 2012                 [Page 5] 
    
    The Internet of Things - Concept and Problem Statement   October 2011 
                                                                       
                                    
       

2.2. Classification and characteristics of objects 

   Many studies are going on regarding IoT which is going to be an 
   advanced network including normal physical objects together with 
   computers and other advanced electronic appliances. Instead of 
   forming ad hoc network, normal objects will be a part of whole 
   network so that they can collaborate, understand real time 
   environmental data and react accordingly in need. 

    

   Objects can be classified as follows. 

   o Size: small, normal 

   o Mobility: mobile, fixed 

   o Power: without power supply, with power supply 

   o Connectivity: intermittently connected, continuously connected 

   o Automation: automated, non automated 

   o Physical/logical: physical objects, logical objects 

   o Network protocol: IP enabled objects, non IP objects 

       

   Objects have the following characteristics. 

   o Ability to sense and/or actuate 

   o Small (or not necessarily) 

   o Limited capability (or not necessarily) 

   o Energy/power limited 

   o Connected to physical world 

   o Intermittent connectivity 

   o Mobile (potentially) 

 
 
Lee, et al.            Expires April 30, 2012                 [Page 6] 
    
    The Internet of Things - Concept and Problem Statement   October 2011 
                                                                       
                                    
   o Of interest to people 

   o Managed by devices, not people 

       

2.3. Purpose / applications 

   o Body area network (bio-medical, etc) 

   o Smart Grid 

   o Building networks 

   o Vehicles (inter and intra) 

   o RFID/Asset-tracking 

   o Manufacturing 

   o Environmental sensors 

   o Revealing/sharing information 

    

3. Features of the IoT 

3.1. Overall aspects  

   (Order(s) of magnitude bigger than the Internet, No computers or 
   humans at endpoint, Inherently mobile, disconnected, unattended) 

3.2. Applications/services aspects 

   There are many use cases among various stakeholders in IoT 
   environment. Each device/machine can be used for multiple 
   applications/services with different characteristics.  

3.3. Networking aspects 

   It is required to provide a common communications technology that 
   supports all applications/services as well as heterogeneous 
   networking interfaces.  



 
 
Lee, et al.            Expires April 30, 2012                 [Page 7] 
    
    The Internet of Things - Concept and Problem Statement   October 2011 
                                                                       
                                    
3.4. Link/physical layer aspects 

   There are various types of networking interfaces which have different 
   coverage and data rates. These environments have the characteristics 
   of low power and lossy networks like Bluetooth, IEEE 802.15.4 
   (6LoWPAN, ZigBee), NFC etc. 

3.5. Smart/connected objects aspects 

   Smart/connected objects are heterogeneous with different sizes, 
   mobility, power, connectivity and protocols. A physical object 
   interacts with several entities, performs various functionalities and 
   generates data that might be used by other entities. Usually 
   resources of these objects are limited.  

3.6. Smart environment aspects  

   Smart environment which consists of networks of federated sensors and 
   actuators can be extended from homes/offices to buildings/cities. 
   From residential home, end-to-end large scale services such as smart 
   cities can be considered.  

      

4. Problems 

4.1. Identifier for objects and services 

   There are various kinds of identifier with different identification 
   codes according to objects and their services. Current identification 
   schemes for objects are also different from their purposes. 

   Technical considerations:   

   o Identification (new naming space, globally unique ID) 

      With the huge evolved communication objects, the hierarchical 
      identification schemes are required. The aggregation feature of 
      IPv6 address is one of example. 

      According to the classification of Things, the different 
      identification schemes are required. That is, the information such 
      as books, medicine and clothes may not require the global 
      identification because revocation lists are required. It means 
      some objects will be destroyed. 

    
 
 
Lee, et al.            Expires April 30, 2012                 [Page 8] 
    
    The Internet of Things - Concept and Problem Statement   October 2011 
                                                                       
                                    
4.2. Object naming  

   Current Internet just identifies the specific server which contents 
   are stored. As the end points of current Internet are hosts, 
   individual content in a server cannot be identified in the network. 

   Technical considerations: 

   o Object naming services 

      The name service of Internet such as DNS (Domain Name System) 
      [RFC1034] has already been one of the most important 
      infrastructures of the Internet nowadays. For example, DNS is an 
      indispensable system of the Internet used for translating the 
      "human-friendly" host names of computers on a TCP/IP network into 
      their corresponding "machine-friendly" IP addresses. In general, 
      DNS also stores other types of information, such as the list of 
      mail servers that accept email for a given Internet domain. By 
      providing a worldwide, distributed name service, DNS is an 
      essential component of the functionality of the Internet. 

      Similarly, object name service will also be one of essential and 
      key elements in the IoT, which can be used for translating the 
      "thing-friendly" names of object which maybe belong to 
      heterogeneous name spaces (e.g. EPC, uCode, and any other self-
      defined code) on different networks (e.g. TCP/IP network, 
      constrained network) into their corresponding "machine-friendly" 
      addresses or other related information of another TCP/IP or 
      constrained network. The object of IoT based on a TCP/IP or 
      constrained network can easily communicate with other object on 
      the same or any other network with the name of the object by 
      object name service, without considering whether the address of 
      the targeted object has been changed or not. 

      To fulfill the aforementioned objective, object naming service 
      based on the IoT needs to be researched. The compatibility of 
      heterogeneous name spaces and the efficiency for the constrained 
      network of this kind of service are supposed to be the most 
      important issues to be studied in future. 

    

4.3. Security/privacy/authority  

   The loss of security and privacy in communications and services, with 
   personal data is becoming available and unwanted communication 
   becoming rampant. 
 
 
Lee, et al.            Expires April 30, 2012                 [Page 9] 
    
    The Internet of Things - Concept and Problem Statement   October 2011 
                                                                       
                                    
   The overall problem is further aggravated by the diversification of 
   the Internet with new types of devices and heterogeneous networks. 
   The user is confronted with a wide range of methods and devices with 
   which to access the digital world, and it can no longer be assumed 
   that a single, independent access per device will suffice, nor that 
   the user will actually own all these devices. 

   Using identities as representations of entities of all kinds as the 
   end points of communications, the handling of the privacy of data in 
   the network and the infrastructure is key issues to solve problems 
   associated with the diversifying of the Internet towards an IoT, and 
   to be reachable in the digital world [7].  

   Technical considerations: 

   o ID-management for objects (security, authentication, privacy) 

      Basically each object should not be able to authenticate during 
      the short time because the hundreds of objects may request the 
      approval at the same time. Therefore, group authentication and 
      authorization methods are required.  

   o Trustworthy networking 

      Confidentiality, authenticity and trustworthiness of communication 
      partners need to be maintained. Users need to give objects limited 
      service access not allowing them to communicate in uncontrolled 
      manner. 

    

4.4. Presence (of people; of devices) 

   Key challenging issue is to develop a mechanism which accepts, stores 
   and distributes presence information with the relationship between 
   people and devices.  

   Technical considerations:   

   o Awareness of presence 

    

4.5. Geographic location (self-identification of location) 

   For IoT applications/services, we need to know the physical location 
   of objects and the location of information from objects. Problems are 
 
 
Lee, et al.            Expires April 30, 2012                [Page 10] 
    
    The Internet of Things - Concept and Problem Statement   October 2011 
                                                                       
                                    
   how to identify location information related to objects with 
   autonomic way.  

   Technical considerations: 

   o Awareness of location 

    

4.6. Discovery/search 

   Every object can be a source of information. Information from object 
   should be stored and discovered through searching in order to use it 
   by persons. For this, semantic and context information can be used. 

   Technical considerations:   

   o Tools for information modeling of objects 

      Characterizing of objects using semantic and ontology technologies 
      are required. Suitable services for objects must be automatically 
      identified. As users want to know objects information and their 
      availability all the time, it requires appropriate semantic means 
      of describing their functionalities. 

    

4.7. Tracking and mobility support of mobile object 

   To support the routing and mobility protocols, the IoT networks have 
   structural characteristics. That is, the mobility support models are 
   required. Some objects move independently. Others will move as the 
   one of group. Therefore, according the moving feature, the different 
   tracking methods are required. It is important to provide ubiquitous 
   and seamless communication among objects while tracking the location 
   of objects.  

   Technical considerations: 

   o Location-based mobility support for mobile objects 

    





 
 
Lee, et al.            Expires April 30, 2012                [Page 11] 
    
    The Internet of Things - Concept and Problem Statement   October 2011 
                                                                       
                                    
4.8. Data processing /computing 

   For supporting various applications in the IoT environment, 
   information should be able to transfer among objects operating under 
   varied perspectives without humans.  

   Technical considerations: 

   o Information model (data store, retrieval, transfer, etc) 

      According the Information model, the functionality of data 
      processing should be distinguished.  

   o Policy/preferences 

    

4.9. Heterogeneous networking environment (IP and non-IP, etc) 

   Objects have different communication, information and processing 
   capabilities. Each object would also be subjected to very different 
   conditions such as power energy availability and communication 
   bandwidth requirement. Networking interfaces of objects are 
   heterogeneous in terms of coverage, date rate, etc. For communicating 
   among objects, both IP and non-IP interfaces should be supported for 
   providing interoperability among heterogeneous interfaces. 

   Technical considerations:   

   o Interworking model with proxy (gateway) 

      Each gateway should support the multiple interfaces, which are 
      evolved in different heterogeneous networks.  

   o Interoperability 

      In order to facilitate communication and cooperation common 
      practices and standards are required. Interoperability solution 
      should be maintained to provide seamless interaction among them. 
      Service description, publishing, and discovery mechanisms should 
      be interoperable otherwise the IoT will be converted into islands 
      of heterogeneous object network.  

   o Device adaptation 



 
 
Lee, et al.            Expires April 30, 2012                [Page 12] 
    
    The Internet of Things - Concept and Problem Statement   October 2011 
                                                                       
                                    
      Each connected objects should be able to adapt the situation where 
      it is now. When a person with smart phone enters home, it should 
      adapt communication mechanism, addressing and localized 
      environment. When it reaches in office environment it should adapt 
      with new situation where the mechanisms available in home can be 
      different. Adaption in many senses should be maintained. 

    

4.10. Global connectivity (IP-based) 

   Each object should support the end-to-end communications. And also 
   outside-initiated services may be supported into the inner network. 
   For global interoperability, IP is considered for communicating smart 
   objects.  

   Technical considerations:   

   o IPv6 protocol 

      To solve scalability regarding addressing, object-to-object 
      communication needs huge number of IP addresses in order to 
      uniquely identify each objects. As a scalable solution, IPv6 can 
      be used which can accommodate as many things as required to 
      include in the IoT. Using IPv6 with abundant address spaces, 
      globally unique connectivity can be provided without additional 
      processing. 

    

4.11. Scalability 

   All of objects are highly distributed with ubiquity features (e.g., 
   any where, any time). Scalable solutions are necessary in the 
   distributed networking environment. 

   Technical considerations:   

   o ID/LOC separation 

      In IETF LISP, Shim6 and Other WG, ID/LOC separation methods have 
      been developing. For more scalable and robust network, ID/LOC 
      separation features are required.  

    


 
 
Lee, et al.            Expires April 30, 2012                [Page 13] 
    
    The Internet of Things - Concept and Problem Statement   October 2011 
                                                                       
                                    
4.12. Autonomics (self-configuring, intelligence for control) 

   For self-configuration, a problem is how a device needs to establish 
   its connection automatically with a plug and play manner. In addition, 
   for intelligent control, a problem is how a device can understand a 
   message for control (e.g., command).    

   Technical considerations:   

   o Remote control and management/maintenance of objects   

      Solutions for remote control and management without human 
      intervention are required to support various kinds of intelligent 
      applications/services using smart objects.  

      For example, IPv6 auto-configuration and multi-homing features are 
      useful for the autonomics. The scope-based IPv6 addressing 
      features are easily applied for self-configuration such as smart 
      building and smart grid.  

    

4.13. Constraint objects 

   Like the Full-function device (FFD) and Reduced Function Devices 
   (RFD) in sensor network, the objects of IoT should be classified in 
   viewpoint of functionalities. 

   For constraint objects which do not have enough power, memory, 
   computing, to develop lightweight protocols for minimizing energy 
   consumption is essential. However, these protocols do not have enough 
   capabilities compared to conventional protocol which is running on 
   always-on devices with enough power. 

   Technical considerations:   

   o Coordination among constraint objects 

      Through the collaboration of objects with full functionalities, 
      required capabilities can be provided to constraint objects.  

   o Energy efficient protocol for constraint objects 

      Energy efficient communication mechanisms are essential. Active 
      and sleep mode operation can be a possible solution. 

       
 
 
Lee, et al.            Expires April 30, 2012                [Page 14] 
    
    The Internet of Things - Concept and Problem Statement   October 2011 
                                                                       
                                    
4.14. Web Services 

   Each object may be identified through the web services. It means that 
   the object should be identified by the URL/URL. For web of objects, 
   it is required to invent technologies for leveraging real-world 
   object exposed using Web on the Representational State Transfer 
   (REST) interface. 

   Technical considerations:   

   o Light-weight Web protocols 

    

4.15. Various volumes of data traffic 

   Depending on application and use cases there is variance in data 
   volume. In a scenario where there is brief collaboration among 
   objects data volume will be less. However, in case where there are 
   large number of objects and interact among very frequently there are 
   large volume of data.  

   Technical considerations:   

   o Efficient processing of data traffic with different granularities 

      How to handle various volumes of data traffic is one of the 
      important challenges. From network perspective it is difficult to 
      handle bulk amount of data if objects produce huge bytes of data 
      regularly or irregularly. In addition, if the number of object in 
      a network significantly increases, it also causes traffic 
      congestion. Solution can be periodic communication between objects 
      or some data compression, aggregation and optimization techniques. 

    

5. Architectural implications 

   This document has explained the concept of the Internet of Things and 
   several characteristics of objects. In addition, this document has 
   specified problems considering technical issues for the IoT. 

   For future work, we need to find possible solutions for each problem. 
   It would be a good starting point to develop a new architectural 
   framework in order to solve problems. Thus, various issues on the 
   architecture for IoT are discussed. 

 
 
Lee, et al.            Expires April 30, 2012                [Page 15] 
    
    The Internet of Things - Concept and Problem Statement   October 2011 
                                                                       
                                    
    

5.1. Vertical vs. Horizontal 

   Based on technical problems for IoT, the current standards should 
   require extension of the architectural principles of both vertical 
   (from link/physical to service/application) and horizontal (one 
   object(user) to other object(user) through local networks as well as 
   global Internet infrastructure) perspectives.  

   In the vertical aspect, more studies should require in networking 
   capabilities for control and operation of various services over 
   complicated stacks of different layer technologies. In horizontal 
   aspects, further enhancements of user-centric communication 
   capabilities should take into account the complex user situations 
   including various devices connected to home networks and various 
   access technologies which support convergence. These capabilities are 
   necessary to support the ubiquitous networking to provide seamlessly 
   interconnection between humans and objects for Any Services, Any Time, 
   Any Where, Any Devices and Any Networks. 

    

5.2. Architectural considerations in the service perspective 

   In the service perspective, a target goal of architecture design is 
   to support various applications using a common communication 
   infrastructure. For this, service oriented architecture, open service 
   platform and overly networks are considered. 

   o Service oriented architecture 

      Objects are becoming smarter with the continual augmentation of 
      communication and computing capabilities. Service Oriented 
      Architecture (SOA) based programming, which was initially used for 
      complex, and rather static business data sharing can now be used 
      for small objects [8]. Objects can offer their functionalities 
      using the Simple Object Access Protocol (SOAP) or the REST 
      Application Programming Interface (API) based approaches [9]. This 
      allows objects to interact dynamically. Devices that provide their 
      functionality as a web service can be used by other entities such 
      as business applications or even other devices. 

   o Open service platform 



 
 
Lee, et al.            Expires April 30, 2012                [Page 16] 
    
    The Internet of Things - Concept and Problem Statement   October 2011 
                                                                       
                                    
      Open service platform is required for promoting integrated and 
      interoperable IoT services while easily interworking with existing 
      service platform based on open standards.   

   o Overlay networks (Service overlay) 

      For deployment of abstract services, logical networks on top of a 
      physical infrastructure are created. These networks have an 
      overlay topology that logically interconnects all the 
      participating nodes/objects in the physical network. 

    

5.3. Common infrastructure in the networking perspective 

   In the networking perspective, common infrastructure should provide 
   scalable, interoperable solutions to support abundant of 
   communicating nodes/objects. 

   o New concepts of networking 

      For stimulating interactions among connected objects with 
      efficient way, new concepts of networking are also required. We 
      need to investigate feasibility of those technologies. The 
      followings are some examples: 

      - User-centric networking 

      - Data-centric networking 

      - Content(Information)-centric networking 

   o Interoperable end-to-end model 

      TBD 

   o Integrating of smart objects 

      Common infrastructure for IoT should provide functionalities for 
      integrating of smart objects. 

    

5.4. Consolidated layered architecture for IoT 

   TBD 

 
 
Lee, et al.            Expires April 30, 2012                [Page 17] 
    
    The Internet of Things - Concept and Problem Statement   October 2011 
                                                                       
                                    
    

6. Security Considerations 

   TBD 

    

7. IANA Considerations 

   This document has no actions for IANA. 

    

8. References 

8.1. Normative References 

   TBD 

8.2. Informative References 

   [1]  ITU-T Internet Reports, "Internet of Things," November 2005. 

   [2]  Zouganeli E., Svinnset, I.E, "Connected objects and the 
        Internet of things-a paradigm shift," Photonics in Switching 
        2009, September 2009. 

   [3]  Harald Sundmaeker, Patrick Guilemin, Peter Friess, Sylvie 
        Woelffle, "Vision and challenges for realizing the Internet of 
        Things," March 2010. 

   [4]  Luigi Atzori, Antonio Iera, Giacomo Morabito, "The Internet of 
        Things: A survey," Computer Networks, Volume 54, Issue 15, 
        pp.2787-2805, October 2010. 

   [5]  Maarten Botterman, "Internet of Things: an early reality of the 
        Future Internet," Workshop Report, European Commission 
        Information Society and Media, May 2009. 

   [6]  White paper, "Smart networked objects and Internet of Things," 
        Association Instituts Carnot, January 2011. 

   [7]  Amardeo Sarma, Joao Girao, "Identities in the Future Internet 
        of Things," Wireless Pers Comm., 2009. 


 
 
Lee, et al.            Expires April 30, 2012                [Page 18] 
    
    The Internet of Things - Concept and Problem Statement   October 2011 
                                                                       
                                    
   [8]  Guinard, D., Trifa, V., Karnouskos, S., Spiess, P., Savio, D., 
        "Interacting with the SOA-based Internet of things: Discovery, 
        Query, Selection, and On-Demand Provisioning of Web 
        Services," IEEE Services Computing, IEEE Transactions, vol.3, 
        no.3, July-Sept. 2010.  

   [9]  Malatras, A., Asgari, A., Bauge, T., "Web enabled wireless 
        sensor networks for facilities management," IEEE Systems 
        Journal, vol.2, no.4, Dec. 2008. 

   [10] Joachim W. Walewski, Alain. Pastor, "The Internet of Things ?
        use cases and requirements," work in progress, <draft-walewski-
        iot-use-case-00.txt>, July 2011. 

   [RFC1034] P. Mockapetris, "Domain names-concepts and facilities," 
             November 1987. 

    

Appendix I: Case study on typical use cases of the IoT 

   A separate document is available in [10]. 

Appendix II: Relationships with existing working groups in IETF 

   o 6LoWPAN (IPv6 header compression) 

   o ROLL (IPv6 routing for low power/lossy networks) 

   o Core (Constrained RESTful Environments, former 6LoWApp (Low power 
      applications) BoF) 

   o RRG (Routing research group) 

   o HIPRG (Host identity protocol research group) 

    

Author's Addresses 

   Gyu Myoung Lee 
   Institut TELECOM, TELECOM SudParis  
   9 rue Charles Fourier, 91011, Evry, France 
      
   Phone: +33 (0)1 60 76 41 19 
   Email: gm.lee@it-sudparis.eu 
    
 
 
Lee, et al.            Expires April 30, 2012                [Page 19] 
    
    The Internet of Things - Concept and Problem Statement   October 2011 
                                                                       
                                    
   Jungsoo Park 
   ETRI/SRC 
   161 Gajeong-dong, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon, 305-700, Korea 
    
   Phone: +82 42 860 6514 
   Email: fnumber@gmail.com 
    

   Ning Kong 
   CNNIC 
   4 South 4th Street, Zhongguancun, Haidian District, Beijing, 100190, 
   China. 
    
   Phone: +86 10 5881 3147 
   Email: nkong@cnnic.cn 
    

   Noel Crespi  
   Institut TELECOM, TELECOM SudParis 
   9 rue Charles Fourier, 91011, Evry, France 
      
   Phone: +33 (0)1 60 76 46 23 
   Email: noel.crespi@it-sudparis.eu 
    






















 
 
Lee, et al.            Expires April 30, 2012                [Page 20] 
    

