



Network Working Group                                             S. Lee
Internet-Draft                                                   M. Shin
Intended status: Informational                                   Y. Choi
Expires: January 16, 2014                                           ETRI
                                                           July 15, 2013


      Problem statement for Verification of Network Service Chains
            draft-lee-nsc-verification-problem-statement-01

Abstract

   This document addresses the possible conflicts between service
   overlays in the network service chaining.  These conflicts are due to
   overlapping in classification rules and resource sharing of service
   overlays.  The verification of service chains provides a method for
   network administrators to detect such conflicts and correct a
   problematic service chain before applying it on the real network.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 16, 2014.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of



Lee, et al.             Expires January 16, 2014                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft   Problem Statement for NSC Verification        July 2013


   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Problem Areas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   3.  Verification of Service Chains  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   4.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   5.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   6.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     6.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     6.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5

1.  Introduction

   The current network service model is bound to static topologies and
   manually configured resources.  This has motivated a more flexible
   deployment model which orchestrates the service delivery separated
   from the network.  Network service chaining (NSC)
   [I-D.quinn-nsc-problem-statement]
   [I-D.boucadair-network-function-chaining] provides a new network
   service model that delivers the traffic along the predefined logical
   paths of network services (i.e., service overlays or service chains).
   The service overlay provides a specific order of network services
   with no regard of network topologies.  The traffic is classified with
   a set of rules in different granularity to select a target service
   overlay.

   The service overlays are configured to be isolated from each other
   with virtualization of the network resources and different traffic
   classification rules.  However, the service overlays can share the
   physical network resources (i.e., network services); and the traffic
   classification rules can overlap each other.  This may cause
   unexpected QoS degradation in a composite network service due to
   network service overload; and service failure due to loops or
   interventions of the service overlays.  In order to these conflicts
   of service overlays over network resources and classification rules,
   it is required to verify the newly added service overlays before
   applying them on the real network.

   This document formulates the problems in network service chaining for
   the verification of service overlays to avoid any conflicts between
   them.






Lee, et al.             Expires January 16, 2014                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft   Problem Statement for NSC Verification        July 2013


2.  Problem Areas

   The main reasons why service chains may bring conflicts between each
   other are as follows:

   1.  Sharing of network services:

      The service overlay provides the identifiers of network services;
      and invocation orders and logical links between them.  The network
      service is instantiated with the identifier so that one or more
      physical network service nodes are located for it.  While the
      network service instantiation can be orchestrated by NSC functions
      in a load balanced manner, the computing resource for the network
      service is limited and dynamic so that it is not avoidable for
      different service chains to share the same network service
      instances.  This brings uncertainty in QoS of the network service
      chains because they cannot see which service chains share the same
      network services.  Thus, the network administrator should
      carefully check the conflict over the network resources before
      adding a new service chain to the real network for its stability.

   2.  Overlapping of classification rules:

      An incoming packet (or traffic) is classified according to the
      classification rules to determine which service overlay will
      handle it.  The classification is based on the contents of one or
      more packet header fields so that the classification rule may vary
      in different granularity.  This may bring a problematic case that
      an incoming packet matches two or more classification rules with
      different service chains, which can result in a service chain loop
      or intervention.  Different priorities of the rules can help the
      problem but it is not easy to predict which rules may be in a
      conflict.  Moreover, the service chains of low priorities may be
      unreachable but not intended to.  Thus, the network administrator
      should carefully check the conflict of the classification rules
      between service chains before adding a new one to the real network
      for its consistency.

3.  Verification of Service Chains

   The service chain verification function provides an ability to check
   whether there is any conflict between a new service chain and the
   existing ones in the network before applying the new service chain in
   the network.  The aforementioned problems arise from the rule or
   resource conflicts between service chains.  Thus, the verification
   targets are the classification rules and network resources used for a
   new service chain.




Lee, et al.             Expires January 16, 2014                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft   Problem Statement for NSC Verification        July 2013


   As a result of the rule verification, the classification rules whose
   target packets are a subset or a superset of the ones of the new rule
   are presented out of the existing rules in the network.  In the
   similar way, the shared network services between the new service
   chain and the existing ones are listed with their frequencies of
   being shared as a result of resource verification.  The verification
   results are provided to network administrators so that they can
   easily anticipate the possible problematic cases and determine if the
   service chain is required to be corrected or not.

   The verification procedure above is performed in an off-line manner.
   In other words, it is a formal verification method which checks the
   conflicts of configurations at design time.  This method is
   relatively simple and can test a set of service chains in an
   exhaustive manner.  However, dynamic state of network resources and
   topologies cannot be considered at the verification.

4.  Security Considerations

   TBD.

5.  IANA Considerations

   TBD.

6.  References

6.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

6.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.boucadair-network-function-chaining]
              Boucadair, M., Jacquenet, C., Parker, R., Lopez, D.,
              Yegani, P., Guichard, J., and P. Quinn, "Differentiated
              Network-Located Function Chaining Framework", draft-
              boucadair-network-function-chaining-02, July 2013.

   [I-D.quinn-nsc-problem-statement]
              Quinn, P., Guichard, J., Kumar, S., Chauhan, A., Leymann,
              N., Boucadair, M., Jacquenet, C., Smith, M., Yadav, N.,
              Nadeau, T., Gray, K., and B. McConnell, "Network Service
              Chaining Problem Statement", draft-quinn-nsc-problem-
              statement-01, July 2013.





Lee, et al.             Expires January 16, 2014                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft   Problem Statement for NSC Verification        July 2013


Authors' Addresses

   Seung-Ik Lee
   ETRI
   218 Gajeong-ro Yuseung-Gu
   Daejeon  305-700
   Korea

   Phone: +82 42 860 1483
   Email: seungiklee@etri.re.kr


   Myung-Ki Shin
   ETRI
   218 Gajeong-ro Yuseung-Gu
   Daejeon  305-700
   Korea

   Phone: +82 42 860 4847
   Email: mkshin@etri.re.kr


   Yoon-Chul Choi
   ETRI
   218 Gajeong-ro Yuseung-Gu
   Daejeon  305-700
   Korea

   Phone: +82 42 860 5978
   Email: cyc79@etri.re.kr





















Lee, et al.             Expires January 16, 2014                [Page 5]