


Softwire                                                          Y. Lee
Internet-Draft                                                   Comcast
Intended status: Informational                               R. Maglione
Expires: April 18, 2011                                   Telecom Italia
                                                             C. Williams
                                                               MCSR Labs
                                                            C. Jacquenet
                                                            M. Boucadair
                                                          France Telecom
                                                        October 15, 2010


             Deployment Considerations for Dual-Stack Lite
                draft-lee-softwire-dslite-deployment-00

Abstract

   This document discusses the deployment issues and describes
   requirements for the deployment and operation of Dual-Stack Lite.
   This document describes the various deployment scenarios and
   applicability of the Dual-Stack Lite protocol.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 18, 2011.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents



Lee, et al.              Expires April 18, 2011                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft    Deployment Considerations for DS-Lite     October 2010


   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  AFTR Deployment Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     2.1.  MTU Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     2.2.  Lawful Intercept Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     2.3.  Logging at the AFTR  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
       2.3.1.  AFTR's Policies  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     2.4.  AFTR Impacts on Internal Accounting Systems  . . . . . . .  5
       2.4.1.  AFTR Impacts on Accounting Process in Broadband
               Access . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     2.5.  Reliability Considerations of AFTR . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     2.6.  Strategic Placement of AFTR  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     2.7.  AFTR Considerations for Geographically Aware Services  . .  7
     2.8.  Impacts on QoS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     2.9.  Port Forwarding Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   3.  B4 Deployment Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     3.1.  DNS deployment Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   4.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   5.  Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   6.  Acknowledgement  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   7.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   8.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     8.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     8.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10


















Lee, et al.              Expires April 18, 2011                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft    Deployment Considerations for DS-Lite     October 2010


1.  Overview

   Dual-stack Lite (DS-Lite) [I-D.ietf-softwire-dual-stack-lite] is a
   transition technique that enable operators to multiplex public IPv4
   addresses while provisioning only IPv6 to users.  DS-Lite is designed
   to address the IPv4 depletion issue and allow the operators to
   upgrade their network incrementally to IPv6.  DS-Lite combines IPv4-
   in-IPv6 tunnel and NAT44 to share a public IPv4 address more than one
   user.  This document discusses various deployment considerations for
   DS-Lite by operators.


2.  AFTR Deployment Considerations

   Address Family Transition Router (AFTR) is the function deployed
   inside the operator's network.  AFTR can be a standalone device or
   embedded into a router.  AFR is the IPv4-in-IPv6 tunnel termination
   point and the NAT44 device.  It is deployed at the IPv4-IPv6 network
   border where the tunnel interface is IPv6 and the NAT interface is
   IPv4.  Although an operator can configure a dual-stack interface for
   both functions, we strongly recommended to configure two individual
   interfaces (i.e. one dedicated for IPv4 and one dedicated for IPv6)
   to segregate the functions.

   In this section, the deployment considerations for AFTR are
   described.

2.1.  MTU Considerations

   DS-Lite is part tunneling protocol.  Tunneling introduces some
   additional complexity and has a risk of MTU or other mis-
   configurations.  With tunneling comes additional header overhead that
   implies that the tunnel's MTU is smaller than the raw interface MTU.
   The second problem is that between the B4 and AFTR networking
   entities there may exist further tunnels inside tunnel, so that the
   tunnel ingress is not necessarily aware of the true tunnel MTU.  The
   third problem is that the routing of the interior of the tunnel may
   change, so that the tunnel MTU may be variable.  The issue that the
   end user will experience is that they cannot download Internet pages
   or transfer files using File Transfer Protocol (FTP) but may be able
   to ping successfully.

   For fragmentation problem shares among all the tunneling protocols,
   this is not unique to DS-Lite.  The IPv4 packet isn't over-sized, it
   is the v6 encapsulation that MAY cause the oversized issue.  So the
   tunnel points are responsible to handle the fragmentation.  In
   general, the Tunnel-Entry Point and Tunnel-Exist Point should
   fragment and reassemble the oversize datagram.  This mechanism is



Lee, et al.              Expires April 18, 2011                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft    Deployment Considerations for DS-Lite     October 2010


   transport protocol agnostic and work for both UDP and TCP.  For TCP,
   we could potentially avoid fragmentation by modify MSS option.  The
   B4 networking component may send an ICMP Destination Unreachable-
   Fragmentation Needed and DF Set message back to the sending host in
   the subscriber network.

2.2.  Lawful Intercept Considerations

   Because of its IPv4-in-IPv6 tunneling scheme, interception in DS-Lite
   architecture must be performed on the AFTR itself.  Timestamped
   logging of the address and port mappings at the AFTR must be
   maintained, which in turn can add a heavy resource burden to the AFTR
   devices.

   Logging to a storage device off the AFTR may also contribute to
   network load.  Wiretapping of a single subject may mean statically
   mapping the user to a certain range of ports on a single address, to
   remove the need to follow dynamic port mappings.  A single IPv4
   address, or some range of ports for each address, might be set aside
   for wiretapping purposes to simplify such procedures.  But any
   requirement that users behind a given AFTR be logged is going to mean
   logging not only traffic but all changes to the mapping tables.

2.3.  Logging at the AFTR

   The timestamped logging of address and port mappings is essential not
   only for lawful intercept but also for tracing back specific users
   when a problem is identified from the outside of the AFTR.  Such a
   problem is usually a misbehaving user in the case of a spammer or a
   DoS source, or someone violating a usage policy.  Knowing the user
   may result in black-listing.  Without time-specific logs of the
   address and port mappings, a misbehaving user stays well hidden
   behind the AFTR.

   Blacklisting might restrict others in the home or office from
   accessing the website but altogether few innocent bystanders are
   affected.  What happens, though, if a website bans an IPv4 address on
   the outside of an AFTR?  In the effort to restrict a single user,
   hundreds of people may be inadvertently restricted generally all
   subscribers on a CMTS or a group of BNASes behind the AFTR.

   Black- or white-listing may need to be split in an AFTR architecture.
   Polices applying to incoming sources must be implemented on the
   outside of the AFTR.  Once the packets are translated, they cannot be
   easily identified by IPv4 address without some correlation with the
   AFTR mapping table.





Lee, et al.              Expires April 18, 2011                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft    Deployment Considerations for DS-Lite     October 2010


2.3.1.  AFTR's Policies

   Polices applying on the NAT-ed addresses must be implemented on the
   external interface of the AFTR.  Once the packets are translated,
   they cannot be easily identified by IPv4 address without some
   correlation with the AFTR mapping table.  Policies applying to
   outgoing sources must be implemented on the customer-facing side of
   the AFTR for the same reason.  In order to be able to deploy
   different services offers, multiple set of policies (e.g.  QoS and
   ACL settings) can be configured on the AFTR: each set of policies can
   then be applied to a different logical tunnel interface on the ATFR.

2.4.  AFTR Impacts on Internal Accounting Systems

   Single points of failure, potential address pool depletion attacks,
   performance and scalability, effects on fragmented packets, effects
   on asymmetric traffic flows, required modifications to provisioning
   systems, required modifications to internal accounting systems.

2.4.1.  AFTR Impacts on Accounting Process in Broadband Access

   DS-Lite introduces challenges to IPv4 accounting process.  In a
   typical DSL/Broadband access scenario where the Residential Gateway
   (RG) is acting as a B4 element, the BNAS is the IPv6 edge router
   which connects to the AFTR.  The BNAS is normally responsible for
   IPv6 accounting and all the subscriber manager functions such as
   authentication, authorization and accounting.  However, given the
   fact that IPv4 traffic is encapsulated into an IPv6 packet at the B4
   level and only decapsulated at the ATFR level, the BNAS can't do the
   IPv4 accounting without examining the inner packet.  AFTR is the next
   logical place to perform IPv4 accounting, but it will potentially
   introduce some additional complexity because the AFTR does not have
   detailed customer identity information.

   The accounting process at the AFTR level is only necessary if the
   Service Provider requires separate per user accounting records for
   IPv4 and IPv6 traffic.  If the per user IPv6 accounting records,
   collected by the BNAS, are sufficient, the additional complexity to
   be able to implement IPv4 accounting at the ATFR level is not
   required.  It is important to consider that, since the IPv4 traffic
   is encapsulated in IPv6 packets, the data collected by the BNAS for
   IPv6 traffic already contain the total amount of traffic (i.e.  IPv6
   plus IPv4).

   Even if detailed accounting records collection for IPv4 traffic may
   not be required, in some scenarios it would be useful for a Service
   Provider, to have inside the RADIUS Accounting packet, generated by
   the BNAS for the IPv6 traffic, a piece of information that can be



Lee, et al.              Expires April 18, 2011                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft    Deployment Considerations for DS-Lite     October 2010


   used to identify the AFTR that is handling the IPv4 traffic for that
   user.  This can be achieved by adding into the IPv6 accounting
   records the RADIUS attribute information specified in
   [I-D.ietf-softwire-dslite-radius-ext]

2.5.  Reliability Considerations of AFTR

   The service provider can use techniques to achieve high availability
   such as various types of clusters to ensure availability of the IPv4
   service.  High availability techniques include the cold standby mode.
   In this mode the AFTR states are not replicated from the Primary AFTR
   to the Backup AFTR.  When the Primary AFTR fails, all the existing
   established sessions will be flushed out.  The internal hosts are
   required to re-establish sessions to the external hosts.  Another
   high availability option is the hot standby mode.  In this mode the
   AFTR keeps established sessions while failover happens.  AFTR states
   are replicated from the Primary AFTR to the Backup AFTR.  When the
   Primary AFTR fails, the Backup AFTR will take over all the existing
   established sessions.  In this mode the internal hosts are not
   required to re-establish sessions to the external hosts.  The final
   option is to deploy a mode in between these two whereby only selected
   sessions such as critical protocols are replicated.  Criteria for
   sessions to be replicated on the backup would be explicitly
   configured on the AFTR devices of a redundancy group.

2.6.  Strategic Placement of AFTR

   The public IPv4 addresses are pulled away from the customer edge to
   the outside of the centralized AFTR where many customer networks can
   share a single public IPv4 address.

   The AFTR architecture design, then, is mostly figuring out the
   strategic placement of each AFTR to best use the capacity of each
   public IPv4 address without oversubscribing the address or overtaxing
   the AFTR itself.  Although only a few studies of per-user port usage
   have been done, an AFTR should be able to support 3000 - 5000 users
   per public IPv4 address.

   By centralizing public IPv4 addresses, each address no longer
   represents a single machine, a single household, or a single small
   office.  The address now represents thousands of machines, homes, and
   offices related only in that they are behind the same AFTR.
   Identification by IP address becomes difficult or impossible and thus
   applications that assume such geographic information may not work as
   intended.






Lee, et al.              Expires April 18, 2011                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft    Deployment Considerations for DS-Lite     October 2010


2.7.  AFTR Considerations for Geographically Aware Services

   Various applications and services will place their servers in such a
   way to locate them near sets of user so that this will lessen the
   latency on the client end.  In addition, having sufficient
   geographical coverage can indirectly improve end-to-end latency.  An
   example is that nameservers typically return results optimized for
   the DNS resolver's location.  Deployment of AFTR must be done in such
   a way as not to negatively impact the geographical nature of these
   services.  This can be done by making sure that AFTR deployments are
   geographically distributed so that existing assumptions of the
   clients source IP address by geographically aware servers can be
   maintained.

2.8.  Impacts on QoS

   As with tunneling in general there are challenges with deep packet
   inspection with DS-Lite for purposes of QoS.  Service Providers
   commonly uses DSCP to classify and prioritize packets.  It is
   recommended the AFTR to copy the DSCP value in the IPv4 header to the
   IPv6 header after the encapsulation.

2.9.  Port Forwarding Considerations

   Some applications require accepting incoming UDP or TCP traffic.
   When the remote host is on IPv4, the incoming traffic will be
   directed towards an IPv4 address.  Some applications use (UPnP-IGD)
   (e.g., XBox) or ICE [I-D.ietf-mmusic-ice] (e.g., SIP, Yahoo!, Google,
   Microsoft chat networks), other applications have all but completely
   abandoned incoming connections (e.g., most FTP transfers use passive
   mode).  But some applications rely on ALGs, UPnP IGD, or manual port
   configuration.  Port Control Protocol (PCP)
   [I-D.wing-pcp-design-considerations] is designed to address this
   issues.


3.  B4 Deployment Considerations

   In order to configure the IPv4-in-IPv6 tunnel, the B4 element needs
   the IPv6 address of the AFTR element.  This IPv6 address can be
   configured using a variety of methods, ranging from an out-of-band
   mechanism, manual configuration or a variety of DHCPv6 options.  In
   order to guarantee interoperability, a B4 element SHOULD implement
   the DHCPv6 option defined in
   [I-D.ietf-softwire-ds-lite-tunnel-option].  The DHCP server must be
   reachable via normal DHCP request channels from the B4, and it must
   be configured with the AFTR address.  In Broadband Access scenario
   where AAA/RADUIS is used for provisioning user profiles in the BNAS,



Lee, et al.              Expires April 18, 2011                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft    Deployment Considerations for DS-Lite     October 2010


   [I-D.ietf-softwire-dslite-radius-ext] may be used.  BNAS will learn
   the AFTR address from the RADIUS attribute and act as the DHCPv6
   server for the B4s.

3.1.  DNS deployment Considerations

   [I-D.ietf-softwire-dual-stack-lite] recommends configuring the B4
   with a DNS proxy resolver, which will forward queries to an external
   recursive resolver over IPv6.  Alternately, the B4 proxy resolver can
   be statically configured with the IPv4 address of an external
   recursive resolver.  In this case, DNS traffic to the external
   resolver will be tunneled through IPv6 to the AFTR.  Note that the B4
   must also be statically configured with an IPv4 address in order to
   source packets; the draft recommends an address in the 192.0.0.0/29
   range.  Even more simply, you could eliminate the DNS proxy, and
   configure the DHCP server on the B4 to give its clients the IPv4
   address of an external recursive resolver.  Because of the extra
   traffic through the AFTR, and because of the need to statically
   configure the B4, these alternate solutions are likely to be
   unsatisfactory in a production environment.  However, they may be
   desirable in a testing or demonstration environment.


4.  Security Considerations

   This document does not present any new security issues.
   [I-D.ietf-softwire-dual-stack-lite] discusses DS-Lite related
   security issues.  General NAT security issues are not repeated here.

   Some of the security issues with carrier-grade NAT result directly
   from the sharing of the routable IPv4 address.  Addresses and
   timestamps are often used to identify a particular user, but with
   shared addresses, more information (i.e., protocol and port numbers)
   is needed.  This impacts software used for logging and tracing spam,
   denial of service attacks, and other abuses.  Devices on the
   customers side may try to carry out general attacks against systems
   on the global Internet or against other customers by using
   inappropriate IPv4 source addresses inside tunneled traffic.  The
   AFTR needs to protect against such abuse.  One customer may try to
   carry out a denial of service attack against other customers by
   monopolizing the available port numbers.  The AFTR needs to ensure
   equitable access.  At a more sophisticated level, a customer may try
   to attack specific ports used by other customers.  This may be more
   difficult to detect and to mitigate without a complete system for
   authentication by port umber, which would represent a huge security
   requirement.





Lee, et al.              Expires April 18, 2011                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft    Deployment Considerations for DS-Lite     October 2010


5.  Conclusion

   DS-Lite provides new functionality to transition IPv4 traffic to IPv6
   addresses.  As the supply of unique IPv4 addresses diminishes,
   service providers can now allocate new subscriber homes IPv6
   addresses and IPv6-capable equipment.  DS-Lite provides a means for
   the private IPv4 addresses behind the IPv6 equipment to reach the
   IPv4 network.

   This document discusses the issues that arise when deploying DS-Lite
   in various deployment modes.  Hence, this document can be a useful
   reference for service providers and network designers.  Deployment
   considerations of the B4, AFTR and DNS have been discussed and
   recommendations for their usage have been documented.


6.  Acknowledgement

   TBD


7.  IANA Considerations

   This memo includes no request to IANA.


8.  References

8.1.  Normative References

   [I-D.ietf-softwire-ds-lite-tunnel-option]
              Hankins, D. and T. Mrugalski, "Dynamic Host Configuration
              Protocol for IPv6 (DHCPv6) Option for Dual- Stack Lite",
              draft-ietf-softwire-ds-lite-tunnel-option-05 (work in
              progress), September 2010.

   [I-D.ietf-softwire-dslite-radius-ext]
              Maglione, R. and A. Durand, "RADIUS Extensions for Dual-
              Stack Lite", draft-ietf-softwire-dslite-radius-ext-00
              (work in progress), October 2010.

   [I-D.ietf-softwire-dual-stack-lite]
              Durand, A., Droms, R., Woodyatt, J., and Y. Lee, "Dual-
              Stack Lite Broadband Deployments Following IPv4
              Exhaustion", draft-ietf-softwire-dual-stack-lite-06 (work
              in progress), August 2010.

   [I-D.wing-pcp-design-considerations]



Lee, et al.              Expires April 18, 2011                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft    Deployment Considerations for DS-Lite     October 2010


              Wing, D., "PCP Design Considerations",
              draft-wing-pcp-design-considerations-00 (work in
              progress), September 2010.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC4925]  Li, X., Dawkins, S., Ward, D., and A. Durand, "Softwire
              Problem Statement", RFC 4925, July 2007.

8.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.ietf-mmusic-ice]
              Rosenberg, J., "Interactive Connectivity Establishment
              (ICE): A Protocol for Network Address Translator (NAT)
              Traversal for Offer/Answer Protocols",
              draft-ietf-mmusic-ice-19 (work in progress), October 2007.

   [I-D.ietf-v6ops-ipv6-cpe-router]
              Singh, H., Beebee, W., Donley, C., Stark, B., and O.
              Troan, "Basic Requirements for IPv6 Customer Edge
              Routers", draft-ietf-v6ops-ipv6-cpe-router-07 (work in
              progress), August 2010.

   [I-D.xu-behave-stateful-nat-standby]
              Xu, X., "Redundancy and Load Balancing Framework for
              Stateful Network Address Translators (NAT)",
              draft-xu-behave-stateful-nat-standby-05 (work in
              progress), September 2010.

   [RFC1918]  Rekhter, Y., Moskowitz, R., Karrenberg, D., Groot, G., and
              E. Lear, "Address Allocation for Private Internets",
              BCP 5, RFC 1918, February 1996.

   [RFC3056]  Carpenter, B. and K. Moore, "Connection of IPv6 Domains
              via IPv4 Clouds", RFC 3056, February 2001.

   [RFC3484]  Draves, R., "Default Address Selection for Internet
              Protocol version 6 (IPv6)", RFC 3484, February 2003.

   [RFC5569]  Despres, R., "IPv6 Rapid Deployment on IPv4
              Infrastructures (6rd)", RFC 5569, January 2010.









Lee, et al.              Expires April 18, 2011                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft    Deployment Considerations for DS-Lite     October 2010


Authors' Addresses

   Yiu L. Lee
   Comcast
   One Comcast Center
   Philadelphia, PA  19103
   U.S.A.

   Email: yiu_lee@cable.comcast.com
   URI:   http://www.comcast.com


   Roberta Maglione
   Telecom Italia
   Via Reiss Romoli 274
   Torino  10148
   Italy

   Email: roberta.maglione@telecomitalia.it
   URI:   http://www.telecomitalia.it


   Carl Williams
   MCSR Labs
   Philadelphia
   U.S.A.

   Email: carlw@mcsr-labs.org


   Christian Jacquenet
   France Telecom
   Rennes
   France

   Email: christian.jacquenet@orange-ftgroup.com>


   Mohamed Boucadair
   France Telecom
   Rennes
   France

   Email: mohamed.boucadair@orange-ftgroup.com







Lee, et al.              Expires April 18, 2011                [Page 11]


