Secure Inter-Domain Routing                                 M. Lepinski
Working Group                                                   S. Kent
Internet Draft                                         BBN Technologies
Intended status: Informational                         October 26, 2009
Expires: April 26, 2010                                                 
                                    
                                      
           An Infrastructure to Support Secure Internet Routing 
                        draft-ietf-sidr-arch-09.txt 


Status of this Memo 

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the 
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79. 

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt. 

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 26, 20010. 

Copyright Notice 

   Copyright (c) 2009 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the 
   document authors.  All rights reserved. 

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal 
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents in effect on the date of 
   publication of this document (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info). 
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights 
   and restrictions with respect to this document. 

Abstract 

   This document describes an architecture for an infrastructure to 
   support improved security of Internet routing. The foundation of this 
 
 
 
Lepinski and Kent         Expires April 2010                   [Page 1] 

Internet-Draft       Secure Routing Architecture           October 2009 
    

   architecture is a public key infrastructure (PKI) that represents the 
   allocation hierarchy of IP address space and Autonomous System 
   Numbers; and a distributed repository system for storing and 
   disseminating the data objects that comprise the PKI, as well as 
   other signed objects necessary for improved routing security. As an 
   initial application of this architecture, the document describes how 
   a legitimate holder of IP address space can explicitly and verifiably 
   authorize one or more ASes to originate routes to that address space. 
   Such verifiable authorizations could be used, for example, to more 
   securely construct BGP route filters. 

Table of Contents 

   1. Introduction...................................................3 
      1.1. Terminology...............................................4 
   2. PKI for Internet Number Resources..............................5 
      2.1. Role in the overall architecture..........................5 
      2.2. CA Certificates...........................................6 
      2.3. End-Entity (EE) Certificates..............................7 
      2.4. Trust Anchors.............................................8 
   3. Route Origination Authorizations...............................9 
      3.1. Role in the overall architecture..........................9 
      3.2. Syntax and semantics.....................................10 
   4. Repositories..................................................11 
      4.1. Role in the overall architecture.........................12 
      4.2. Contents and structure...................................12 
      4.3. Access protocols.........................................14 
      4.4. Access control...........................................14 
   5. Manifests.....................................................15 
      5.1. Syntax and semantics.....................................15 
   6. Local Cache Maintenance.......................................16 
   7. Common Operations.............................................17 
      7.1. Certificate issuance.....................................17 
      7.2. ROA management...........................................18 
         7.2.1. Single-homed subscribers (with PA address space)....19 
         7.2.2. Multi-homed subscribers (with PA address space).....19 
         7.2.3. Provider-Independent Address Space..................20 
   8. Security Considerations.......................................20 
   9. IANA Considerations...........................................21 
   10. Acknowledgments..............................................21 
   11. References...................................................22 
      11.1. Normative References....................................22 
      11.2. Informative References..................................22 
   Authors' Addresses...............................................23 
   Pre-5378 Material Disclaimer.....................................23 
    
 
 
 
Lepinski and Kent         Expires April 2010                   [Page 2] 

Internet-Draft       Secure Routing Architecture           October 2009 
    

1. Introduction 

   This document describes an architecture for an infrastructure to 
   support improved security for BGP routing [2] for the Internet. The 
   architecture encompasses three principle elements: 

     . a public key infrastructure (PKI) 

     . digitally-signed routing objects to support routing security 

     . a distributed repository system to hold the PKI objects and the 
        signed routing objects 

   The architecture described by this document enables an entity to 
   verifiably assert that it is the legitimate holder of a set of IP 
   addresses or a set of Autonomous System (AS) numbers. As an initial 
   application of this architecture, the document describes how a 
   legitimate holder of IP address space can explicitly and verifiably 
   authorize one or more ASes to originate routes to that address space. 
   Such verifiable authorizations could be used, for example, to more 
   securely construct BGP route filters. In addition to this initial 
   application, the infrastructure defined by this architecture also is 
   intended to provide future support for security protocols such as S-
   BGP [12] or soBGP [13]. This architecture is applicable to the 
   routing of both IPv4 and IPv6 datagrams. IPv4 and IPv6 are currently 
   the only address families supported by this architecture. Thus, for 
   example, use of this architecture with MPLS labels is beyond the 
   scope of this document.  

   In order to facilitate deployment, the architecture takes advantage 
   of existing technologies and practices.  The structure of the PKI 
   element of the architecture corresponds to the existing resource 
   allocation structure. Thus management of this PKI is a natural 
   extension of the resource-management functions of the organizations 
   that are already responsible for IP address and AS number resource 
   allocation. Likewise, existing resource allocation and revocation 
   practices have well-defined correspondents in this architecture. Note 
   that while the initial focus of this architecture is routing security 
   applications, the PKI described in this document could be used to 
   support other applications that make use of attestations of IP 
   address or AS number resource holdings.  

   To ease implementation, existing IETF standards are used wherever 
   possible; for example, extensive use is made of the X.509 certificate 
   profile defined by PKIX [3] and the extensions for IP Addresses and 
   AS numbers representation defined in RFC 3779 [5]. Also CMS [4] is 

 
 
Lepinski and Kent         Expires April 2010                   [Page 3] 

Internet-Draft       Secure Routing Architecture           October 2009 
    

   used as the syntax for the newly-defined signed objects required by 
   this infrastructure. 

   As noted above, the architecture is comprised of three main 
   components: an X.509 PKI in which certificates attest to holdings of 
   IP address space and AS numbers; non-certificate/CRL signed objects 
   (including route origination authorizations and manifests) used by 
   the infrastructure; and a distributed repository system that makes 
   all of these signed objects available for use by ISPs in making 
   routing decisions.  These three basic components enable several 
   security functions; this document describes how they can be used to 
   improve route filter generation, and to perform several other common 
   operations in such a way as to make them cryptographically 
   verifiable.  

1.1. Terminology 

   It is assumed that the reader is familiar with the terms and concepts 
   described in "Internet X.509 Public Key Infrastructure Certificate 
   and Certificate Revocation List (CRL) Profile" [3], and "X.509 
   Extensions for IP Addresses and AS Identifiers" [5]. 

   Throughout this document we use the terms "address space holder" or 
   "holder of IP address space" interchangeably to refer to a legitimate 
   holder of IP address space who has received this address space 
   through the standard IP address allocation hierarchy. That is, the 
   address space holder has either directly received the address space 
   as an allocation from a Regional Internet Registry (RIR) or IANA; or 
   else the address space holder has received the address space as a 
   sub-allocation from a National Internet Registry (NIR) or Local 
   Internet Registry (LIR). We use the term "resource holder" to refer 
   to a legitimate holder of either IP address or AS number resources. 

   Throughout this document we use the terms "registry" and ISP to refer 
   to an entity that has an IP address space and/or AS number allocation 
   that it is permitted to sub-allocate its resources. We use the term 
   "subscriber" to refer to an entity (e.g., an enterprise) that 
   receives an IP address space and/or AS number assignment, and does 
   not sub-allocate its resources. 

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [1]. 




 
 
Lepinski and Kent         Expires April 2010                   [Page 4] 

Internet-Draft       Secure Routing Architecture           October 2009 
    

2. PKI for Internet Number Resources 

   Because the holder of a block IP address space is entitled to define 
   the topological destination of IP datagrams whose destinations fall 
   within that block, decisions about inter-domain routing are 
   inherently based on knowledge of the allocation of the IP address 
   space. Thus, a basic function of this architecture is to provide 
   cryptographically verifiable attestations as to these allocations. In 
   current practice, the allocation of IP addresses is hierarchic. The 
   root of the hierarchy is IANA. Below IANA are five Regional Internet 
   Registries (RIRs), each of which manages address and AS number 
   allocation within a defined geopolitical region. In some regions the 
   third tier of the hierarchy includes National Internet Registries 
   (NIRs) as well as Local Internet Registries (LIRs) and subscribers 
   with so-called provider-independent ("portable") allocations. (The 
   term LIR is used in some regions to refer to what other regions 
   define as an ISP. Throughout the rest of this document we will use 
   the term LIR/ISP to simplify references to these entities.) In other 
   regions the third tier consists only of LIRs/ISPs and subscribers 
   with provider-independent allocations.  

   In general, the holder of a block of IP address space may sub-
   allocate portions of that block, either to itself (e.g., to a 
   particular unit of the same organization), or to another 
   organization, subject to contractual constraints established by the 
   registries.  Because of this structure, IP address allocations can be 
   described naturally by a hierarchic public-key infrastructure, in 
   which each certificate attests to an allocation of IP addresses, and 
   issuance of subordinate certificates corresponds to sub-allocation of 
   IP addresses.  The above reasoning holds true for AS number resources 
   as well, with the difference that, by convention, AS numbers may not 
   be sub-allocated except by RIRs or NIRs. Thus allocations of both IP 
   addresses and AS numbers can be expressed by the same PKI.  Such a 
   PKI is a central component of this architecture. 

2.1. Role in the overall architecture 

   Certificates in this PKI are called Resource Certificates, and 
   conform to the certificate profile for such certificates [6].  
   Resource certificates attest to the allocation by the (certificate) 
   issuer of IP addresses or AS numbers to the subject.  They do this by 
   binding the public key contained in the Resource Certificate to the 
   IP addresses or AS numbers included in the certificate's IP Address 
   Delegation or AS Identifier Delegation Extensions, respectively, as 
   defined in RFC 3779 [5].   


 
 
Lepinski and Kent         Expires April 2010                   [Page 5] 

Internet-Draft       Secure Routing Architecture           October 2009 
    

   An important property of this PKI is that certificates do not attest 
   to the identity of the subject. Therefore, the subject names used in 
   certificates are not intended to be "descriptive." That is, the 
   resource PKI is intended to provide authorization, but not 
   authentication. This is in contrast to most PKIs where the issuer 
   ensures that the descriptive subject name in a certificate is 
   properly associated with the entity that holds the private key 
   corresponding to the public key in the certificate. Because issuers 
   need not verify the right of an entity to use a subject name in a 
   certificate, they avoid the costs and liabilities of such 
   verification. This makes it easier for these entities to take on the 
   additional role of Certificate Authority (CA).  

   Most of the certificates in the PKI assert the basic facts on which 
   the rest of the infrastructure operates.  CA certificates within the 
   PKI attest to IP address space and AS number holdings.  End-entity 
   (EE) certificates are issued by resource holder CAs to delegate the 
   authority attested by their allocation certificates. The primary use 
   for EE certificates is the validation of Route Origination 
   Authorizations (ROAs). Additionally, signed objects called manifests 
   will be used to help ensure the integrity of the repository system, 
   and the signature on each manifest will be verified via an EE 
   certificate.  

2.2. CA Certificates 

   Any resource holder who is authorized to sub-allocate these resources 
   must be able to issue Resource Certificates to correspond to these 
   sub-allocations.  Thus, for example, CA certificates will be 
   associated with IANA and each of the RIRs, NIRs, and LIRs/ISPs.  A CA 
   certificate also is required to enable a resource holder to issue 
   ROAs, because it must issue the corresponding end-entity certificate 
   used to validate each ROA. Thus some entities that do not sub-
   allocate their resources also will need to have CA certificates for 
   their allocations, e.g., a multi-homed subscriber with a provider-
   independent allocation, to enable them to issue ROAs. (A subscriber 
   who is not multi-homed, whose allocation comes from an LIR/ISP, and 
   who has not moved to a different LIR/ISP, need not be represented in 
   the PKI. Moreover, a multi-homed subscriber with an allocation from 
   an LIR/ISP may or may not need to be explicitly represented, as 
   discussed in Section 7.2.2) 

   Unlike in most PKIs, the distinguished name of the subject in a CA 
   certificate is chosen by the certificate issuer. The subject's 
   distinguished name must not attempt to convey the identity of the 
   subject in a descriptive fashion. The subject's distinguished name 

 
 
Lepinski and Kent         Expires April 2010                   [Page 6] 

Internet-Draft       Secure Routing Architecture           October 2009 
    

   must include the common name attribute and may additionally include 
   the serial attribute.  

   In this PKI, the certificate issuer, being an RIR, NIR, or LIR/ISP, 
   is not in the business of verifying the legal right of the subject to 
   assert a particular identity. Therefore, selecting a distinguished 
   name that does not convey the identity of the subject in a 
   descriptive fashion minimizes the opportunity for the subject to 
   misuse the certificate to assert an identity, and thus minimizes the 
   legal liability of the issuer. Since all CA certificates are issued 
   to subjects with whom the issuer has an existing relationship, it is 
   recommended that the issuer select a subject name that enables the 
   issuer to easily link the certificate to existing database records 
   associated with the subject. For example, an authority may use 
   internal database keys or subscriber IDs as the subject common name 
   in issued certificates.  

   Although the subject's common name in a certificate does not convey 
   identity, it is still the case that the common name must be unique 
   among all subjects to whom a certification authority issues 
   certificates. That is, a CA must not issue certificates to two 
   different entities which use the same common name for the subject. 

   Each Resource Certificate attests to an allocation of resources to a 
   resource holder, so entities that have allocations from multiple 
   sources will have multiple CA certificates. Note that when an entity 
   receives multiple certificates from different issuers that the 
   subject names in these certificates will generally be different. A CA 
   also may issue distinct certificates for each distinct allocation to 
   the same entity, if the CA and the resource holder agree that such an 
   arrangement will facilitate management and use of the certificates. 
   For example, an LIR/ISP may have several certificates issued to it by 
   one registry, each describing a distinct set of address blocks, 
   because the LIR/ISP desires to treat the allocations as separate. 

2.3. End-Entity (EE) Certificates 

   The private key corresponding to public key contained in an EE 
   certificate is not used to sign other certificates in a PKI. The 
   primary function of end-entity certificates in this PKI is the 
   verification of signed objects that relate to the usage of the 
   resources described in the certificate, e.g., ROAs and manifests.  
   For ROAs and manifests there will be a one-to-one correspondence 
   between end-entity certificates and signed objects, i.e., the private 
   key corresponding to each end-entity certificate is used to sign 
   exactly one object, and each object is signed with only one key.  
   This property allows the PKI to be used to revoke these signed 
 
 
Lepinski and Kent         Expires April 2010                   [Page 7] 

Internet-Draft       Secure Routing Architecture           October 2009 
    

   objects, rather than creating a new revocation mechanism. When the 
   end-entity certificate used to sign an object has been revoked, the 
   signature on that object (and any corresponding assertions) will be 
   considered invalid, so a signed object can be effectively revoked by 
   revoking the end-entity certificate used to sign it. 

   A secondary advantage to this one-to-one correspondence is that the 
   private key corresponding to the public key in a certificate is used 
   exactly once in its lifetime, and thus can be destroyed after it has 
   been used to sign its one object.  This fact should simplify key 
   management, since there is no requirement to protect these private 
   keys for an extended period of time.  

   Although this document describes only two uses for end-entity 
   certificates, additional uses will likely be defined in the future.  
   For example, end-entity certificates could be used as a more general 
   authorization for their subjects to act on behalf of the specified 
   resource holder.  This could facilitate authentication of inter-ISP 
   interactions, or authentication of interactions with the repository 
   system.  These additional uses for end-entity certificates may 
   require retention of the corresponding private keys, even though this 
   is not required for the private keys associated with end-entity 
   certificates keys used for verification of ROAs and manifests, as 
   described above. 

2.4. Trust Anchors 

   In any PKI, each relying party (RP) chooses its own set of trust 
   anchors. This general property of PKIs applies here as well. There is 
   an extant IP address space and AS number allocation hierarchy, and 
   thus IANA and/or the five RIRs are obvious candidates to be default 
   TAs here. Nonetheless, each RP ultimately chooses the set of trust 
   anchors it will use for certificate validation.  

   For example, a RP (e.g., an LIR/ISP) could create a trust anchor to 
   which all address space and/or all AS numbers are assigned, and for 
   which the RP knows the corresponding private key. The RP could then 
   issue certificates under this trust anchor to whatever entities in 
   the PKI it wishes, with the result that the certification paths 
   terminating at this locally-installed trust anchor will satisfy the 
   RFC 3779 validation requirements. A large ISP that uses private 
   (i.e., RFC 1918) IP address space and runs BGP internally will need 
   to create this sort of trust anchor to accommodate a CA to which all 
   private (RFC 1918) address space is assigned. The RP could then issue 
   certificates under this CA that correspond to the RP's internal use 
   of private address space.   

 
 
Lepinski and Kent         Expires April 2010                   [Page 8] 

Internet-Draft       Secure Routing Architecture           October 2009 
    

   Note that a RP who elects to create and manage its own set of trust 
   anchors may fail to detect allocation errors that arise under such 
   circumstances, but the resulting vulnerability is local to the RP. 

   It is expected that some parties within the extant IP address space 
   and AS number allocation hierarchy may wish to publish trust anchor 
   material for possible use by relying parties. A standard profile for 
   the publication of trust anchor material for this public key 
   infrastructure can be found in [9].  

3. Route Origination Authorizations 

   The information on IP address allocation provided by the PKI is not, 
   in itself, sufficient to guide routing decisions.  In particular, BGP 
   is based on the assumption that the AS that originates routes for a 
   particular prefix is authorized to do so by the holder of that prefix 
   (or an address block encompassing the prefix); the PKI contains no 
   information about these authorizations.  A Route Origination 
   Authorization (ROA) makes such authorization explicit, allowing a 
   holder of IP address space to create an object that explicitly and 
   verifiably asserts that an AS is authorized originate routes to a 
   given set of prefixes. 

3.1. Role in the overall architecture 

   A ROA is an attestation that the holder of a set of prefixes has 
   authorized an autonomous system to originate routes for those 
   prefixes.  A ROA is structured according to the format described in 
   [7].  The validity of this authorization depends on the signer of the 
   ROA being the holder of the prefix(es) in the ROA; this fact is 
   asserted by an end-entity certificate from the PKI, whose 
   corresponding private key is used to sign the ROA.   

   ROAs may be used by relying parties to verify that the AS that 
   originates a route for a given IP address prefix is authorized by the 
   holder of that prefix to originate such a route. For example, an ISP 
   might use validated ROAs as inputs to route filter construction for 
   use by its BGP routers. (See [15] for information on the use of ROAs 
   to validate the origination of BGP routes.) 

   Initially, the repository system will be the primary mechanism for 
   disseminating ROAs, since these repositories will hold the 
   certificates and CRLs needed to verify ROAs.  In addition, ROAs also 
   could be distributed in BGP UPDATE messages or via other 
   communication paths, if needed to meet timeliness requirements. 


 
 
Lepinski and Kent         Expires April 2010                   [Page 9] 

Internet-Draft       Secure Routing Architecture           October 2009 
    

3.2. Syntax and semantics 

   A ROA constitutes an explicit authorization for a single AS to 
   originate routes to one or more prefixes, and is signed by the holder 
   of those prefixes. A detailed specification of the ROA syntax can be 
   found in [7] but, at a high level, a ROA consists of (1) an AS 
   number; (2) a list of IP address prefixes; and, optionally, (3) for 
   each prefix, the maximum length of more specific (longer) prefixes 
   that the AS is also authorized to advertise. (This last element 
   facilitates a compact authorization to advertise, for example, any 
   prefixes of length 20 to 24 contained within a given length 20 
   prefix.) 

   Note that a ROA contains only a single AS number. Thus, if an ISP has 
   multiple AS numbers that will be authorized to originate routes to 
   the prefix(es) in the ROA, an address space holder will need to issue 
   multiple ROAs to authorize the ISP to originate routes from any of 
   these ASes. 

   A ROA is signed using the private key corresponding to the public key 
   in an end-entity certificate in the PKI. In order for a ROA to be 
   valid, its corresponding end-entity (EE) certificate must be valid 
   and the IP address prefixes of the ROA must exactly match the IP 
   address prefix(es) specified in the EE certificate's RFC 3779 
   extension. Therefore, the validity interval of the ROA is implicitly 
   the validity interval of its corresponding certificate. A ROA is 
   revoked by revoking the corresponding EE certificate. There is no 
   independent method of invoking a ROA. One might worry that this 
   revocation model could lead to long CRLs for the CA certification 
   that is signing the EE certificates. However, routing announcements 
   on the public internet are generally quite long lived. Therefore, as 
   long as the EE certificates used to verify a ROA are given a validity 
   interval of several months, the likelihood that many ROAs would need 
   to revoked within that time is quite low. 













 
 
Lepinski and Kent         Expires April 2010                  [Page 10] 

Internet-Draft       Secure Routing Architecture           October 2009 
    

             ---------                ---------                
             |  RIR  |                |  NIR  |                 
             |  CA   |                |  CA   |                 
             ---------                ---------                 
                 |                        |            
                 |                        |             
                 |                        |           
             ---------                ---------                
             |  ISP  |                |  ISP  |                 
             |  CA 1 |                |  CA 2 |                 
             ---------                ---------    
              |     \                      |         
              |      -----                 |      
              |           \                |          
          ----------    ----------      ----------                
          |  ISP   |    |  ISP   |      |  ISP   |                 
          |  EE 1a |    |  EE 1b |      |  EE 2  |                 
          ----------    ----------      ----------    
              |             |               | 
              |             |               | 
              |             |               | 
          ----------    ----------      ----------                
          | ROA 1a |    | ROA 1b |      | ROA 2  |                               
          ----------    ----------      ---------- 
    
   FIGURE 2: This figure illustrates an ISP with allocations from two 
   sources (and RIR and an NIR). It needs two CA certificates due to RFC 
   3779 rules. 

   Because each ROA is associated with a single end-entity certificate, 
   the set of IP prefixes contained in a ROA must be drawn from an 
   allocation by a single source, i.e., a ROA cannot combine allocations 
   from multiple sources. Address space holders who have allocations 
   from multiple sources, and who wish to authorize an AS to originate 
   routes for these allocations, must issue multiple ROAs to the AS. 

4. Repositories 

   Initially, an LIR/ISP will make use of the resource PKI by acquiring 
   and validating every ROA, to create a table of the prefixes for which 
   each AS is authorized to originate routes. To validate all ROAs, an 
   LIR/ISP needs to acquire all the certificates and CRLs. The primary 
   function of the distributed repository system described here is to 
   store these signed objects and to make them available for download by 
   LIRs/ISPs. Note that this repository system provides a mechanism by 
   which relying parties can pull fresh data at whatever frequency they 
   deem appropriate. However, it does not provide a mechanism for 
 
 
Lepinski and Kent         Expires April 2010                  [Page 11] 

Internet-Draft       Secure Routing Architecture           October 2009 
    

   pushing fresh data to relying parties (e.g. by including resource PKI 
   objects in BGP or other protocol messages) and such a mechanism is 
   beyond the scope of the current document.  

   The digital signatures on all objects in the repository ensure that 
   unauthorized modification of valid objects is detectable by relying 
   parties. Additionally, the repository system uses manifests (see 
   Section 5) to ensure that relying parties can detect the deletion of 
   valid objects and the insertion of out of date, valid signed objects.   

   The repository system is also a point of enforcement for access 
   controls for the signed objects stored in it, e.g., ensuring that 
   records related to an allocation of resources can be manipulated only 
   by authorized parties. The use of access controls prevents denial of 
   service attacks based on deletion of or tampering to repository 
   objects. Indeed, although relying parties can detect tampering with 
   objects in the repository, it is preferable that the repository 
   system prevent such unauthorized modifications to the greatest extent 
   possible. 

4.1. Role in the overall architecture 

   The repository system is the central clearing-house for all signed 
   objects that must be globally accessible to relying parties.  When 
   certificates and CRLs are created, they are uploaded to this 
   repository, and then downloaded for use by relying parties (primarily 
   LIRs/ISPs). ROAs and manifests are additional examples of such 
   objects, but other types of signed objects may be added to this 
   architecture in the future. This document briefly describes the way 
   signed objects (certificates, CRLs, ROAs and manifests) are managed 
   in the repository system. As other types of signed objects are added 
   to the repository system it will be necessary to modify the 
   description, but it is anticipated that most of the design principles 
   will still apply. The repository system is described in detail in 
   [11]. 

4.2. Contents and structure 

   Although there is a single repository system that is accessed by 
   relying parties, it is comprised of multiple databases. These 
   databases will be distributed among registries (RIRs, NIRs, 
   LIRs/ISPs). At a minimum, the database operated by each registry will 
   contain all CA and EE certificates, CRLs, and manifests signed by the 
   CA(s) associated with that registry. Repositories operated by 
   LIRs/ISPs also will contain ROAs. Registries are encouraged to 
   maintain copies of repository data from their customers, and their 
   customer's customers (etc.), to facilitate retrieval of the whole 
 
 
Lepinski and Kent         Expires April 2010                  [Page 12] 

Internet-Draft       Secure Routing Architecture           October 2009 
    

   repository contents by relying parties. Ideally, each RIR will hold 
   PKI data from all entities within its geopolitical scope. 

   For every certificate in the PKI, there will be a corresponding file 
   system directory in the repository that is the authoritative 
   publication point for all objects (certificates, CRLs, ROAs and 
   manifests) verifiable via this certificate. A certificate's Subject 
   Information Authority (SIA) extension provides a URI that references 
   this directory. Additionally, a certificate's Authority Information 
   Authority (AIA) extension contains a URI that references the 
   authoritative location for the CA certificate under which the given 
   certificate was issued. That is, if certificate A is used to verify 
   certificate B, then the AIA extension of certificate B points to 
   certificate A, and the SIA extension of certificate A points to a 
   directory containing certificate B (see Figure 2). 

                   +--------+            
        +--------->| Cert A |<----+ 
        |          | CRLDP  |     |        +---------+ 
        |          |  AIA   |     |    +-->| A's CRL |<-+ 
        |  +--------- SIA   |     |    |   +---------+  | 
        |  |       +--------+     |    |                | 
        |  |                      |    |                | 
        |  |                  +---+----+                | 
        |  |                  |   |                     | 
        |  |  +---------------|---|-----------------+   | 
        |  |  |               |   |                 |   |  
        |  +->|   +--------+  |   |   +--------+    |   | 
        |     |   | Cert B |  |   |   | Cert C |    |   | 
        |     |   | CRLDP ----+   |   | CRLDP -+--------+ 
        +----------- AIA   |      +----- AIA   |    | 
              |   |  SIA   |          |  SIA   |    | 
              |   +--------+          +--------+    |  
              |                                     | 
              +-------------------------------------+ 
    

   FIGURE 3: In this example, certificates B and C are issued under 
   certificate A. Therefore, the AIA extensions of certificates B and C 
   point to A, and the SIA extension of certificate A points to the 
   directory containing certificates B and C. 

   If a CA certificate is reissued with the same public key, it should 
   not be necessary to reissue (with an updated AIA URI) all 
   certificates signed by the certificate being reissued. Therefore, a 
   certification authority SHOULD use a persistent URI naming scheme for 
   issued certificates. That is, reissued certificates should use the 
 
 
Lepinski and Kent         Expires April 2010                  [Page 13] 

Internet-Draft       Secure Routing Architecture           October 2009 
    

   same publication point as previously issued certificates having the 
   same subject and public key, and should overwrite such certificates. 

4.3. Access protocols 

   Repository operators will choose one or more access protocols that 
   relying parties can use to access the repository system.  These 
   protocols will be used by numerous participants in the infrastructure 
   (e.g., all registries, ISPs, and multi-homed subscribers) to maintain 
   their respective portions of it.  In order to support these 
   activities, certain basic functionality is required of the suite of 
   access protocols, as described below.  No single access protocol need 
   implement all of these functions (although this may be the case), but 
   each function must be implemented by at least one access protocol. 

   Download: Access protocols MUST support the bulk download of 
   repository contents and subsequent download of changes to the 
   downloaded contents, since this will be the most common way in which 
   relying parties interact with the repository system.  Other types of 
   download interactions (e.g., download of a single object) MAY also be 
   supported. 

   Upload/change/delete: Access protocols MUST also support mechanisms 
   for the issuers of certificates, CRLs, and other signed objects to 
   add them to the repository, and to remove them.  Mechanisms for 
   modifying objects in the repository MAY also be provided.  All access 
   protocols that allow modification to the repository (through 
   addition, deletion, or modification of its contents) MUST support 
   verification of the authorization of the entity performing the 
   modification, so that appropriate access controls can be applied (see 
   Section 4.4). 

   Current efforts to implement a repository system use RSYNC [14] as 
   the single access protocol.  RSYNC, as used in this implementation, 
   provides all of the above functionality. A document specifying the 
   conventions for use of RSYNC in the PKI will be prepared. 

4.4. Access control 

   In order to maintain the integrity of information in the repository, 
   controls must be put in place to prevent addition, deletion, or 
   modification of objects in the repository by unauthorized parties. 
   The identities of parties attempting to make such changes can be 
   authenticated through the relevant access protocols.  Although 
   specific access control policies are subject to the local control of 
   repository operators, it is recommended that repositories allow only 
   the issuers of signed objects to add, delete, or modify them. 
 
 
Lepinski and Kent         Expires April 2010                  [Page 14] 

Internet-Draft       Secure Routing Architecture           October 2009 
    

   Alternatively, it may be advantageous in the future to define a 
   formal delegation mechanism to allow resource holders to authorize 
   other parties to act on their behalf, as suggested in Section 2.3 
   above. 

5. Manifests 

   A manifest is a signed object listing of all of the signed objects 
   issued by an authority responsible for a publication in the 
   repository system. For each certificate, CRL, or ROA issued by the 
   authority, the manifest contains both the name of the file containing 
   the object, and a hash of the file content.  

   As with ROAs, a manifest is signed by a private key, for which the  
   corresponding public key appears in an end-entity certificate. This 
   EE certificate, in turn, is signed by the CA in question. The EE 
   certificate private key may be used to issue one for more manifests. 
   If the private key is used to sign only a single manifest, then the 
   manifest can be revoked by revoking the EE certificate. In such a 
   case, to avoid needless CRL growth, the EE certificate used to 
   validate a manifest SHOULD expire at the same time that the manifest 
   expires. If an EE certificate is used to issue multiple (sequential) 
   manifests for the CA in question, then there is no revocation 
   mechanism for these individual manifests.  

   Manifests may be used by relying parties when constructing a local 
   cache (see Section 6) to mitigate the risk of an attacker who deletes 
   files from a repository or replaces current signed objects with stale 
   versions of the same object. Such protection is needed because 
   although all objects in the repository system are signed, the 
   repository system itself is untrusted. 

5.1. Syntax and semantics 

   A manifest constitutes a list of (the hashes of) all the files in a 
   repository point at a particular point in time. A detailed 
   specification of manifest syntax is provided in [8] but, at a high 
   level, a manifest consists of (1) a manifest number; (2) the time the 
   manifest was issued; (3) the time of the next planned update; and (4) 
   a list of filename and hash value pairs.   

   The manifest number is a sequence number that is incremented each 
   time a manifest is issued by the authority. An authority is required 
   to issue a new manifest any time it alters any of its items in the 
   repository, or when the specified time of the next update is reached. 
   A manifest is thus valid until the specified time of the next update 
   or until a manifest is issued with a greater manifest number, 
 
 
Lepinski and Kent         Expires April 2010                  [Page 15] 

Internet-Draft       Secure Routing Architecture           October 2009 
    

   whichever comes first. (Note that when an EE certificate is used to 
   sign only a single manifest, whenever the authority issues the new 
   manifest, the CA MUST also issue a new CRL which includes the EE 
   certificate corresponding to the old manifest. The revoked EE 
   certificate for the old manifest will be removed from the CRL when it 
   expires, thus this procedure ought not to result in significant CRLs 
   growth.)  

6. Local Cache Maintenance 

   In order to utilize signed objects issued under this PKI, a relying 
   party must first obtain a local copy of the valid EE certificates for 
   the PKI. To do so, the relying party performs the following steps: 

     1. Query the registry system to obtain a copy of all certificates, 
        manifests and CRLs issued under the PKI. 

     2. For each CA certificate in the PKI, verify the signature on the 
        corresponding manifest. Additionally, verify that the current 
        time is earlier than the time indicated in the nextUpdate field 
        of the manifest. 

     3. For each manifest, verify that certificates and CRLs issued 
        under the corresponding CA certificate match the hash values 
        contained in the manifest. Additionally, verify that no 
        certificate or manifest listed on the manifest is missing from 
        the repository. If the hash values do not match, or if any 
        certificate or CRL is missing, notify the appropriate repository 
        administrator that the repository data has been corrupted.  

     4. Validate each EE certificate by constructing and verifying a 
        certification path for the certificate (including checking 
        relevant CRLs) to the locally configured set of TAs. (See [6] 
        for more details.) 

   Note that since relying parties will perform these operations 
   regularly, it is more efficient for the relying party to request from 
   the repository system only those objects that have changed since the 
   relying party last updated its local cache. A relying party may 
   choose any frequency it desires for downloading and validating 
   updates from the repository. However, any relying party that uses 
   RPKI data as an input to operational routing decisions (e.g., ISPs, 
   RIRs, NIRs) SHOULD download and validate updates at least once every 
   three hours.  



 
 
Lepinski and Kent         Expires April 2010                  [Page 16] 

Internet-Draft       Secure Routing Architecture           October 2009 
    

   Note also that by checking all issued objects against the appropriate 
   manifest, the relying party can be certain that it is not missing an 
   updated version of any object.  

7. Common Operations 

   Creating and maintaining the infrastructure described above will 
   entail additional operations as "side effects" of normal resource 
   allocation and routing authorization procedures.  For example, a 
   subscriber with provider-independent ("portable") address space who 
   enters a relationship with an ISP will need to issue one or more ROAs 
   identifying that ISP, in addition to conducting any other necessary 
   technical or business procedures.  The current primary use of this 
   infrastructure is for route filter construction; using ROAs, route 
   filters can be constructed in an automated fashion with high 
   assurance that the holder of the advertised prefix has authorized the 
   origin AS to originate an advertised route. 

7.1. Certificate issuance 

   There are several operational scenarios that require certificates to 
   be issued.  Any allocation that may be sub-allocated requires a CA 
   certificate, e.g., so that certificates can be issued as necessary 
   for the sub-allocations. Holders of provider-independent IP address 
   space allocations also must have certificates, so that a ROA can be 
   issued to each ISP that is authorized to originate a route to the 
   allocation (since the allocation does not come from any ISP). 
   Additionally, multi-homed subscribers may require certificates for 
   their allocations if they intend to issue the ROAs for their 
   allocations (see Section 7.2.2). Other resource holders need not be 
   issued CA certificates within the PKI. 

   In the long run, a resource holder will not request resource 
   certificates, but rather receive a certificate as a side effect of 
   the allocation process for the resource. However, initial deployment 
   of the RPKI will entail issuance of certificates to existing resource 
   holders as an explicit event. Note that in all cases, the authority 
   issuing a CA certificate will be the entity who allocates resources 
   to the subject. This differs from most PKIs in which a subject can 
   request a certificate from any certification authority.  

   If a resource holder receives multiple allocations over time, it may 
   accrue a collection of resource certificates to attest to them.  If a 
   resource holder receives multiple allocations from the same source, 
   the set of resource certificates may be combined into a single 
   resource certificate, if both the issuer and the resource holder 
   agree. This is accomplished by consolidating the IP Address 
 
 
Lepinski and Kent         Expires April 2010                  [Page 17] 

Internet-Draft       Secure Routing Architecture           October 2009 
    

   Delegation and AS Identifier Delegation Extensions into a single 
   extension (of each type) in a new certificate.  However, if the 
   certificates for these allocations contain different validity 
   intervals, creating a certificate that combines them might create 
   problems, and thus is NOT RECOMMENDED.  

   If a resource holder's allocations come from different sources, they 
   will be signed by different CAs, and cannot be combined.  When a set 
   of resources is no longer allocated to a resource holder, any 
   certificates attesting to such an allocation MUST be revoked. A 
   resource holder SHOULD NOT use the same public key in multiple CA 
   certificates that are issued by the same or differing authorities, as 
   reuse of a key pair complicates path construction. Note that since 
   the subject's distinguished name is chosen by the issuer, a subject 
   who receives allocations from two sources generally will receive 
   certificates with different subject names.  

7.2. ROA management      

   Whenever a holder of IP address space wants to authorize an AS to 
   originate routes for a prefix within his holdings, he MUST issue an 
   end-entity certificate containing that prefix in an IP Address 
   Delegation extension. He then uses the corresponding private key to 
   sign a ROA containing the designated prefix and the AS number for the 
   AS.  The resource holder MAY include more than one prefix in the EE 
   certificate and corresponding ROA if desired. As a prerequisite, 
   then, any address space holder that issues ROAs for a prefix must 
   have a resource certificate for an allocation containing that prefix.  
   The standard procedure for issuing a ROA is as follows: 

     1. Create an end-entity certificate containing the prefix(es) to be     
        authorized in the ROA. 

     2. Construct the payload of the ROA, including the prefixes in the     
        end-entity certificate and the AS number to be authorized. 

     3. Sign the ROA using the private key corresponding to the end-
        entity certificate (the ROA is comprised of the payload 
        encapsulated in a CMS signed message [7]). 

     4. Upload the end-entity certificate and the ROA to the repository     
        system. 

   The standard procedure for revoking a ROA is to revoke the 
   corresponding end-entity certificate by creating an appropriate CRL 
   and uploading it to the repository system.  The revoked ROA and end- 
   entity certificate SHOULD BE removed from the repository system. 
 
 
Lepinski and Kent         Expires April 2010                  [Page 18] 

Internet-Draft       Secure Routing Architecture           October 2009 
    

   Care must be taken when revoking ROAs in that revoking a ROA may 
   cause a relying party to treat routing advertisements corresponding 
   to the prefixes and origin AS number in the ROA as unauthorized (and 
   potentially even change routing behavior to no longer forward packets 
   based on those advertisements). In particular, resource holders 
   should adhere to the principle of "make before break" as follows. 
   Before revoking a ROA corresponding to a prefix which the resource 
   holder wishes to be routable on the Internet, it is very important 
   for the resource holder to ensure that there exists another valid 
   alternative ROA that lists the same prefix (possibly indicating a 
   different AS number). Additionally, the resource holder should ensure 
   that the AS indicated in the valid alternative ROA is actually 
   originating routing advertisements to the prefixes in question. 
   Furthermore, a relying party must fetch new ROAs from the repository 
   system before taking any routing action in response to a ROA 
   revocation. 

7.2.1. Single-homed subscribers (with PA address space) 

   In BGP, a single-homed subscriber with provider aggregatable (non-
   portable) address space does not need to explicitly authorize routes 
   to be originated for the prefix(es) it is using, since its ISP will 
   already advertise a more general prefix and route traffic for the 
   subscriber's prefix as an internal function.  Since no routes are 
   originated specifically for prefixes held by these subscribers, no 
   ROAs need to be issued under their allocations; rather, the 
   subscriber's ISP will issue any necessary ROAs for its more general 
   prefixes under resource certificates from its own allocation. Thus, a 
   single-homed subscriber with an IP address allocation from his 
   service provider is not included in the RPKI, i.e., it does not 
   receive a CA certificate, nor issue EE certificates or ROAs. 

7.2.2. Multi-homed subscribers (with PA address space) 

   Here we consider a subscriber who receives provider aggregatable IP 
   address space from a primary ISP (i.e., the IP addresses used by the 
   subscriber are a subset of ISP A's IP address space allocation) and 
   receives redundant upstream connectivity from one or more secondary 
   ISPs, in addition to the primary ISP. The preferred option for such a 
   multi-homed subscriber is for the subscriber to obtain an AS number 
   (from an RIR or NIR) and run BGP with each of its upstream providers. 
   In such a case, there are two ways for ROA management to be handled. 
   The first is that the primary ISP issues a CA certificate to the 
   subscriber, and the subscriber issues a ROA to containing the 
   subscriber's AS number and the subscriber's IP address prefixes. The 
   second possibility is that the primary ISP does not issue a CA 
   certificate to the subscriber, and instead issues a ROA on the 
 
 
Lepinski and Kent         Expires April 2010                  [Page 19] 

Internet-Draft       Secure Routing Architecture           October 2009 
    

   subscriber's behalf that contains the subscriber's AS number and the 
   subscriber's IP address prefixes. 

   If the subscriber is unable or unwilling to obtain an AS number and 
   run BGP, the other option is that the multi-homed subscriber can 
   request that the primary ISP create a ROA for each secondary ISP that 
   authorizes the secondary ISP to originate routes to the subscriber's 
   prefixes. The primary ISP will also create a ROA containing its own 
   AS number and the subscriber's prefixes, as it is likely in such a 
   case that the primary ISP wishes to advertise precisely the 
   subscriber's prefixes and not an encompassing aggregate. Note that 
   this approach results in inconsistent origin AS numbers for the 
   subscriber's prefixes which are considered undesirable on the public 
   Internet; thus this approach is NOT RECOMMENDED. 

7.2.3. Provider-Independent Address Space 

   A resource holder is said to have provider-independent (portable) 
   address space if the resource holder received its allocation directly 
   from a RIR or NIR.  Because the prefixes represented in such 
   allocations are not taken from an allocation held by an ISP, there is 
   no ISP that holds and advertises a more general prefix. A holder of a 
   portable IP address space allocation MUST authorize one or more ASes 
   to originate routes to these prefixes. Thus the resource holder MUST 
   generate one or more EE certificates and associated ROAs to enable 
   the AS(es) to originate routes for the prefix(es) in question. This 
   ROA is required because none of the ISP's existing ROAs authorize it 
   to originate routes to the subscriber's provider-idependent 
   allocation. 

8. Security Considerations 

   The focus of this document is security; hence security considerations 
   permeate this specification. 

   The security mechanisms provided by and enabled by this architecture 
   depend on the integrity and availability of the infrastructure it 
   describes.  The integrity of objects within the infrastructure is 
   ensured by appropriate controls on the repository system, as 
   described in Section 4.4. Likewise, because the repository system is 
   structured as a distributed database, it should be inherently 
   resistant to denial of service attacks; nonetheless, appropriate 
   precautions should also be taken, both through replication and backup 
   of the constituent databases and through the physical security of 
   database servers. 


 
 
Lepinski and Kent         Expires April 2010                  [Page 20] 

Internet-Draft       Secure Routing Architecture           October 2009 
    

9. IANA Considerations 

   This document requests that the IANA issue RPKI Certificates for the 
   resources for which it is authoritative, i.e., reserved IPv4 
   addresses, IPv6 ULAs, and address space not yet allocated by IANA to 
   the RIRs. IANA SHOULD make available trust anchor material in the 
   format defined in [9] in support of these functions.   

10. Acknowledgments 

   The architecture described in this draft is derived from the 
   collective ideas and work of a large group of individuals. This work 
   would not have been possible without the intellectual contributions 
   of George Michaelson, Robert Loomans, Sanjaya and Geoff Huston of 
   APNIC, Robert Kisteleki and Henk Uijterwaal of the RIPE NCC, Tim 
   Christensen and Cathy Murphy of ARIN, Rob Austein of ISC and Randy 
   Bush of IIJ. 

   Although we are indebted to everyone who has contributed to this 
   architecture, we would like to especially thank Rob Austein for the 
   concept of a manifest, Geoff Huston for the concept of managing 
   object validity through single-use EE certificate key pairs, and 
   Richard Barnes for help in preparing an early version of this 
   document. 























 
 
Lepinski and Kent         Expires April 2010                  [Page 21] 

Internet-Draft       Secure Routing Architecture           October 2009 
    

11. References 

11.1. Normative References 

   [1]   Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement 
         Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997. 

   [2]   Rekhter, Y., Li, T., and S. Hares, "A Border Gateway Protocol 4 
         (BGP-4)", RFC 4271, January 2006 

   [3]   Cooper, D., Santesson, S., Farrell, S., Boeyen, S., Housley, 
         R., and W. Polk, "Internet X.509 Public Key Infrastructure 
         Certificate and Certificate Revocation List (CRL) Profile", RFC 
         5280, May 2008. 

   [4]   Housley, R., "Cryptographic Message Syntax", RFC 3852, July 
         2004. 

   [5]   Lynn, C., Kent, S., and K. Seo, "X.509 Extensions for IP            
         Addresses and AS Identifiers", RFC 3779, June 2004. 

   [6]   Huston, G., Michaelson, G., and Loomans, R., "A Profile for 
         X.509 PKIX Resource Certificates", draft-ietf-sidr-res-certs-
         17, September 2009. 

   [7]   Lepinski, M., Kent, S., and Kong, D., "A Profile for Route 
         Origin Authorizations (ROA)", draft-ietf-sidr-roa-format-06, 
         October 2009. 

   [8]   Austein, R., et al., "Manifests for the Resource Public Key 
         Infrastructure", draft-ietf-sidr-rpki-manifests-05, August 
         2009. 

   [9]   Michaelson, G., Kent, S., and Huston, G., "A Profile for Trust 
         Anchor Material for the Resource Certificate PKI", draft-ietf-
         sidr-ta-02, September 2009. 

   [10]  Huston, G., "A Profile for Algorithms and Key Sizes for use in 
         the Resource Public Key Infrastructure", draft-ietf-sidr-rpki-
         algs-00, August 2009. 

11.2. Informative References 

   [11]  Huston, G., Michaelson, G., and Loomans, R., "A Profile for 
         Resource Certificate Repository Structure", draft-ietf-sidr-
         repos-struct-03, August 2009. 

 
 
Lepinski and Kent         Expires April 2010                  [Page 22] 

Internet-Draft       Secure Routing Architecture           October 2009 
    

   [12]  Kent, S., Lynn, C., and Seo, K., "Secure Border Gateway 
         Protocol (Secure-BGP)", IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in 
         Communications Vol. 18, No. 4, April 2000.  

   [13]  White, R., "soBGP", May 2005, <ftp://ftp-
         eng.cisco.com/sobgp/index.html>  

   [14]   Tridgell, A., "rsync", April 2006, 
         <http://samba.anu.edu.au/rsync/>  

   [15]  Huston, G., Michaelson, G., "Validation of Route Origination in 
         BGP using the Resource Certificate PKI", draft-ietf-sidr-roa-
         validation-03, August 2009. 

 

Authors' Addresses 

   Matt Lepinski
   BBN Technologies
   10 Moulton St.
   Cambridge, MA 02138
       
   Email: mlepinski@bbn.com
    
    
   Stephen Kent
   BBN Technologies
   10 Moulton St.
   Cambridge, MA 02138
       
   Email: kent@bbn.com

    

Pre-5378 Material Disclaimer 

   This document may contain material from IETF Documents or IETF 
   Contributions published or made publicly available before November 
   10, 2008. The person(s) controlling the copyright in some of this 
   material may not have granted the IETF Trust the right to allow 
   modifications of such material outside the IETF Standards Process. 
   Without obtaining an adequate license from the person(s) controlling 
   the copyright in such materials, this document may not be modified 
   outside the IETF Standards Process, and derivative works of it may 
   not be created outside the IETF Standards Process, except to format 

 
 
Lepinski and Kent         Expires April 2010                  [Page 23] 

Internet-Draft       Secure Routing Architecture           October 2009 
    

   it for publication as an RFC or to translate it into languages other 
   than English. 

 











































 
 
Lepinski and Kent         Expires April 2010                  [Page 24] 

