


SIDR                                                           G. Huston
Internet-Draft                                                     APNIC
Intended status: Informational                           August 25, 2009
Expires: February 26, 2010


 A Profile for Algorithms and Key Sizes for use in the Resource Public
                           Key Infrastructure
                    draft-ietf-sidr-rpki-algs-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on February 26, 2010.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2009 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents in effect on the date of
   publication of this document (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info).
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.

Abstract

   This document defines a profile for the algorithm and key size to be
   used for signatures applied to certificates, Certificate Revocation



Huston                  Expires February 26, 2010               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft           RPKI Algorithm Profile              August 2009


   Lists, and signed objects in the context of the Resource Public Key
   Infrastructure.


1.  Introduction

   This document defines a profile for the algorithm and key size to be
   used for signatures applied to certificates, Certificate Revocation
   Lists (CRLs), and signed objects in the context of the Resource
   Public Key Infrastructure (RPKI) [I-D.ietf-sidr-arch].

   This section of the profile is specified in a distinct profile
   document, referenced by the RPKI Certificate Policy (CP)
   [I-D.ietf-sidr-cp] and the RPKI Certificate Profile
   [I-D.ietf-sidr-res-certs], in order to allow for a degree of
   algorithm and key agility in the RPKI, while permitting some longer
   term stability in the CP and Certificate Profile specifications.

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119.


2.  Algorithm and Key Size

   This profile specifies the use of the RSA algorithm [RFC3447] to
   compute the signature of certificates, CRLs and signed objects in the
   context of the RPKI.  This profile specifies a default of SHA-256
   with RSA (sha256WithRSAEncryption), and allows for the use of SHA-384
   (sha384WithRSAEncryption) or SHA-512 (sha384WithRSAEncryption).
   Accordingly, The OID values used in the RPKI for such signatures MUST
   be one of { pkcs-1 11 }, { pkcs-1 12 } or { pkcs-1 13 } [RFC4055].

   The required RSA key size MUST be 2048 bits.

   The public exponent (e) of the RSA algorithm is F4 (65,537).


3.  Future Upates

   It is anticipated that the RPKI will require the adoption of updated
   key sizes and a different set of signature and hash algorithms over
   time, in order to maintain an acceptable level of cryptographic
   security to protect the integrity of signed products in the RPKI.
   This profile should be updated to specify such future requirements,
   as and when appropriate.

   Certification Authorities (CAs) and Relying Parties (RPs) should be



Huston                  Expires February 26, 2010               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft           RPKI Algorithm Profile              August 2009


   capable of supporting a transition to allow for the phased
   introduction of additional encryption algorithms and key
   specifications, and also accomodate the orderly deprecation of
   previously specified algorithms and keys.  Accordingly, CAs and RPs
   SHOULD be capable of supporting multiple RPKI algorithm and key
   profiles simultaneously within the scope of such anticipated
   transitions.


4.  Security Considerations

   The Security Considerations of [RFC3779], [RFC5280], and [RFC4055]
   apply to signatures as defined by this profile, and their use.


5.  IANA Considerations

   [There are no IANA considerations in this document.]


6.  Acknowledgments

   The author acknowledges the re-use in this draft of material
   originally contained in working drafts the RPKI Certificate Policy
   and Resource Certificate profile documents.  The co-authors of these
   two documents, namely Stephen Kent, Derrick Kong, Karen Seo, Ronald
   Watro, George Michaelson and Robert Loomans, are acknowledged with
   thanks.  The constraint on key size noted in this profile is the
   outcome of comments from Stephen Kent and review comments from David
   Cooper.


7.  Normative References

   [I-D.ietf-sidr-arch]
              Lepinski, M. and S. Kent, "An Infrastructure to Support
              Secure Internet Routing", draft-ietf-sidr-arch (work in
              progress), July 2009.

   [I-D.ietf-sidr-cp]
              Seo, K., Watro, R., Kong, D., and S. Kent, "Certificate
              Policy (CP) for the Resource PKI (RPKI)",
              draft-ietf-sidr-cp (work in progress), July 2009.

   [I-D.ietf-sidr-res-certs]
              Husotn, G., Michaelson, G., and R. Loomans, "A Profile for
              X.509 PKIX Resource Certificates",
              draft-ietf-sidr-res-certs (work in progress),



Huston                  Expires February 26, 2010               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft           RPKI Algorithm Profile              August 2009


              February 2008.

   [RFC3447]  Jonsson, J. and B. Kaliski, "Public-Key Cryptography
              Standards (PKCS) #1: RSA Cryptography Specifications
              Version 2.1", RFC 3447, February 2003.

   [RFC3779]  Lynn, C., Kent, S., and K. Seo, "X.509 Extensions for IP
              Addresses and AS Identifiers", RFC 3779, June 2004.

   [RFC4055]  Schaad, J., Kaliski, B., and R. Housley, "Additional
              Algorithms and Identifiers for RSA Cryptography for use in
              the Internet X.509 Public Key Infrastructure Certificate
              and Certificate Revocation List (CRL) Profile", RFC 4055,
              June 2005.

   [RFC5280]  Cooper, D., Santesson, S., Farrell, S., Boeyen, S.,
              Housley, R., and W. Polk, "Internet X.509 Public Key
              Infrastructure Certificate and Certificate Revocation List
              (CRL) Profile", RFC 5280, May 2008.


Author's Address

   Geoff Huston
   Asia Pacific Network Information Centre

   Email: gih@apnic.net
























Huston                  Expires February 26, 2010               [Page 4]

