



Network Working Group                                          K. Nagami
Internet-Draft                                                     Intec
Intended status: Informational                                  S. Kamei
Expires: January 16, 2014                             NTT Communications
                                                                K. Koita
                                                                     IID
                                                            T. Jitsuzumi
                                                            Kyushu Univ.
                                                            I. Mizukoshi
                                                                NTT East
                                                           July 15, 2013


       Use Case from a measurement provider perspective for LMAP
           draft-nagami-lmap-use-case-measurement-provider-00

Abstract

   This document describes an example of the use cases of measurement
   provider for LMAP.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 16, 2014.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect



Nagami, et al.          Expires January 16, 2014                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft   LMAP Use Case for Measurement Provider        July 2013


   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

1.  Introduction

   In Japan, a high-speed internet of fixed network is used to a lot of
   people.  The use of smartphones and tablet devices increases, the
   mobile network is also faster.  Users know the maximum bandwidth of
   last mile for fixed network (100Mbps to 2Gbps in FTTH) and mobile
   network (37.5Mbps to 112.5Mbps in LTE).  However, users do not know
   the performance of the actual network.  In order to know them, it is
   necessary to measure the actual performance of the network.  In
   addition, users need to know the performance of other network
   providers as information for selecting the network.

   Measurement providers measure a network performance from users to
   multiple content providers using a dedicated hardware or software.
   They will show the result with measurement methods and measurement
   parameters.

   This document introduces a new use cases of measurement provider for
   LMAP described in [LMAP-USE-CASES].

2.  Use Case for Measurement Provider

   Measurement providers measure a network performance from users to
   multiple content providers to show a performance of the actual
   network.  Users need to know a performance that are using their own.
   In addition, they need to know a performance of other ISP of same
   location as information for selecting the network.  Measurement
   providers will show the measurement result with measurement methods
   and measurement parameters.

   The following is a case that is currently implemented.

2.1.  Measurements for Fixed Networks with dedicated hardware

   We have measured a network using dedicated hardware fixed network.
   We put a dedicated hardware to multiple locations in Japan.

   Measurement provider distributes dozens of dedicated hardwares, Linux
   box with ARM 600MHz ARM Processor and 512M memories.







Nagami, et al.          Expires January 16, 2014                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft   LMAP Use Case for Measurement Provider        July 2013


   With major fixed broadband access service in Japan, we can select ISP
   services using one FTTH access line.  Therefore we can measure many
   ISPs with one FTTH spot.  In our trial, we measured 117 ISP-location
   sets by 9 Linux boxes and 13 ISP accounts.

   The architecture of measurement system is composed of Linux box MAs
   and the control Linux server.  They act as follows: Before
   measurement, we made measurement plan file and set it on contorl
   server beforehand.

   1.  Distributing MAs to some locations.

   2.  MAs are powered on and connected to FTTH access line.

   3.  MAs set up PPPoE connection to ISP service.

   4.  After getting an IP address, MAs set up VPN connection to the
       control server.

   5.  MAs fetch measurement plan file from control server, interpret
       and execute it.

   6.  MAs put measurement results to control the server.

   7.  MAs check plan file again, back to step 5.

   The plan file is described by the shell script.  It can set crontab
   and can execute any active measurement commands.  We also send
   measurement results from plan file.  MAs can act autonomously and can
   perform without control server.

   In our measurement, measuring metrics are RTT, traceroute, HTTP GET
   (through-put) from/to OTT services.

   There are some problems of measurement architecture from this
   experiment.

   o  Scalability is not enough in openvpn tunnel, upload results and
      checking plan file.

   o  It is necessary to consider security risks for plan file in
      control server.









Nagami, et al.          Expires January 16, 2014                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft   LMAP Use Case for Measurement Provider        July 2013


2.2.  Measurements for Fixed Networks with software

   The measurement is designed to ask users visit the measurement site.
   When the user visits the measurement site using a browser,
   measurement is performed.  Because it is measured using the software,
   we can perform the measurement from the many MAs.

   Since the measurement was performed when the end users accessed to
   the designated measurement site, each individual result was readily
   available to each participating user himself.

   There are two performance measurements.  One is performed by an
   academic researcher and another is performed by a company.

   In academic research, the overall summary of all the participants was
   presented at several conferences that the author attended, and is
   also available through one of the author's webpage [JITSUZUMI-WEB]
   and a slideshare site [JITSUZUMI-SLIDESHARE].  These measurements
   were part of academic researches, and therefore all of the costs were
   covered by the research grants from the government.

   The measurement company shows individual results and a summary of the
   measurements to participating users, free of charge.  The cost of the
   measurement is covered by offering detailed results, after proper
   anonymization, to interested companies for fee.

2.3.  Measurements for Mobile Networks with smartphone

   Measurement provider distributes a measurement applications to users
   for smart phones.  By using this application, the user performs the
   measurement to the servers from a smartphone.

   There are two type of measurements.

   1.  Run a measurement when users push a measurement button.  We have
       been measured to the servers from 500,000 MAs.

   2.  Run a measurement periodically.  Measurement application is
       executed periodically in the background.  We have been measured
       to the servers from 2,000 MAs.

3.  IANA Considerations

   There are no IANA considerations in this memo.

4.  Security Considerations

   TBD



Nagami, et al.          Expires January 16, 2014                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft   LMAP Use Case for Measurement Provider        July 2013


5.  Informative References

   [JITSUZUMI-SLIDESHARE]
              Jitsuzumi, T., "Jitsuzumi's Slideshare", , <http://
              www.slideshare.net/toshiyajitsuzumi/report-actual-
              qosinjapan>.

   [JITSUZUMI-WEB]
              Jitsuzumi, T., "Jitsuzumi's Web Page", ,
              <http://www.facebook.com/toshiya.jitsuzumi>.

   [LMAP-TERMINOLOGY]
              Eardley, P., Morton, A., Bagnulo, M., and T. Burbridge,
              "Terminology for Large MeAsurement Platforms", draft-
              eardley-lmap-terminology-02 , July 2013.

   [LMAP-USE-CASES]
              Linsner, M., Eardley, P., and T. Burbridge, "Large-Scale
              Broadband Measurement Use Cases", draft-linsner-lmap-use-
              cases-02 , February 2013.

Authors' Addresses

   Kenichi Nagami
   Intec

   Email: nagami@inetcore.com


   Satoshi Kamei
   NTT Communications

   Email: skame@nttv6.jp


   Kenji Koita
   IID

   Email: k-koita@iid.co.jp


   Toshiya Jitsuzumi
   Kyushu Univ.

   Email: jitsuzumi@econ.kyushu-u.ac.jp






Nagami, et al.          Expires January 16, 2014                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft   LMAP Use Case for Measurement Provider        July 2013


   Ichiro Mizukoshi
   NTT East

   Email: i.mizukoshi@east.ntt.co.jp















































Nagami, et al.          Expires January 16, 2014                [Page 6]
