A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3408

        Title:      Zero-byte Support for Reliable
                    Bidirectional Mode (R-mode) in Extended Link-Layer
                    Assisted RObust Header Compression (ROHC) Profile
        Author(s):  Z. Liu, K. Le
        Status:     Standards Track
        Date:       December 2002
        Mailbox:    zhigang.c.liu@nokia.com, khiem.le@nokia.com
        Pages:      7
        Characters: 14805
        Updates/Obsoletes/SeeAlso:   None
       
        I-D Tag:    draft-ietf-rohc-rtp-lla-r-mode-03.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3408.txt


This document defines an additional mode of the link-layer assisted
RObust Header Compression (ROHC) profile, also known as the zero-byte
profile, beyond the two defined in RFC 3242.  Zero-byte header
compression exists in order to prevent the single-octet ROHC header
from pushing a packet voice stream into the next higher fixed packet
size for the radio.  It is usable in certain widely deployed older
air interfaces.  This document adds the zero-byte operation for ROHC
Bidirectional Reliable mode (R-mode) to the ones specified for
Unidirectional (U-mode) and Bidirectional Optimistic (O-mode) modes
of header compression in RFC 3242.

This document is a product of the Robust Header Compression Working
Group of the IETF.

This is now a Proposed Standard Protocol.

This document specifies an Internet standards track protocol for
the Internet community, and requests discussion and suggestions
for improvements.  Please refer to the current edition of the
"Internet Official Protocol Standards" (STD 1) for the
standardization state and status of this protocol.  Distribution
of this memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.

