A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3320

        Title:      Signaling Compression (SigComp)
        Author(s):  R. Price, C. Bormann, J. Christoffersson,
                    H. Hannu, Z. Liu, J. Rosenberg
        Status:     Standards Track
        Date:       January 2003
        Mailbox:    richard.price@roke.co.uk, cabo@tzi.org,
                    jan.christoffersson@epl.ericsson.se,
                    hans.hannu@epl.ericsson.se
                    zhigang.c.liu@nokia.com, jdrosen@dynamicsoft.com
        Pages:      62
        Characters: 137035
        Updates/Obsoletes/SeeAlso:    None

        I-D Tag:    draft-ietf-rohc-sigcomp-07.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3320.txt


This document defines Signaling Compression (SigComp), a solution for
compressing messages generated by application protocols such as the
Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) (RFC 3261) and the Real Time
Streaming Protocol (RTSP) (RFC 2326).  The architecture and
prerequisites of SigComp are outlined, along with the format of the
SigComp message. 

Decompression functionality for SigComp is provided by a Universal
Decompressor Virtual Machine (UDVM) optimized for the task of running
decompression algorithms.  The UDVM can be configured to understand
the output of many well-known compressors such as DEFLATE (RFC-1951).

This document is a product of Robust Header Compression Working Group
of the IETF.

This is now a Proposed Standard Protocol.

This document specifies an Internet standards track protocol for
the Internet community, and requests discussion and suggestions
for improvements.  Please refer to the current edition of the
"Internet Official Protocol Standards" (STD 1) for the
standardization state and status of this protocol.  Distribution
of this memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.
