A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3322

        Title:      Signaling Compression (SigComp) Requirements &
                    Assumptions
        Author(s):  H. Hannu
        Status:     Informational
        Date:       January 2003
        Mailbox:    hans.hannu@epl.ericsson.se
        Pages:      13
        Characters: 27533
        Updates/Obsoletes/SeeAlso:    None

        I-D Tag:    draft-ietf-rohc-signaling-req-assump-06.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3322.txt


The purpose of this document is to outline requirements and
motivations for the development of a scheme for compression and
decompression of messages from signaling protocols.  In wireless
environments and especially in cellular systems, e.g., GSM (Global
System for Mobile communications) and UMTS (Universal Mobile
Telecommunications System), there is a need to maximize the transport
efficiency for data over the radio interface.  With the introduction
of SIP/SDP (Session Initiation Protocol/Session Description Protocol)
to cellular devices, compression of the signaling messages should be
considered in order to improve both service availability and quality,
mainly by reducing the user idle time, e.g., at call setup.

This document is a product of the Robust Header Compression Working
Group of the IETF.

This memo provides information for the Internet community.  It does
not specify an Internet standard of any kind.  Distribution of this
memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.

