


IPv6 Operations                                                 F. Baker
Internet-Draft                                             Cisco Systems
Intended status: Informational                                 W. Harrop
Expires: February 13, 2011                                   G. Armitage
                                           CAIA, Swinburne University of
                                                              Technology
                                                         August 12, 2010


                         IPv4 and IPv6 Greynets
                      draft-baker-v6ops-greynet-05

Abstract

   This note discusses a feature to support building Greynets for IPv4
   and IPv6.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on February 13, 2011.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.



Baker, et al.           Expires February 13, 2011               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft           IPv4 and IPv6 Greynets              August 2010


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.1.  History and experience . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Deploying Greynets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     2.1.  Deployment using routing - Darknets  . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     2.2.  Deployment using sparse address space - Greynets . . . . .  5
     2.3.  Other filters  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   3.  Implications for router design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   4.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   5.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   6.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   7.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     7.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     7.2.  Informative references . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10



































Baker, et al.           Expires February 13, 2011               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft           IPv4 and IPv6 Greynets              August 2010


1.  Introduction

   Darknets, also called "Network Telescopes" among other things, have
   been deployed by several organizations including CAIDA, Team Cymru,
   and the University of Michigan, to look at traffic directed to
   addresses in blocks that are not in actual use.  Such traffic becomes
   visible by either direct capture (it is routed to a collector) or by
   virtue of its backscatter (its resulting in ICMP traffic or transport
   layer resets).

   Darknets, of course, have two problems.  As their address spaces
   become known, attackers stop probing them, so they are less
   effective.  Also, the administrators of those prefixes are pressured
   by RIR policy and business requirements to deploy them in active
   networks.

   [Harrop] defines a 'Greynet' by extension, in these words:

      Darknets are often proposed to monitor for anomalous, externally
      sourced traffic, and require large, contiguous blocks of unused IP
      addresses - not always feasible for enterprise network operators.
      We introduce and evaluate the Greynet - a region of IP address
      space that is sparsely populated with "darknet" addresses
      interspersed with active (or "lit") IP addresses.  Based on a
      small sample of traffic collected within a university campus
      network we saw that relatively sparse greynets can achieve useful
      levels of network scan detection.

   In other words, instead of setting aside prefixes that an attacker
   might attempt to probe and in so doing court discovery, Harrop
   proposed that individual (or small groups of adjacent) addresses in
   subnets be set aside for the purpose, using different host
   identifiers in each subnet to make it more difficult for an address
   scan to detect them.  The concept has value in the sense that it is
   harder to map the addresses or prefixes out of an attacker's search
   pattern, as their presence is more obscure.  Harrop's research was
   carried out using IPv4 [RFC0791], and yielded interesting
   information.

1.1.  History and experience

   The research supporting this proposal includes two prototypes, one
   with IPv4 [RFC0791] and one with IPv6 [RFC2460].  Both have
   limitations, being research experiments as opposed to deployment of a
   finished product.

   The original research was done by Warren Harrop and documented in
   [Harrop].  This was IPv4-only.  His premise was that one would put a



Baker, et al.           Expires February 13, 2011               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft           IPv4 and IPv6 Greynets              August 2010


   virtual or physical machine on a LAN that one was not otherwise
   using, and use it to identify scans of various kinds.  As reported in
   his paper, the concept worked effectively in a prototype deployment
   at Swinburne University CAIA.  The basic reason was that there was a
   reasonable expectation on the part of a potential attacker that a
   given address might be represented, and there was no pattern that
   would enable the attacker to predict which addresses were being used
   in this way.

   Baker's addition to his concept started from the router, the idea
   that the router would be highly likely to encounter any such scan if
   it came from off-LAN, and the fact that the router would have to use
   ARP or ND to identify - or fail to identify - the machine in
   question.  In effect, any address that is not currently instantiated
   in the subnet acts as a greynet trigger address.  This obviously also
   works for any system that would implement ARP or Neighbor Discovery,
   but the router is an obvious focal point in any subnet.

   Tim Chown, School of Electronics and Computer Science, University of
   Southampton, offered privately to do some research on it, and had
   Owen Stephens do a Linux prototype in spring 2010.  They demonstrated
   that the technology was straightforward to implement and in fact
   worked in a prototype IPv6 implementation.

   The question that remains with IPv6 address scanning is the
   likelihood that the attack would occur at all.  Tim originally argued
   in [RFC5157] that address scans were impossible due to the sheer
   number of possibilities.  There are, however, ways to limit the
   field; for example, one can observe that a company buys a certain
   kind of machine or NIC, and therefore its probable EUI-64 addresses
   are limited to a much smaller range than 2^64 - more like 2^24
   addresses on a given subnet - or one can observe DNS, SMTP envelopes,
   XMPP messages, FTP, HTTP, etc, that carry IP addresses in other ways.
   We have not yet seen such attacks in the wild that I know of, but as
   IPv6 becomes more widely used, one has to believe that such things
   will happen.  Such attacks can be limited by the use of Privacy
   Addresses [RFC4941], which periodically change, rendering historical
   information less useful, but the fact is that such analytic methods
   exist.  Greynets are a tool that can be used to isolate and analyze
   them.


2.  Deploying Greynets

   Corporate IT departments and other network operators frequently run
   collectors or other kinds of sensors.  A collector is a computer
   system on the Internet that is expressly set up to attract and "trap"
   nefarious attempts to penetrate computer systems.  Such systems may



Baker, et al.           Expires February 13, 2011               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft           IPv4 and IPv6 Greynets              August 2010


   simply record the attempt or the datagram that initiated the attempt
   (darknets/greynets), or they may act as a decoy, luring in potential
   attacks in order to study their activities and study their methods
   (honey pots).

   To accomplish this, we separate nefarious traffic from that which is
   likely normal and important, studying one and facilitating the other.

2.1.  Deployment using routing - Darknets

   One obvious way to isolate and identify nefarious traffic is to
   realize that it is sent to a prefix or address that is not
   instantiated.  If a campus uses an IPv4 /24 prefix or an IPv6 /56
   prefix but contains less than 100 actual subnets, for example, we
   might use only odd numbered subnets (128 of the 256 available in that
   prefix), and not quite all of those.  Knowing that the active
   prefixes are more specific and therefore attract appropriate traffic,
   we might also advertise the default prefix from the collector,
   attracting traffic directed to the uninstantiated prefixes in that
   routing domain.

   A second question involves mimicking a host under attack; the
   collector may simply record this uninvited traffic, or may reply as a
   honeypot system.

2.2.  Deployment using sparse address space - Greynets

   IPv4 subnets usually have some unallocated space in them, if only
   because CIDR allocates O(2^n) addresses to an IP Subnet and there are
   not exactly that many systems there.

   Similarly, with active IPv6 prefixes, even a very large switched LAN
   is likely to use a small fraction of the available addresses.  This
   is by design, as discussed in section 2.5.1 of [RFC4291].  If the
   addresses are distributed reasonably randomly among the possible
   values, the likelihood of an attacker guessing what addresses are in
   actual use is limited.  This gives us an opportunity with respect to
   unused addresses within a IP prefix.

   Routers use IPv4 ARP [RFC0826] and IPv6 Neighbor Discovery [RFC4861]
   to determine the MAC address of a neighbor to which a datagram needs
   to be sent.  Both specifications intend that when a datagram arrives
   at a router serving the target prefix, but which doesn't know the MAC
   address of the intended destination, it should:

   o  Enqueue the datagram,





Baker, et al.           Expires February 13, 2011               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft           IPv4 and IPv6 Greynets              August 2010


   o  Emit a Neighbor Solicitation or ARP Request,

   o  Await a Neighbor Advertisement or ARP Response, and

   o  On receipt, dequeue and forward the datagram.

   Once the host's MAC address is in the router's tables (and in so
   doing the address proven valid), the matter is not an issue.

   In [Harrop], the Greynet is described as being instantiated on an
   end-host that replies to ARP Requests for all 'dark' IP addresses.
   However, a small modification to router behavior can augment this
   model.  As well as queuing or dropping a datagram that has triggered
   an ARP Request or Neighbor Solicitation, the router forwards a copy
   of this datagram over an independent link to the Greynet's analytic
   equipment.  This independent link may be a different physical
   interface, a circuit, VLAN, tunnel, UDP or other encapsulation, or in
   fact any place such a datagram could be handled.  Depending on the
   requirements of the receiving collector, one could also imagine
   summarizing information in a form similar to IPFIX
   [RFC5101][RFC5610].

   The analytic equipment will now receive two types of datagrams.  Of
   most interest will be those destined for 'dark' IP addresses.  Of
   less interest will be the irregular case where a datagram arrives for
   a legitimate local neighbor who has, for some temporary reason, no
   MAC address in the router's tables.  Datagrams arriving for an IP
   destination for which an ARP reply (or Neighbor Advertisement) has
   not yet received might also be forwarded to the analytical equipment
   over the independent link - or might not, if they are considered to
   be unlikely to provide new analytic information.

   Analytic equipment, depending on the router to recognize 'dark' IP
   addresses in this manner, can easily track arrival patterns of
   datagrams destined to unused parts of the network.  It may also
   optionally chose to respond to such datagrams, acting as a honeypot
   to elicit further datagrams from the remote source.

   If the collector replies directly, the attacker may be able to
   identify the fact through information in or about the datagram -
   datagrams sent to the same IP Subnet may come back with different TTL
   values, for example.  Hence, it may be advisable for the collector to
   send the reply back through the tunnel and therefore as if from the
   same IP Subnet.  Naturally the collector in this scenario should not
   respond to datagrams destined for 'lit' IP addresses - the intended
   destination will eventually respond to the router's ARP or Neighbor
   Solicitation anyway.




Baker, et al.           Expires February 13, 2011               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft           IPv4 and IPv6 Greynets              August 2010


   One implication of this model is that ddos attacks terminate on
   router subnets within a network, as opposed to stopping on inter-
   router links.

2.3.  Other filters

   An obvious extension of the concept would include traffic identified
   by other filters as appropriate to send to the collector.  For
   example, one might configure the system to forward traffic failing a
   unicast reverse forwarding path (uRPF) check [RFC2827] to the
   collector via the same tunnel.


3.  Implications for router design

   The implication for router design applies to the IPv4 ARP and IPv6
   Neighbor Discovery algorithms.  It might be interesting to provide,
   under configuration control, the ability to forward arriving
   datagrams that trigger an ARP Request or Neighbor Solicit, and then
   fail to receive the intended response, to an interface, circuit,
   VLAN, or tunnel to an analytic system.


4.  IANA Considerations

   This memo asks the IANA for no new parameters.

   Note to RFC Editor: This section will have served its purpose if it
   correctly tells IANA that no new assignments or registries are
   required, or if those assignments or registries are created during
   the RFC publication process.  From the author's perspective, it may
   therefore be removed upon publication as an RFC at the RFC Editor's
   discretion.


5.  Security Considerations

   This note describes a tool for managing IPv4 and IPv6 network
   security.  Like any tool, it has limitations and possible attacks.
   If discarding traffic under overload is a good thing, then holding
   and subsequently forwarding the traffic instead places a potential
   load on the network and the router in question, and as such
   represents a possible attack.  Such an attack has obvious
   mitigations, however; one simply, in a manner the operator deems
   appropriate, selects a subset of the traffic to forward and discards
   the rest.  In addition, this attack is not new; it is only changed in
   character.  A stream that would instantiate the attack today results
   in a load of ARP or Neighbor Solicit messages that all listening



Baker, et al.           Expires February 13, 2011               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft           IPv4 and IPv6 Greynets              August 2010


   hosts must intelligently discard.  The new attack additionally
   consumes bandwidth that is presumably set aside specifically for that
   purpose.

   The question of exactly what subset of traffic is interesting and
   economical to forward is intentionally left open.  Key questions in
   algorithm design include what can be learned from a given sample (are
   bursts happening, and if so with what data?), what the impact on the
   router and other equipment in question is, how that might be
   mitigated, etc.  Possible selection algorithms dependent only on
   state and algorithms typically available in a router include:

   o  All datagrams triggering an ARP Request or Neighbor Solicit,

   o  The subset of those that are not responded to within some stated
      interval and are therefore likely dark,

   o  The subset of those that are new; if the address is currently
      being solicited, forwarding redundant data may not be useful.

   o  All such datagrams up to some rate,

   o  All such datagrams matching (or not matching) a specified filter
      rule,

   o  etc.


6.  Acknowledgements

   Algorithms for learning about Internet attack behavior by observing
   backscatter traffic have been used by CAIDA, University of Michigan,
   Team Cymru, and others.  Harrop extended them in his research.  This
   formulation of the notion originated in a discussion among the
   authors in 2005.  This note grew out of a conversation with Paul
   Vixie and Rhette Marsh on Internet traffic sensors; they also made
   useful comments on it.  Albert Manfredi commented on the distinction
   between a LAN (as defined by IEEE 802) and an IP subnet.

   Tim Chown [RFC5157] has observed that, at least at this time, address
   scanning attacks in IPv6 have not been reported in the wild.  Rhette
   Marsh has suggested the structure of such an attack, however, and
   Fred Baker has suggested approaches based on addressing information
   exchanged by applications.  Hence, we believe that such issues may be
   relevant to IPv6 in the future, when IPv6 is a more interesting
   target.

   Tim Chown and Owen Stephens tested the proposal, and made useful



Baker, et al.           Expires February 13, 2011               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft           IPv4 and IPv6 Greynets              August 2010


   comments that have been incorporated in this text.  His fundamental
   comment was, however, that "it works".


7.  References

7.1.  Normative References

   [Harrop]   Harrop, W. and G. Armitage, "Greynets: a definition and
              evaluation of sparsely populated darknets", IEEE LCN IEEE
              30th Conference on Local Computer Networks, 2005.

   [RFC0791]  Postel, J., "Internet Protocol", STD 5, RFC 791,
              September 1981.

   [RFC0826]  Plummer, D., "Ethernet Address Resolution Protocol: Or
              converting network protocol addresses to 48.bit Ethernet
              address for transmission on Ethernet hardware", STD 37,
              RFC 826, November 1982.

   [RFC2460]  Deering, S. and R. Hinden, "Internet Protocol, Version 6
              (IPv6) Specification", RFC 2460, December 1998.

   [RFC4291]  Hinden, R. and S. Deering, "IP Version 6 Addressing
              Architecture", RFC 4291, February 2006.

   [RFC4861]  Narten, T., Nordmark, E., Simpson, W., and H. Soliman,
              "Neighbor Discovery for IP version 6 (IPv6)", RFC 4861,
              September 2007.

   [RFC4941]  Narten, T., Draves, R., and S. Krishnan, "Privacy
              Extensions for Stateless Address Autoconfiguration in
              IPv6", RFC 4941, September 2007.

7.2.  Informative references

   [RFC2827]  Ferguson, P. and D. Senie, "Network Ingress Filtering:
              Defeating Denial of Service Attacks which employ IP Source
              Address Spoofing", BCP 38, RFC 2827, May 2000.

   [RFC5101]  Claise, B., "Specification of the IP Flow Information
              Export (IPFIX) Protocol for the Exchange of IP Traffic
              Flow Information", RFC 5101, January 2008.

   [RFC5157]  Chown, T., "IPv6 Implications for Network Scanning",
              RFC 5157, March 2008.

   [RFC5610]  Boschi, E., Trammell, B., Mark, L., and T. Zseby,



Baker, et al.           Expires February 13, 2011               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft           IPv4 and IPv6 Greynets              August 2010


              "Exporting Type Information for IP Flow Information Export
              (IPFIX) Information Elements", RFC 5610, July 2009.


Authors' Addresses

   Fred Baker
   Cisco Systems
   Santa Barbara, California  93117
   USA

   Email: fred@cisco.com


   Warren Harrop
   CAIA, Swinburne University of Technology
   Hawthorn, Victoria  3122
   Australia

   Email: wazz@bud.cc.swin.edu.au


   Grenville Armitage
   CAIA, Swinburne University of Technology
   Hawthorn, Victoria  3122
   Australia

   Email: garmitage@swin.edu.au























Baker, et al.           Expires February 13, 2011              [Page 10]

