


Softwire                                                          Y. Lee
Internet-Draft                                                   Comcast
Intended status: Informational                               R. Maglione
Expires: March 1, 2013                                    Telecom Italia
                                                             C. Williams
                                                               MCSR Labs
                                                            C. Jacquenet
                                                            M. Boucadair
                                                          France Telecom
                                                         August 28, 2012


             Deployment Considerations for Dual-Stack Lite
                draft-ietf-softwire-dslite-deployment-05

Abstract

   This document discusses the deployment issues and describes
   requirements for the deployment and operation of Dual-Stack Lite.
   This document describes the various deployment considerations and
   applicability of the Dual-Stack Lite architecture.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on March 1, 2013.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2012 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents



Lee, et al.               Expires March 1, 2013                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft    Deployment Considerations for DS-Lite      August 2012


   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  AFTR Deployment Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     2.1.  Interface Consideration  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     2.2.  MTU Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     2.3.  Fragmentation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     2.4.  Lawful Intercept Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     2.5.  Logging at the AFTR  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     2.6.  Blacklisting a shared IPv4 Address . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     2.7.  AFTR's Policies  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     2.8.  AFTR Impacts on Accounting Process . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     2.9.  Reliability Considerations of AFTR . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     2.10. Strategic Placement of AFTR  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     2.11. AFTR Considerations for Geographically Aware Services  . .  8
     2.12. Impacts on QoS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     2.13. Port Forwarding Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     2.14. DS-Lite Tunnel Security  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     2.15. IPv6-only Network Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   3.  B4 Deployment Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     3.1.  DNS deployment Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     3.2.  IPv4 Service Monitoring  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
       3.2.1.  B4 Remote Management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
       3.2.2.  IPv4 Connectivity Check  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   4.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   5.  Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   6.  Acknowledgement  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   7.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   8.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     8.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     8.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13












Lee, et al.               Expires March 1, 2013                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft    Deployment Considerations for DS-Lite      August 2012


1.  Overview

   Dual-stack Lite (DS-Lite) [RFC6333] is a transition technique that
   enable operators to multiplex public IPv4 addresses while
   provisioning only IPv6 to users.  DS-Lite is designed to continue
   offering IPv4 services while operators upgrading their network
   incrementally to IPv6.  DS-Lite combines IPv4-in-IPv6 [RFC2473]
   softwire and NAT44 [RFC3022] to enable more than one user to share a
   public IPv4 address.  This document discusses various DS-Lite
   deployment considerations for operators.


2.  AFTR Deployment Considerations

2.1.  Interface Consideration

   Address Family Transition Router (AFTR) is a network element that
   deployed inside the operator's network.  AFTR can be a standalone
   device or embedded into a router.  AFTR is the IPv4-in-IPv6 tunnel
   termination point and the NAT44 device.  It is deployed at the IPv4-
   IPv6 network border where the tunnel interface is IPv6 and the
   external NAT44 interface is IPv4.  Although an operator can configure
   a dual-stack interface for both functions, we recommend to configure
   two individual interfaces (i.e. one dedicated for IPv4 and one
   dedicated for IPv6) to segregate the functions.

2.2.  MTU Considerations

   DS-Lite is part tunneling protocol.  Tunneling introduces overhead to
   the packet and decreases the effective MTU size after encapsulation.
   The DS-lite users may experience problems with applications such as
   not being able to download Internet pages or transfer large file.  To
   mitigate the tunnel overhead, the access network may increase the MTU
   size to account the necessary tunnel overhead.  If simple IPv4-in-
   IPv6 softwire [RFC2473] is used, the overhead is the size of an IPv6
   header.  If the access network MTU size is fixed and cannot be
   changed, the B4 element and the AFTR must support fragmentation
   defined in [RFC6333].

2.3.  Fragmentation

   The IPv4-in-IPv6 tunnel is established between B4 and AFTR.  When a
   host behind the B4 element communicates with a remote peer, both end
   nodes are not aware of the tunnel.  For example, the peers may use
   the MTU size associated with their connected interfaces.  In fact,
   the IPv4 packet isn't over-sized, it is the IPv6 encapsulation that
   may cause the oversize of the encapsulating packets.  So the tunnel
   endpoints are responsible for handling the fragmentation.  In



Lee, et al.               Expires March 1, 2013                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft    Deployment Considerations for DS-Lite      August 2012


   general, the Tunnel-Entry Point and Tunnel-Exit Point should fragment
   and reassemble the oversized datagram.  If the DF bit is set in the
   IPv4 header, the B4 element should send an ICMP "Destination
   Unreachable" with "Fragmentation Needed and Don't Fragment was Set"
   and drop the packet.  If the DF is unset in the IPv4 header, the B4
   element should fragment the IPv6 packet after the encapsulation.
   This mechanism is transport protocol agnostic and works for transport
   protocol such as TCP and UDP over IP.

2.4.  Lawful Intercept Considerations

   Because of the IPv4-in-IPv6 tunneling scheme, interception of IPv4
   sessions in DS-Lite framework is likely performed on the AFTR.
   Subjects can be uniquely identified by the IPv6 address assigned to
   the B4 element.  If an operator is legally requested to intercept
   packets of a subject, the AFTR should extract the IPv4 packets from
   the IPv6 payload before sending it to the interception point.

   Monitoring of a subject may require statically mapping the subject to
   a certain range of ports of a single IPv4 address, to remove the need
   to follow dynamic port mappings.  A single IPv4 address, or some
   range of ports for each address, might be set aside for monitoring
   purposes to simplify such procedures.  This requires creating a
   static mapping of a B4 element's IPv6 address to a public IPv4
   address and port range that are used for lawful intercept.

2.5.  Logging at the AFTR

   Timestamped logging is essential for back tracking specific users
   when a problem is identified with one of the AFTR's NAT-ed addresses.
   Such a problem is usually a misbehaving user in the case of a spammer
   or a Deny-of-Service (DoS) source, or someone violating a usage
   policy.  Without time-specific logs of the address and port mappings,
   a misbehaving user stays well hidden behind the AFTR.

   In DS-Lite framework, each B4 element is provisioned with one or more
   unique source IPv6 addresses.  The AFTR uses the B4's tunnel IPv6
   address to identify the B4 element.  Thus, to uniquely identify a
   specific user, the AFTR is required to log more than just IPv4
   address.  There are two types of logging:

   o  Source-Specific Log

   o  Destination-Specific Log

   For Source-Specific Log, the AFTR must timestamped log the B4's IPv6
   address, transport protocol, source IPv4 address after NAT-ed, and
   source port.  If a range of ports is dynamically assigned to a B4



Lee, et al.               Expires March 1, 2013                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft    Deployment Considerations for DS-Lite      August 2012


   element, the AFTR may create one log per range of ports to aggregate
   number of log entries.  For Destination-Specific Log, the AFTR must
   create a timestamped log of the B4's IPv6 address, transport
   protocol, source IPv4 address after NAT-ed, source port, destination
   address and destination port.

   Destination-Specific Log is session-based, the operators can't really
   aggregate log entries.  When using Destination-Specific Log, the
   operator must be careful of the large number of log entries created
   by the AFTR.  Destination-Specific Log may raise privacy concerns.
   Operators should apply the same privacy policies for both regular and
   DS-Lite users.

   Depedning on the rate of NAT table changes, real-time logging can be
   demanding to the AFTR if AFTR must send a log message per NAT entry
   change to the syslog server in real-time.  If operators requires only
   near real-time logs, they may configure the AFTR to log changes
   locally and send the logs in a batch file in a pre-configured
   interval (e.g. every 5 minutes).  The files may be compressed before
   transferring to better utilize bandwidth and storage.  Other
   optimizaitons are also under consideration such as AFTR pre-
   allocating a set of ports to users.  After creates only one log entry
   when a user allocates the port-set instead of log per port
   allocation.

2.6.  Blacklisting a shared IPv4 Address

   AFTR is a NAT device.  It enables multiple users to share a single
   public IPv4 address.  [RFC6269] discusses some considerations when
   sharing an IPv4 address.  When a public IPv4 address is blacklisted
   by a remote peer, this may affect multiple users.  Internet hosts
   such as servers must no longer rely solely on IP address to identify
   an abused user.  The server should combine the information stored in
   the transport layer (e.g. source port) and application layer (e.g.
   HTTP) to identify an abused user [RFC6302].
   [I-D.boucadair-intarea-nat-reveal-analysis] analyzes different
   approaches to identify a user in a shared address environment.

2.7.  AFTR's Policies

   There are two types of AFTR polices:

   o  Outgoing Policies

   o  Incoming Policies

   The outgoing policies should be implemented on the AFTR's internal
   interface connected to the B4 elements.  The policies may include



Lee, et al.               Expires March 1, 2013                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft    Deployment Considerations for DS-Lite      August 2012


   Access Control List (ACL) and Qualify of Service (QoS) settings.  For
   example: the AFTR may only accept B4's connections originated from
   the IPv6 prefixes configured in the AFTR.  The AFTR may also give
   priority to the packets marked by certain DSCP values [RFC2475]; the
   AFTR may also limit the rate of port allocation for a single B4's
   IPv6 address.

   An operator may create multiple outgoing polices in the AFTR, each
   identified by a softwire.  When provisioning a user, the system will
   pass the softwire identifier associated to a specific incoming policy
   to the user.  Two standardized mechanisms to pass softwire identifier
   to the B4 element are DHCPv6 [RFC6333] and RADIUS [RFC6519].
   Outgoing policies could be applied to an individual B4 element or to
   a set of B4 elements.

   The incoming policies should be implemented on the AFTR's external
   interface connected to the IPv4 network.  Similar to the outgoing
   policies, the incoming policies may include ACL and QoS settings.
   Incoming policies are usually more general and generic.  They usually
   applied to all users rather than to an individual user.

2.8.  AFTR Impacts on Accounting Process

   DS-Lite introduces challenges to IPv4 accounting process.  In a
   typical broadband access scenario (e.g.  DSL or Cable), the B4
   element is embedded in the Residential Gateway and the edge router
   (e.g.  BRAS or CMTS) is the IPv6 edge router.  The edge router is
   usually responsible for IPv6 accounting and the subscriber management
   functions such as authentication, authorization and accounting.
   However, given the fact that IPv4 traffic is encapsulated in an IPv6
   packet at the B4 and only decapsulated at the ATFR, the edge router
   will require additional function to collect IPv4 accounting
   information.  If DS-lite is the only application using IP-in-IP
   protocol, the edge router could check the IPv6 Next Header field in
   the IPv6 header and identify the protocol type (i.e. 0x04) and
   collect IPv4 accouting information.

   Alternatively, AFTR is a logical place to perform IPv4 accounting,
   but it will potentially introduce some additional complexity because
   the AFTR does not have detailed customer identity information.  The
   accounting process at the AFTR is only necessary if the operator
   requires separating per user accounting records for IPv4 and IPv6
   traffic.  If the per user IPv6 accounting records, collected by the
   edge router, are sufficient, the additional complexity of enabling
   IPv4 accounting at the ATFR is not required.  It is important to
   notice that, since the IPv4 traffic is encapsulated in IPv6 packets,
   the data collected by the edge router for IPv6 traffic already
   contain the total amount of traffic (i.e.  IPv4 and IPv6).



Lee, et al.               Expires March 1, 2013                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft    Deployment Considerations for DS-Lite      August 2012


   Even if detailed accounting records collection for IPv4 traffic may
   not be required, it would be useful for an operator in some scenarios
   to have information that is generated by the edge router for the IPv6
   traffic and can be used to identify the AFTR who is handling the IPv4
   traffic for that user.  This can be achieved by adding additional
   information the IPv6 accounting records.  For example: operators can
   use RADIUS attribute information specified in [RFC6519] or new
   attribute to be speciified in Internet Protocol Detailed Record
   (IPDR).

2.9.  Reliability Considerations of AFTR

   The operator can use techniques such as various types of clusters to
   achieve high availability of the IPv4 service.  High availability
   techniques include the cold standby mode.  In this mode the AFTR
   states are not replicated from the Primary AFTR to the Backup AFTR.
   When the Primary AFTR fails, all the existing established sessions
   will be flushed out.  The internal hosts are required to re-establish
   sessions with the external hosts.  Another high availability option
   is the hot standby mode.  In this mode the AFTR keeps established
   sessions while failover happens.  AFTR states are replicated on-the-
   fly from the Primary AFTR to the Backup AFTR.  When the Primary AFTR
   fails, the Backup AFTR will take over all the existing established
   sessions.  In this mode the internal hosts are not required to re-
   establish sessions with the external hosts.  The final option is to
   deploy a mode in between these two whereby only selected sessions
   such as critical protocols are replicated.  Criteria for sessions to
   be replicated on the backup would be explicitly configured on the
   AFTR devices of a redundancy group.

2.10.  Strategic Placement of AFTR

   In DS-lite, IPv4 traffic from B4 must pass through the AFTR to reach
   the IPv4 Internet.  Managing large numbers of tunnels and a large NAT
   table could be resource intensive (e.g.  CPU and memory), so the
   placement of the AFTR could affect the traffic flows in the access
   network and have operation implications.  In general, there are two
   placement models to deploy AFTR.  Model One is to deploy the AFTR in
   the edge of the network to cover a small region.  Model Two is to
   deploy the AFTR in the core of network to cover a large region.

   When an operator considers where to deploy the AFTR, it must make
   trade-offs.  AFTR in Model One serves few B4 elements, thus, it
   requires less powerful AFTR.  Moreover, the traffic flows are more
   evenly distributed to the AFTRs.  However, it requires deploying more
   AFTRs to cover the entire network.  Often the operation cost
   increases proportionally to the number of network equipment.




Lee, et al.               Expires March 1, 2013                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft    Deployment Considerations for DS-Lite      August 2012


   AFTR in Model Two covers a large area, thus, it serves more B4
   elements.  The operator could deploy only few AFTRs to support the
   entire subscriber base.  However, this model requires more powerful
   AFTR to sustain the load at peak hours.  Since the AFTR would support
   B4 elements from different regions, the AFTR would be deployed closer
   to the core network.

   DS-Lite framework can be incrementally deployed.  An operator may
   consider to start with Model Two. When the demand increases, they
   could push the AFTR closer to the edge which would effectively become
   Model One.

2.11.  AFTR Considerations for Geographically Aware Services

   By centralizing public IPv4 addresses, each address no longer
   represents a single machine, a single household, or a single small
   office.  The address now represents hundreds of machines, homes, and
   offices related only in that they are behind the same AFTR.
   Identification by IP address becomes more difficult and thus
   applications that assume such geographic information may not work as
   intended.  Placement of AFTR could impact the geographical aware
   services.  To minimize the impact, an operator could deploy AFTR
   closer to users so that existing location based assumptions of the
   clients source IP address by geographically aware servers can be
   maintained.  Another possibility is that the applications could rely
   on location information such as GPS co-ordination to identify the
   user's location.  This technique is commonly used in mobile
   deployment where the mobile handheld devices are probably usually
   behind a NAT device.

2.12.  Impacts on QoS

   Operators commonly use DSCP [RFC2475] to classify and prioritize
   different types of traffic.  DS-Lite tunnel can be seen as a
   particular case of uniform conceptual tunnel model described in
   section 3.1 of [RFC2983].  The uniform model views an IP tunnel as
   just a necessary mechanism to forward traffic to its destination, but
   the tunnel has no significant impact on traffic conditioning.  In
   this model, any packet has exactly one DS Field that is used for
   traffic conditioning at any point and it is the field in the
   outermost IP header.  In DS-Lite model this is the Traffic Class
   field in IPv6 header.  According to [RFC2983] implementations of this
   model copy the DS value to the outer IP header at encapsulation and
   copy the outer header's DSCP value to the inner IP header at
   decapsulation.  Applying the described model to DS-Lite scenario, it
   is recommended that the AFTR copies the DSCP value in the IPv4 header
   to the IPv6 header after the encapsulation for the downstream traffic
   and similarly the B4 copies the DSCP value in the IPv4 header to the



Lee, et al.               Expires March 1, 2013                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft    Deployment Considerations for DS-Lite      August 2012


   IPv6 header after the encapsulation for the upstream traffic.

2.13.  Port Forwarding Considerations

   Some applications require the B4 to accept incoming requests.  When
   the remote host is on IPv4, the incoming request will be directed
   towards the B4's IPv4 address.  Some applications use UPnP-IGD (e.g.,
   popular gaming consoles) or ICE [RFC5245] (e.g., SIP, Yahoo!, Google,
   Microsoft chat networks) to request incoming ports.  Some
   applications rely on ALGs or manual port configuration to reserve a
   port in the NAT.  In usual DS-Lite deployment, B4 does not own a
   dedicated public IPv4 address or all the available ports, so it must
   coordinate with its serving AFTR and the applications to reserve the
   incoming ports.  Port Control Protocol (PCP) [I-D.ietf-pcp-base] is
   designed to address this issue.

2.14.  DS-Lite Tunnel Security

   Section 11 of [RFC6333] describes security issues associated to DS-
   Lite mechanism.  To restrict the service offered by AFTR only to
   registered customers, an operator can implement IPv6 ingress filter
   on the AFTR's tunnel interface to accept only the IPv6 prefixes
   defined in the filter.  This approach requires knowing in advance the
   IPv6 prefixes provisioned to the customers for the softwire in order
   to configure the filter.

   Using DHCPv6 Leasequery defined in [RFC5007] is another option of
   achieving the same goal and providing some form of access control to
   AFTR.  When the AFTR receives a packet from an unknown IPv6 prefix,
   it issues a DHCPv6 Leasequery based on the DUID to the DHCPv6 server
   in order to verify if that prefix was previously provisioned by the
   DHCPv6 server to the specific DUID.  If known, the DHCPv6 server will
   reply with the IPv6 prefix and the associated lease.  If both
   prefixes match, the ATFR accepts the packet otherwise it drops the
   packet and denies the service.

2.15.  IPv6-only Network Considerations

   In environments where the operator wants to deploy AFTR in the IPv6-
   only network, the AFTR nodes may not have direct IPv4 connectivity.
   In this scenario the operator extends the IPv6-only boundary to the
   border of the network and only the border routers have IPv4
   connectivity.  For both scalability and performance purposes, AFTR is
   located in the IPv6-only network closer to B4 elements.  In this
   scenario the AFTR has only IPv6 connectivity and must be able to send
   and receive IPv4 packets.  Enhancements to the DS-Lite AFTR are
   required to achieve this.  [I-D.boucadair-softwire-dslite-v6only]
   describes such issues and enhancements to DS-Lite in IPv6-only



Lee, et al.               Expires March 1, 2013                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft    Deployment Considerations for DS-Lite      August 2012


   deployments.


3.  B4 Deployment Considerations

   In order to configure the IPv4-in-IPv6 tunnel, the B4 element needs
   the IPv6 address of the AFTR element.  This IPv6 address can be
   configured using a variety of methods, ranging from an out-of-band
   mechanism, manual configuration, DHCPv6 option to RADIUS.  If an
   operator uses DHCPv6 to provision the B4, the B4 element must
   implement the DHCPv6 option defined in [RFC6334].  If an operator
   uses RADIUS to provision the B4, the B4 element must implement
   [RFC6519].

3.1.  DNS deployment Considerations

   [RFC6333] recommends the B4 element should send DNS queries to an
   external recursive resolver over IPv6.  The B4 element should
   implement proxy resolver that will proxy DNS query from IPv4
   transport to the DNS server in the IPv6 network.  Alternatively, the
   DHCPv4 server on the B4 is configured to give its clients an IPv4
   address of an external DNS recursive resolver.  Then, the B4 can be
   statically configured to tunnel all DNS packets to the external
   resolver over IPv6 to the AFTR.  Note that there is no effective way
   to provision an IPv4 DNS address to the B4 over IPv6, this may create
   complexity in B4 provisioning.  Moreover, this will increase load to
   AFTR by creating short-live entries in the NAT table, this alternate
   solution is likely to be unsatisfactory in a production environment.
   It should be used in a testing or demonstration environment.

3.2.  IPv4 Service Monitoring

3.2.1.  B4 Remote Management

   B4 is connected to IPv6 access network to offer IPv4 services.  When
   users experience IPv4 connectivity issue, operators must be able to
   remotely access (e.g.  TR-069) the B4 element to verify its B4's
   configuration and status.  Operators should access B4 elements using
   native IPv6.  Operators should not access B4 over the softwire.

3.2.2.  IPv4 Connectivity Check

   DS-Lite framework provides IPv4 services over IPv6 access network.
   Operators must be able to check the IPv4 connectivity from the B4
   element to its AFTR.  AFTR should be configured with an IPv4 address
   to enable PING test and traceroute test.  An operator may assign the
   same IPv4 address (e.g. 192.0.0.2/32) to all AFTRs.  This IPv4
   address only used to respond to the requests from the B4 elements



Lee, et al.               Expires March 1, 2013                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft    Deployment Considerations for DS-Lite      August 2012


   over the softwire.  IANA allocates 192.0.0.0/29 [RFC6333] which can
   be used for this purpose.


4.  Security Considerations

   This document does not present any new security issues.  [RFC6333]
   discusses DS-Lite related security issues.  General NAT security
   issues are not repeated here.

   Some of the security issues result directly from sharing routable
   IPv4 addresses.  Addresses and timestamps are often used to identify
   a particular user, but with shared addresses, more information (i.e.,
   protocol and port numbers) is needed.  This impacts software used for
   logging and tracing spam, denial of service attacks, and other
   abuses.  Devices on the customer's side may try to carry out general
   attacks against systems on the global Internet or against other
   customers by using inappropriate IPv4 source addresses inside the
   tunneled traffic.  The AFTR needs to protect against such abuse.  One
   customer may try to carry out a denial of service attack against
   other customers by monopolizing the available port numbers.  The AFTR
   needs to ensure equitable access.  At a more sophisticated level, a
   customer may try to attack specific ports used by other customers.
   This may be more difficult to detect and to mitigate without a
   complete system for authentication by port numbers, which would
   represent a huge security requirement.


5.  Conclusion

   DS-Lite provides new functionality to transition IPv4 traffic to IPv6
   addresses.  As the supply of unique IPv4 addresses diminishes,
   operators can now allocate new subscriber homes IPv6 addresses and
   IPv6-capable equipment.  DS-Lite provides a means for the private
   IPv4 addresses behind the IPv6 equipment to reach the public IPv4
   network.

   This document discusses the issues that arise when deploying DS-Lite
   in various deployment modes.  Hence, this document can be a useful
   reference for operators and network designers.  Deployment
   considerations of the B4, AFTR and DNS have been discussed and
   recommendations for their usage have been documented.


6.  Acknowledgement

   Thanks to Mr. Nejc Skoberne and Dr. Maoke Chen for their through
   review and helpful comments.  We also want to thank Mr. Hu Jie for



Lee, et al.               Expires March 1, 2013                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft    Deployment Considerations for DS-Lite      August 2012


   sharing his DS-Lite deployment experience to us.  He gave us
   recommendations what his company learned while testing DS-Lite in the
   production network.


7.  IANA Considerations

   This memo includes no request to IANA.


8.  References

8.1.  Normative References

   [RFC6333]  Durand, A., Droms, R., Woodyatt, J., and Y. Lee, "Dual-
              Stack Lite Broadband Deployments Following IPv4
              Exhaustion", RFC 6333, August 2011.

   [RFC6334]  Hankins, D. and T. Mrugalski, "Dynamic Host Configuration
              Protocol for IPv6 (DHCPv6) Option for Dual-Stack Lite",
              RFC 6334, August 2011.

   [RFC6519]  Maglione, R. and A. Durand, "RADIUS Extensions for Dual-
              Stack Lite", RFC 6519, February 2012.

8.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.boucadair-intarea-nat-reveal-analysis]
              Boucadair, M., Touch, J., Levis, P., and R. Penno,
              "Analysis of Solution Candidates to Reveal a Host
              Identifier in Shared Address Deployments",
              draft-boucadair-intarea-nat-reveal-analysis-04 (work in
              progress), September 2011.

   [I-D.boucadair-softwire-dslite-v6only]
              Boucadair, M., Jacquenet, C., Grimault, J., Kassi-Lahlou,
              M., Levis, P., Cheng, D., and Y. Lee, "Deploying Dual-
              Stack Lite in IPv6 Network",
              draft-boucadair-softwire-dslite-v6only-01 (work in
              progress), April 2011.

   [I-D.ietf-pcp-base]
              Wing, D., Cheshire, S., Boucadair, M., Penno, R., and P.
              Selkirk, "Port Control Protocol (PCP)",
              draft-ietf-pcp-base-26 (work in progress), June 2012.

   [RFC2473]  Conta, A. and S. Deering, "Generic Packet Tunneling in
              IPv6 Specification", RFC 2473, December 1998.



Lee, et al.               Expires March 1, 2013                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft    Deployment Considerations for DS-Lite      August 2012


   [RFC2475]  Blake, S., Black, D., Carlson, M., Davies, E., Wang, Z.,
              and W. Weiss, "An Architecture for Differentiated
              Services", RFC 2475, December 1998.

   [RFC2983]  Black, D., "Differentiated Services and Tunnels",
              RFC 2983, October 2000.

   [RFC3022]  Srisuresh, P. and K. Egevang, "Traditional IP Network
              Address Translator (Traditional NAT)", RFC 3022,
              January 2001.

   [RFC5007]  Brzozowski, J., Kinnear, K., Volz, B., and S. Zeng,
              "DHCPv6 Leasequery", RFC 5007, September 2007.

   [RFC5245]  Rosenberg, J., "Interactive Connectivity Establishment
              (ICE): A Protocol for Network Address Translator (NAT)
              Traversal for Offer/Answer Protocols", RFC 5245,
              April 2010.

   [RFC6269]  Ford, M., Boucadair, M., Durand, A., Levis, P., and P.
              Roberts, "Issues with IP Address Sharing", RFC 6269,
              June 2011.

   [RFC6302]  Durand, A., Gashinsky, I., Lee, D., and S. Sheppard,
              "Logging Recommendations for Internet-Facing Servers",
              BCP 162, RFC 6302, June 2011.


Authors' Addresses

   Yiu L. Lee
   Comcast
   One Comcast Center
   Philadelphia, PA  19103
   U.S.A.

   Email: yiu_lee@cable.comcast.com
   URI:   http://www.comcast.com













Lee, et al.               Expires March 1, 2013                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft    Deployment Considerations for DS-Lite      August 2012


   Roberta Maglione
   Telecom Italia
   Via Reiss Romoli 274
   Torino  10148
   Italy

   Email: roberta.maglione@telecomitalia.it
   URI:


   Carl Williams
   MCSR Labs
   U.S.A.

   Email: carlw@mcsr-labs.org


   Christian Jacquenet
   France Telecom
   Rennes
   France

   Email: christian.jacquenet@orange.com


   Mohamed Boucadair
   France Telecom
   Rennes
   France

   Email: mohamed.boucadair@orange.com




















Lee, et al.               Expires March 1, 2013                [Page 14]

