
A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 2919

        Title:      List-Id: A Structured Field and Namespace for the
                    Identification of Mailing Lists
        Author(s):  R. Chandhok, G. Wenger
        Status:     Standards Track
        Date:       March 2001
        Mailbox:    chandhok@within.com, wenger@within.com
        Pages:      9
        Characters: 18480
        Updates/Obsoletes/SeeAlso:    None

        I-D Tag:    draft-chandhok-listid-04.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc2919.txt


Software that handles electronic mailing list messages (servers
and user agents) needs a way to reliably identify messages that
belong to a particular mailing list.  With the advent of list
management headers, it has become even more important
to provide a unique identifier for a mailing list regardless of
the particular host that serves as the list processor at any
given time.
 
The List-Id header provides a standard location for such an
identifier.  In addition, a namespace for list identifiers
based on fully qualified domain names is described.  This
namespace is intended to guarantee uniqueness for list owners
who require it, while allowing for a less rigorous namespace
for experimental and personal use.
 
By including the List-Id field, list servers can make it easier
for mail clients to provide automated tools for users to
perform list functions.  The list identifier can serve as a key
to make many automated processing tasks easier, and hence more
widely available.

This is now a Proposed Standard Protocol.

This document specifies an Internet standards track protocol for
the Internet community, and requests discussion and suggestions
for improvements.  Please refer to the current edition of the
"Internet Official Protocol Standards" (STD 1) for the
standardization state and status of this protocol.  Distribution
of this memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.

