


Internet Engineering Task Force                                 B. Zhang
Internet-Draft                                                    J. Shi
Intended status: Informational                 The University of Arizona
Expires: January 10, 2013                                        J. Dong
                                                                M. Zhang
                                                                  Huawei
                                                            July 9, 2012


 Power-aware Routing and Traffic Engineering: Requirements, Approaches,
                               and Issues
                        draft-zhang-greennet-00

Abstract

   Energy consumption of network infrastructures is rising fast.  There
   are emerging needs for power-aware routing and traffic engineering,
   which adjust routing paths to help reduce power consumption network-
   wide.  This document gives a high-level analysis on the basic
   requirements, approaches, and potential issues in power-aware routing
   and traffic engineering.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 10, 2013.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2012 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents



Zhang, et al.           Expires January 10, 2013                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft    Green Routing and Traffic Engineering        July 2012


   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Approaches . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   4.  Issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     4.1.  Hardware Support . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     4.2.  Software Support . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     4.3.  Impacts on Protocols . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     4.4.  Network Monitoring . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   5.  Summary  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   6.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   7.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   8.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13





























Zhang, et al.           Expires January 10, 2013                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft    Green Routing and Traffic Engineering        July 2012


1.  Introduction

   Driven by exponential growth of Internet traffic, networks worldwide
   are expanding their infrastructures at a fast pace by deploying more
   high-capacity, power-hungry routers, which also leads to increasing
   energy consumption.  Besides operational costs and environmental
   impacts, the ever-increasing energy consumption has become a limiting
   factor to long-term growth of network infrastructure, due to
   challenges in power delivery to and heat removal from router
   components as well as the hosting facilities [Gupta03] [Epps06].

   Today's ISP networks have redundant routers and links, over-
   provisioned link capacity, and load-balancing traffic engineering.
   As a result, routers and links operate at full capacity all the time
   with low average usage, typically less than 40% of link utilization.
   This practice makes networks resilient to traffic spikes and
   component failures, but also makes networks far from energy
   efficient.  Though advances in hardware design have made individual
   routers more energy efficient over the years, there is still has a
   long way to go before routers become energy-proportional.  Recently
   researchers have started to look beyond a single router or linecard
   for network-wide solutions towards energy proportionality.  Power-
   aware routing and traffic engineering has been proposed to improve
   network's energy efficiency, for example, aggregating traffic onto a
   subset of links and putting the other links with no traffic into
   sleep.  As demonstrated in several research works, this approach has
   the potential to save a significant amount of energy [GreenTE]
   [Nedevschi08] [Chabarek08].  Designing a practical protocol, however,
   has been challenging, because making routing protocols power-aware
   brings fundamental changes to the routing system and the entire
   network, thus it is a complicated task with involvement of hardware
   support, protocol design and operations, and network monitoring.

   This document gives a high-level analysis on power-aware routing and
   traffic engineering, including solution requirements, existing
   approaches, and potential issues.  Power-aware routing and traffic
   engineering exploits the over-provisioned feature of networks, so
   there will be some impact on network performance and resilience.  In
   order to save energy without impacting network performance and
   resilience too much, certain requirements should be met.  When a
   power-aware approach is implemented, new issues may arise, and should
   be addressed to make the solution practical.  While there are many
   aspects of energy efficient networks, this document focuses on intra-
   domain routing within a single ISP.







Zhang, et al.           Expires January 10, 2013                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft    Green Routing and Traffic Engineering        July 2012


2.  Requirements

   The high-level idea of power-aware routing or traffic engineering is
   to adjust routing paths based on traffic level.  When traffic level
   is high, use more links to carry the traffic; when traffic level is
   low, merge traffic to a small number of links so that other links can
   be put to sleep or reduce rate in order to save power.  The
   fundamental requirement for any energy-efficient network solution is
   to save power without negative impacts on network operations, which
   can be broken down as follows.

   o  The network should retain enough resiliency against node and/or
      link failures.

   o  The network should have enough spare standby capacity or be able
      to react quickly enough to traffic spikes in order to minimize
      packet losses due to links/routers being in low power states.

   o  QoS metrics such as end-to-end delay should be kept at a desired
      level.

   o  The operation of other protocols should not be interrupted, or at
      least other protocols should be able to adapt without being broken
      after links/routers change their power states.

   While this document focuses on routing and traffic engineering, it
   requires support from underlying hardware and system for energy
   management capability, which is the topic of the IETF Energy
   Management Working Group [EMAN-WG]


3.  Approaches

   In the last couple of years a number of power-aware protocols have
   been proposed in research.  Instead of listing them individually,
   here we categorize the solutions along three different dimensions.

   Link Sleep vs. Rate Adaptation

   Sleeping and rate adaptation are two major ways to save energy in
   computer systems.  Many hardware, including line cards and chassises,
   consumes a significant amount of power when they stand by without
   doing any actual work.  When put into sleep mode, they will consume
   only a little power.  Thus putting an idle component to sleep is a
   common way to save energy.  If there is a need to use this component,
   it can be waken up and become usable after a transition time.  The
   longer a component is in sleep mode, the more power saved.  A power-
   aware protocol adjusts routing paths to increase the sleep time for



Zhang, et al.           Expires January 10, 2013                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft    Green Routing and Traffic Engineering        July 2012


   certain links in the network.

   A network interface often supports multiple data rates.  Operating at
   a lower data rate usually consumes less energy, though the actual
   rate-power curve varies from device to device.  Rate-adaptation-based
   approaches operate interfaces at lower data rates when the traffic
   demand is low and increase the data rate when traffic demand is high.
   Thus the routers can save power during low utilization period.

   These two approaches are also related in the case of "bundled links"
   [Fisher10].  A bundled link is a virtual link comprised of multiple
   physical links.  A sleep-based approach can put some physical links
   into sleep to save power, which is same as conducting rate adaptation
   on the virtual link with adjustment unit of a physical link.

   Configured vs. Adaptive

   The key in power-aware routing and traffic engineering is to adjust
   routing paths in response to traffic changes, so that the power state
   of routers (or router components) will also change accordingly to
   achieve energy saving.  Different approaches differ at the
   granularity of the adjustment.

   Some approaches take the long-term traffic average as input, and
   output a routing configuration that is applied to the network
   regardless of short-term traffic variation.  This is mostly useful
   when network traffic exhibits a stable, clear pattern, e.g., diurnal
   pattern where traffic is high during work hours and low during off
   hours.  It can only exploit the target traffic pattern; it cannot
   react dynamically to short-term traffic changes to either save energy
   (by putting links to sleep) or avoid congestion (by waking links up),
   but the design and implementation should be simple.

   Another type of approaches is to adapt to traffic changes dynamically
   on much smaller time granularity.  This approach may be able to save
   more energy and have better performance because it is more
   responsive, but the design and implementation usually are more
   complicated.  This approach needs to continuously collect traffic
   data in order to adjust routing dynamically.  The adjustment may be
   done periodically or whenever significant traffic changes are
   observed.

   Distributed vs. Centralized

   In distributed solutions, routers make power-aware adjustment
   decisions, such as link sleep/wake-up and rate increase/decrease,
   locally without a central controller.  These routers need to exchange
   information in order to achieve consistent network states.



Zhang, et al.           Expires January 10, 2013                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft    Green Routing and Traffic Engineering        July 2012


   Distributed approach fits the Internet operation model well but its
   design is the most challenging.  Traditional routing does not respond
   to traffic variation while power-aware routing does, and it needs to
   do so without causing loops or congestions.

   In centralized solutions, a controller computes the routing paths
   considering the network topology and traffic demand, and informs
   routers how to adjust their routing paths.  A centralized server
   usually has more complete information, more computation power, and
   more memory and storage than routers, thus it may make better
   decisions than distributed approach.  The server locates in the
   network NOC and can be backed up by server replicas.  Nevertheless,
   this approach requires high reliability of the server.

   Both distributed and centralized solutions may find their places in
   ISP networks.  For example, centralized solution can be integrated
   into the Path Computation Element (PCE) framework [PCE-WG].  There
   can also be hybrid designs, e.g., using a centralized solution based
   on long-term traffic pattern, and distributed mechanisms to handle
   short-term traffic variations.


4.  Issues

4.1.  Hardware Support

   In order to save power, routers and switches should support low power
   states, and make available control primitives to enter or leave low
   power states.  To reduce the impact on network performance, routers
   and switches should have the ability to change power states quickly.
   These are the hardware support needed by power-aware protocols.

   Sleeping State

   Most sleep-based approaches require routers and switches, or a
   component of them such as a line card, to support sleeping state.
   While most components can go to sleep very quickly, they also need to
   be able to wake up quickly.  Besides, entering and leaving sleeping
   state often incurs extra energy draw, which need to be kept small.
   Different designs may have different requirements of the transition
   time between power states.  In uncoordinated sleeping approach,
   upstream routers intentionally buffer packets for a very short period
   of time to allow downstream routers longer sleep time.  This approach
   can only allow a component to sleep for a few milliseconds, otherwise
   the buffering may cause too much extra delay.  Hence this approach
   requires a very short transition time and low penalty power.  In
   coordinated sleeping approaches, where routers coordinate on which
   paths to use and when to put links to sleep, a component usually can



Zhang, et al.           Expires January 10, 2013                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft    Green Routing and Traffic Engineering        July 2012


   sleep much longer, for seconds, minutes or even longer.  Therefore
   their requirement on transition time and power is more relaxed.

   Common energy management scheme at the individual component such as
   line card is sleep-on-idle (SoI) and wake-on-arrival (WoA).  When a
   link is idle for a short period of time, it goes into sleep; when a
   packet arrives, it wakes up.  Power-aware protocols manipulate
   traffic paths so that some links will have much longer idle time than
   default routing.

   The hardware is also expected to minimize potential packet loss
   during the transition between power states.  Especially in WoA, the
   first packet is susceptible to loss.  The two ends of the link can
   coordinate, e.g., one end sends a dummy packet to the other end to
   inform about the link wakeup, or if they don't coordinate, the
   receiver end should have the capability to buffer incoming packets
   before the interface wakes up to process these packets.

   Multiple Data Rates

   CMOS based silicon supports Dynamic Voltage Scaling (DVS), so
   clocking an interface at a lower frequency, and operating at lower
   data rate can save considerable amount of energy.  This calls for a
   need for router interfaces to support multiple data rates.  If an
   interface could support more data rates and incur low penalty power
   on a change, there are more opportunity to save energy.  Furthermore,
   it will also help if an interface supports different sending and
   receiving data rates.

   The transition between different data rates needs be quick and on-
   the-fly.  Most Ethernet cards supports auto-negotiation of data
   rates, which happens when a cable is plugged in and takes hundreds of
   milliseconds.  Auto-negotiation is not suitable for changing data
   rate to save energy, because buffer would be filled up during the
   negotiation period and leads to packet loss.  A fast mechanism for
   initiating and agreeing upon a link data rate change is necessary.

   Electrical Damage

   Many electronic devices are not designed to be turned on and off
   frequently.  When a device is waken up, the in-rush current may
   damage or destroy a component and related circuits.  Hardware that is
   more friendly to power management is needed.

   Optical Component Support

   Electrical components consumes much more energy than optical
   components in network routing infrastructure.  Therefore, many power-



Zhang, et al.           Expires January 10, 2013                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft    Green Routing and Traffic Engineering        July 2012


   aware routing or traffic engineering approaches are designed with
   electrical devices in mind.  However, the number of optical
   components in ISP networks can also be large.  Care should be taken
   when adopting existing approaches to optical networks.  For example,
   optical receivers cannot be turned off when WoA is needed.
   Furthermore, there is room for more power saving when optical
   components are explicitly considered in the approach.  It's possible
   to turn off an optical receiver while maintaining the ability to wake
   it up when needed, by maintaining another route towards the other end
   that a control packet could be delivered.

4.2.  Software Support

   There are many different power-aware approaches.  They need different
   input datasets, and generate different instructions.  Software is
   required to collect necessary input, as well as deliver and execute
   resulting instructions.

   Topology and Traffic

   Many power-aware approaches require knowledge of global topology on a
   centralized server or on each router.  It's fairly easy to satisfy
   this requirement by running a link state routing protocol such as
   OSPF.  If a network running OSPF has OSPF areas configured, power-
   aware approaches can only be deployed within one area, or some other
   way to collect global topology is needed.

   Many approaches require knowledge of link utilization on a local
   router, its neighbors, or all routers.  Routers may need to maintain
   necessary counters to calculate this information, and exchange or
   announce them.  Routers then need to categorize packets and maintain
   a separate set of counters for each interesting category.  Some
   approaches such as GreenTE require network-wide traffic matrix.
   There are two ways to obtain this information: infer from link
   utilization, or collect directly.  We can infer traffic matrix from
   global topology and link utilization by using gravity model and
   tomographic method [TM].  This method requires some computation
   power, but needs least amount of data exchange, so it is particularly
   useful when traffic matrix is only needed on a centralized server.
   However, the accuracy of this method is not guaranteed, especially
   when traffic engineering is in place that causes traffic pattern to
   deviate from the gravity model, or multicast is enabled which creates
   multiple copies of packets.  We can also collect traffic matrix
   directly.  There is a cost on ingress routers: an ingress router
   needs to identify the egress node, and maintain one counter per
   egress.  Identifying egress is not an extra cost in many cases,
   because many approaches need to know egress to select a feasible
   route.  Maintaining per-egress counters, as well as sending them to



Zhang, et al.           Expires January 10, 2013                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft    Green Routing and Traffic Engineering        July 2012


   the centralized server in centralized approaches, is a high cost.

   Traffic Splitting

   Some approaches may route traffic between an ingress-egress pair
   along multiple paths, according to certain split ratio.  To avoid
   out-of-order arrival which impacts TCP performance, traffic splitting
   is usually based on the hash of some fields in the packet header,
   such as source-destination IP pair.  In a small network such as a
   company, there are big flows between some IPs, while there is little
   traffic on most other IPs.  In this case, hash-based splitting has
   significant bias.

   Timeliness of Solutions

   Traffic engineering approaches take network topology and traffic
   information (in the form of link utilization or traffic matrix) as
   input, and outputs a solution including which links should be
   sleeping and what rate should links be operated on.  Most traffic
   engineering approaches run on a centralized server.  Traffic demand
   changes over time, and network topology may even change due to link
   failure.  It takes time to collect traffic information from the
   entire network, and time is also consumed while computing the
   solution.  Thus, the solution, when comes out, is based on network
   topology and traffic information of sometime earlier, and it may not
   still be applicable to current situation.  Prediction of future
   traffic information may help in some situations.

4.3.  Impacts on Protocols

   Power-aware routing and traffic engineering is a tradeoff between
   energy consumption and network resilience.  They save power by
   turning off or slowing down some links, which were previously over-
   provisioned to obtain better resilience.  Any power-aware approach
   will cause loss of network resilience to some extent.  Sleeping based
   approaches has another impact.  Traditionally, a link is either up or
   down.  An up link can transmit packets, and a down link cannot.  A
   third state, sleeping, is added by power-aware protocols.  A sleeping
   link cannot transmit packets right away, but it can be waken up when
   needed.  The introduction of a third sleeping state has its impact on
   protocols that maintain their own states about network links.

   Congestion after Traffic Surges

   Traffic engineering approaches usually take traffic information at
   certain time, and a solution contains a routing scheme that could
   accommodate such traffic on a reduce topology with some links
   sleeping or operating at lower rate.  This routing scheme usually



Zhang, et al.           Expires January 10, 2013                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft    Green Routing and Traffic Engineering        July 2012


   keeps link utilization under certain threshold, so that there is some
   safe margin in case traffic increases.  However, because a solution
   is computed periodically, congestion is still possible when traffic
   increases to a level that exceeds the safe margin within one
   adjustment period.  To address this issue, some method of fast
   readjustment is needed.  When a traffic increase is observed, the
   routing scheme should be slightly changed to accommodate this
   traffic, probably waking up or increase rate on a few links.

   Network Partition on Link or Node Failure

   Many sleep based approaches will result in a topology with very low
   redundancy level.  These reduced topologies are vulnerable to link
   and node failures, which are quite common in large networks.  Those
   approaches should be improved by adding a constraint of redundancy
   level.  A redundancy level of 2, which could protect from single link
   failure, is a reasonable value.  It's possible to incorporate power
   aware feature into MRT to achieve energy saving while remain the
   network 2-disjoint [I-D.ietf-rtgwg-mrt-frr-architecture].  Once a
   partition is detected, it's easy to repair by waking up all sleeping
   links.  But this causes a sudden increase on power consumption, which
   is sometimes undesirable.  A local algorithm to select a subset of
   sleeping links that could repair the partition is needed.  The
   selection doesn't need to be optimal, because waking up a small
   subset is much better than waking up all sleeping links.

   Sleeping Link State in Routing Protocols

   Sleeping links should be handled separately in routing protocols.  A
   sleeping link should be advertised as up, probably with a tag stating
   it's sleeping.  No HELLO messages should be sent over a sleeping
   link, so no HELLO messages could be received from a sleeping link.
   Missed HELLO messages on a sleeping link should not cause the link to
   be treated as down state.  As a consequence, if a sleeping link
   fails, the failure would not be detected until the router attempts to
   wake it up.  To detect a failure earlier, it may be desirable to wake
   up the link and probe it periodically (using a long interval such as
   every hour).  No control message should be sent over a sleeping link.
   This may cause the network to converge slower than usual, because LSA
   flooding takes more hops.  Fortunately most power-aware approaches
   have network diameter constraints, so convergence time should be
   comparable.

   IP Multicast on Reduced Topology

   IP Multicast works by building one or more trees on available links.
   If any link in a multicast tree goes to sleep, some receivers cannot
   receive multicast packets for a noticeable period of time, until IP



Zhang, et al.           Expires January 10, 2013               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft    Green Routing and Traffic Engineering        July 2012


   multicast automatically repairs the tree.  So, if a link is part of a
   multicast tree, it should not be put to sleep.

   One solution is keeping all links that are contained in multicast
   trees active.  If there are many multicast trees that don't have much
   overlap, a major portion of links would be forced active by
   multicast, and power saving potential is greatly limited.  Another
   solution is explicitly modifying multicast trees in a power-aware
   approach.  This is not an easy way to go.  There should be a delay
   constraint on each multicast tree, and there're possibly a large
   number of multicast trees.  After a multicast tree is modified,
   utilization of multiple links will change.

   A third solution is making IP multicast power-aware.  When a
   multicast tree is being built, energy consumption is taken into
   account, such that IP multicast would attempt to use as few links as
   possible as long as delay constraint could be satisfied.  After that,
   these links used by IP multicast will not go to sleep.

4.4.  Network Monitoring

   Network operators demand a monitoring solution when deploying
   anything.  The most important metrics are: How much energy is saved?
   How much impact is there on network performance?  Measurement of
   Energy Consumption.  The IETF eman WG [EMAN-WG] is working on
   defining energy objects in network devices, and monitoring and
   controlling their states.  When a device is running on full power
   state, the power demand is recorded as full power demand.  When a
   power-aware approach is deployed, actual energy consumption is
   measured.  The amount of saved energy is the full power demand
   multiplied by elapsed time during the measurement of actual energy
   consumption subtracted by actual energy consumption.

   In centralized periodical adjustment approaches, the centralized
   server should have knowledge of current applied solution (which is
   based on previous traffic information) and current traffic
   information.  It can then calculate what link utilization and delay
   would be when this traffic is routed on current applied solution, as
   well as the performance as if this traffic is routed without power-
   aware consideration.  It's not trivial to measure the impact in other
   cases.

   SNMP MIBs are needed to standardize monitoring.  Software for
   operations products such as System Center Operations Manager needs to
   integrate power-aware routing and traffic engineering to existing IT
   monitoring architecture.





Zhang, et al.           Expires January 10, 2013               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft    Green Routing and Traffic Engineering        July 2012


5.  Summary

   Power-aware routing and traffic engineering has great potential to
   improve network energy efficiency while maintain network services at
   desired levels.  Its effectiveness, however, depends on various
   supports from hardware and software, and more importantly, protocol
   designs that address operational issues.  This document is a first
   step towards developing practical power-aware protocols.


6.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no actions for IANA.


7.  Security Considerations

   This draft is a discussion on the Internet's necessity to follow an
   evolutionary path towards the future.  There is no direct impact on
   the Internet security.


8.  Informative References

   [Chabarek08]
              Chabarek, J. and et al. , "Power Awareness in Network
              Design and Routing", IEEE INFOCOM 2008.

   [EMAN-WG]  "IETF Energy Management Working Group", 2012,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/wg/eman/>.

   [Epps06]   Epps, G. and et al. , "System Power Challenges", 2006,
              <http://www.slidefinder.net/c/cisco routing research/
              seminar august 29/1562106>.

   [Fisher10]
              Fisher, W. and et al. , "Greening Backbone Networks:
              Reducing Energy Consumption by Shutting Off Cables in
              Bundled Links", Green Networking 2010.

   [GreenTE]  Zhang, M. and et al. , "GreenTE: Power-Aware Traffic
              Engineering", ICNP 2010.

   [Gupta03]  Gupta, M. and S. Singh, "Greening the Internet", ACM
              SIGCOMM 2003.

   [I-D.ietf-rtgwg-mrt-frr-architecture]
              Atlas, A., Kebler, R., Envedi, G., Csaszar, A.,



Zhang, et al.           Expires January 10, 2013               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft    Green Routing and Traffic Engineering        July 2012


              Konstantynowicz, M., White, R., and M. Shand, "An
              Architecture for IP/LDP Fast-Reroute Using Maximally
              Redundant Trees", draft-ietf-rtgwg-mrt-frr-architecture-01
              (work in progress), March 2012.

   [Nedevschi08]
              Nedevschi, S. and et al. , "Reducing Network Energy
              Consumption via Sleeping and Rate- Adaptation", USENIX
              NSDI 2008.

   [PCE-WG]   "IETF Path Computation Element Working Group", 2012,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/wg/pce/>.

   [TM]       Roughan, M., Thorup, M., and Y. Zhang, "Traffic
              Engineering with Estimated Traffic Matrices", IMC 2003.


Authors' Addresses

   Beichuan Zhang
   The University of Arizona

   Email: bzhang@cs.arizona.edu


   Junxiao Shi
   The University of Arizona

   Email: shijunxiao@cs.arizona.edu


   Jie Dong
   Huawei

   Email: jie.dong@huawei.com


   Mingui Zhang
   Huawei

   Email: zhangmingui@huawei.com










Zhang, et al.           Expires January 10, 2013               [Page 13]

