 Network working group                                    Dacheng Zhang 
 Internet Draft                                               Xiaohu Xu 
 Intended status: Experimental              Huawei Technologies Co.,Ltd 
 Created: October 19, 2009                                 Jiankang Yao 
 Expires: April 2010                                              CNNIC           
  
                                       
                        Investigation in HIP Proxies 
                   draft-zhang-hip-investigation-proxy-00 
                                       


 Status of this Memo 

    This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with 
    the provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79. 

    Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
    Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that 
    other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
    Drafts. 

    Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
    months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents 
    at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
    material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 

    The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at   
    http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt. 

    The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at   
    http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 

    This Internet-Draft will expire on April 15, 2010. 

 Copyright Notice 

    Copyright (c) 2009 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the 
    document authors. All rights reserved.  

    This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal 
    Provisions Relating to IETF Documents 
    (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of 
    publication of this document. Please review these documents 
    carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with 
    respect to this document.  Code Components extracted from this 
    document must include Simplified BSD License text as described in 

  
  
  
 Zhang and Xu.           Expires April 19, 2010                 [Page 1] 

 Internet-Draft       Investigation in HIP Proxies          October 2009 
     

    Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without 
    warranty as described in the BSD License. 

 Abstract 

    HIP proxies play an important role in the transition from the 
    current Internet architecture to the HIP architecture. The major 
    function of HIP proxies is to make up legacy (or Non-HIP) hosts as 
    HIP hosts and enable them to communicate with HIP hosts without 
    upgrading their protocol stacks. In this document, the legacy hosts 
    served by proxies is referred to as the Made-up Legacy (ML) hosts. 
    Currently, various design solutions of HIP proxies have been 
    proposed for different working circumstances, and the effectiveness 
    of these solutions can be influenced by various factors (e.g., the 
    information of HIP hosts maintained in DNS servers, the position 
    where a proxy is located, etc.). In this document, we attempt to 
    investigate these solutions in detail and compare their performance 
    in different scenarios. 

 Conventions used in this document 

    The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
    "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
    document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [RFC2119]. 

 Table of Contents 

     
    1. Introduction...................................................3 
    2. HIP Proxies....................................................3 
       2.1. Essential Operations of HIP Proxies.......................3 
       2.2. A Taxonomy of HIP Proxies.................................4 
       2.3. DI Proxies................................................4 
       2.4. N-DI Proxies..............................................6 
    3. Issues with HIP proxies in the Load Balancing Scenarios........7 
       3.1. Issues with HIP Proxies in Supporting ML Hosts to Initiate 
       Communication..................................................7 
          3.1.1. The Asymmetric Path Issue............................7 
          3.1.2. Issues with Routing packets sent by HIP hosts........8 
       3.2. Issues with HIP Proxies in Supporting HIP Hosts to Initiate 
       Communication..................................................9 
          3.2.1. DNS Resource Records for Made-up Legacy Hosts........9 
          3.2.2. The Asymmetric Path Issue...........................10 
    4. Security Consideration........................................13 
    5. Conclusions...................................................13 
    6. IANA Considerations...........................................13 

  
  
 Zhang and Xu.           Expires April 19, 2010                 [Page 2] 

 Internet-Draft       Investigation in HIP Proxies          October 2009 
     

    7. Acknowledgments...............................................13 
    8. References....................................................13 
    Authors' Addresses...............................................14 
     
 1. Introduction 

    As core components of HIP extensional solutions, HIP proxies have 
    attracted increasing attention from both industry and academia. 
    Currently, multiple research work is engaged in the design and the 
    performance assessment of HIP proxies. In this document, we attempt 
    to investigate the design issues with HIP proxies, provide a 
    taxonomy of HIP proxies, and compare the effectiveness of different 
    types of HIP proxies in different scenarios. There has been a 
    detailed discussion of HIP proxies in [SAL05]. This document can be 
    regarded as a complement of that paper. Some new topics (e.g., the 
    asymmetric path issues occurred in HIP proxy based load-balancing 
    mechanisms and the necessary of extending HIP RR for HIP proxies) 
    are discussed. Theoretically, there is no restriction on the 
    locations of the ML hosts and the HIP host they intend to 
    communicate with. However, in this document, we only consider the 
    most important scenario that HIP proxies are expected to support 
    [SAL05]. That is, without mentioned otherwise, legacy hosts are 
    located within a private network and HIP hosts are located in the 
    public network. 

    The content of the remaining paper is organized as follows. In 
    section 2, we first briefly introduce the essential functions of HIP 
    proxies and provide a taxonomy of HIP proxies according to their 
    implementation styles. In section 3  we compare the performances of 
    different types of HIP proxies in load balancing scenarios. Section 
    4 provides a brief discussion about the influence brought by DNSsec 
    to the deployment of HIP proxies. Section 5 is the conclusion of the 
    whole document. 

 2. HIP Proxies 

2.1. Essential Operations of HIP Proxies 

    A primary function of HIP proxies is to represent legacy hosts to 
    communicate with HIP hosts by using standard HIP protocols. In order 
    to achieve this function, a HIP proxy needs to be located on the 
    path of data packets transported between legacy and HIP hosts. Upon 
    capturing a packet from a legacy host, the proxy needs to verify 
    whether this packet is destined to a HIP host. If it is, the proxy 
    then tries to find out an appropriate HIP association (HA) from its 
    local database. If the HA is found, the proxy uses the HA to 

  
  
 Zhang and Xu.           Expires April 19, 2010                 [Page 3] 

 Internet-Draft       Investigation in HIP Proxies          October 2009 
     

    encapsulate the packet and forwards it to its destination. However, 
    if there is no such a HA, the proxy needs to represent the legacy 
    host to carry out a HIP base-exchange with the HIP host to generate 
    a new one, using the HI and HIT assigned to the legacy host. The 
    newly generated HIP association is then maintained in the local 
    database. After capturing a responding packet from the HIP host, the 
    proxy also uses the key material in the HA to decapsulate the packet 
    and then forwards it to the legacy host.  

2.2. A Taxonomy of HIP Proxies 

    In practice, there are various design solutions for HIP proxies 
    which are based on different presumptions and supposed to execute in 
    different circumstances. In this section, these solutions are 
    investigated in detail. To benefit the analysis, we classify HIP 
    proxies into DNS lookups Intercepting Proxies (DI proxies) and Non-
    DNS lookups Intercepting Proxies (N-DI proxies). As indicated by the 
    name, DI proxies need to intercept DNS lookups in order to correctly 
    process the follow-up communication between legacy hosts and their 
    peers, while NDI proxies do not have to.  

    To avoid confusion, in the remainder of this document we use the 
    terms "lookup" and "answer" in specific ways. A lookup refers to the 
    entire process of translating a domain name for a legacy host. An 
    answer is a DNS response that terminates the lookup. 

2.3. DI Proxies 

    Usually, before a legacy host communicates with a remote host, it 
    needs to query DNS servers to obtain the IP address of its 
    destination. On this premise, it is effective for DI proxies to 
    identify the hosts which legacy hosts may intends to contact by 
    intercepting DNS lookups. Specifically, the initial DNS queries or 
    DNS answers are most valuable for DI proxies. For instance, after 
    intercepting an initial query from a legacy host, a DI proxy can 
    take advantage of the FQDN in the query to initiate a new DNS lookup 
    to enquire the information it needs (AAAA RRs, HIP RRs, and etc.). 
    After maintaining such information in the local database, the proxy 
    returns an answer with an AAAA RR to the legacy host.  

    On the occasions where DI proxies intercept DNS answers, a DI proxy 
    can directly locate the DNS severs maintaining the desired RRs from 
    the packet headers of DNS answers and contact the DNS servers 
    directly in the subsequent lookups. However, because the lookups 
    initiated by legacy hosts and proxies are carried out in a sequent 


  
  
 Zhang and Xu.           Expires April 19, 2010                 [Page 4] 

 Internet-Draft       Investigation in HIP Proxies          October 2009 
     

    way, the DI proxies intercepting answers may introduce more delays 
    than those intercepting initial queries in certain circumstances. 

    Besides intercepting DNS lookups, some kinds of DI proxies also 
    modify the contents of the AAAA RRs in DNS answers to benefit their 
    following up operations. For instance, [RFC5338] indicate that a HIP 
    proxy can returns HITs rather than IP addresses in the DNS answers 
    to legacy hosts. Consequently, the data packets destined to HIP 
    hosts will use HITs as destination addresses. In addition, [PAT07] 
    proposes a solution where a HIP proxy maintains an IP address pool 
    and returns the IP addresses selected from the pool in DNS answers. 
    As a result, the IP addresses selected by the proxy are used to 
    route the packets destined to HIP hosts within the private network. 
    In the remainder of this document, the proxies adopting the 
    solutions depicted above are referred to as DI1 proxies and DI2 
    proxies respectively. In addition, we refer to the proxies which do 
    not modify the contents of DNS answers (i.e., return the IP 
    addresses of HIP hosts in answers) as DI3 proxies. 

    Different modifications on DNS answers introduce different 
    influences on the performances of DI proxies and impose different 
    restrictions on their locations.   

    Compared with DI1 and DI2 proxies, DI3 proxies show their 
    limitations in many aspects. For instance, it is common for a ML 
    host served by a proxy to publish the IP address of its proxy in its 
    DNS AAAA RR. Therefore, when a user served by a DI3 proxy attempts 
    to communicate with such two remote ML hosts served by a same HIP 
    proxy, it is difficult for the user to distinguish an ML host from 
    the other as they both use the same IP address. In addition, DI3 
    proxies cannot work properly in the circumstance where HIP hosts 
    renumber their IP addresses during the communication due to mobility 
    and re-homing reasons. In DI1 or DI2-proxy-based Load Balancing 
    mechanisms (LBMs), these issues can be avoided, since the IP 
    addresses of HIP hosts are not used for routing packets within 
    private networks.  

    Moreover, it is difficult for DI3 proxies to advertise routes for 
    their desired packets, and consequently they can only be deployed at 
    the borders of private networks. DI1 (or DI2) proxies, however, can 
    attract the packets for HIP hosts to themselves by advertising 
    associated routes because the packets destined to HIP hosts have 
    HITs (or the IP addresses selected from pools) in their destination 
    address fields. Therefore, in private networks with resolvers (local 
    DNS servers), DI1 and DI2 proxies can also be located on the paths 
    of DNS packets transported between resolvers and legacy hosts, where 

  
  
 Zhang and Xu.           Expires April 19, 2010                 [Page 5] 

 Internet-Draft       Investigation in HIP Proxies          October 2009 
     

    proxies do not have to process undesired packets (e.g., the packets 
    exchanged between legacy hosts).  

2.4. N-DI Proxies 

    Unlike DI proxies, an N-DI proxy never attempts to intercept DNS 
    lookups to find out the potential destinations of legacy hosts in 
    the subsequent communication. Instead, it verifies whether the 
    destination of a data packet is HIP enabled, using the information 
    in the packet header. To facilitate such verifications, an N-DI 
    proxy may need to maintain a list of mapping information between 
    HITs and IP addresses. Therefore, if the destination address of a 
    received packet is maintained in the list, the proxy can ensure the 
    packet is for a HIP hosts [SAL05]. Obviously, this solution is 
    infeasible in the cases where the HIP hosts that ML hosts intend to 
    communicate with are unpredictable. This issue can be addressed by 
    storing HITs (which have a prefix different from that of ordinary IP 
    addresses) instead of IPv6 addresses in the AAAA RRs of HIP hosts in 
    DNS servers. When receiving an answer containing the AAAA RR of a 
    HIP host, a legacy host (e.g., host A) will treat the HIT in the 
    answer as the IPv6 address of its desired host (e.g., host B). When 
    sending a data packet to B, A puts the HIT of B in the destination 
    address fields of the packet headers. Therefore, the packets for 
    legacy hosts and the packets for HIP hosts can be distinguished by 
    comparing their contents in the destination address fields, and an 
    N-DI proxy (e.g., proxy P) can route the packet for B to itself by 
    distributing an associated route. Upon receiving the packet, P uses 
    the associated HA to encapsulate the packet. In order to forward the 
    encapsulated packet to its destination, P may need to get the 
    associated IP address from DHT servers using the HIT of B. Also, P 
    can try to send the packet to an overlay facilitating HIT-based 
    routing in the public network. 

    Compared with DI proxies, N-DI proxies show advantages on some 
    occassions. For instance, in order to facilitate the legacy hosts in 
    the private networks without HIP proxies to communicate with HIP 
    hosts, ISPs may try to deploy HIP proxies in transit networks. 
    However, in order to work properly in a transit network, a DI proxy 
    may have to process all the packets transported inside the network 
    to find out the desired DNS lookups. This issue can seriously affect 
    its scalability. In this case, an N-DI proxy can be more efficient 
    as it can advertise routes in the network to attract its desired 
    packets to itself.  

    However, there is a realistic problem which may prevent N-DI proxies 
    from being widely employed. It is predicable that, in the initial 

  
  
 Zhang and Xu.           Expires April 19, 2010                 [Page 6] 

 Internet-Draft       Investigation in HIP Proxies          October 2009 
     

    period of widely deploying HIP hosts, various HIP proxy solutions 
    will be adopted by different organizations and the information of 
    HIP hosts in DNS servers will organized in an ad hoc way. At least 
    in this period, it is extremely difficult to guarantee that all the 
    RRs of HIP hosts are modified appropriately. However, if this 
    prerequisite is not fulfilled, N-DI proxies cannot work as what they 
    are expected. From this perspective, modifying DNS answers is a 
    valuable capability of DI proxies. 

 3. Issues with HIP proxies in the Load Balancing Scenarios 

    If there is only a single HIP proxy deployed for a private network, 
    the proxy may become the cause of a single-point-of-failure. In 
    addition, when the number of the users increases, the overhead 
    imposed on the proxy may overwhelm its capability, which makes it 
    the bottleneck of the whole mechanism. Load-balancing is a widely 
    exploited solution to mitigate such issues. By sharing overheads 
    amongst multiple HIP proxies, a LBM can be more scalable and more 
    capable to tolerate the failures of a sub-set of HIP proxies. 
    However, a LBM is not just a collection of multiple HIP proxies. 
    Lots of issues need to be carefully considered. 

3.1. Issues with HIP Proxies in Supporting ML Hosts to Initiate 
 Communication 

 3.1.1. The Asymmetric Path Issue  

      +-------------------------+            +------------------------+ 
      |                         |            |                        | 
      |                     +---+-------+    |                        | 
      |   +-----------+     |HIP proxy 1+----+          +---------+   | 
      |   |Legacy Host|     +---+-------+    |          |HIP Host |   | 
      |   +-----------+         |     .      |          |  (HH1)  |   | 
      |                         |     .      |          +---------+   | 
      |                     +---+--------+   |                        | 
      |                     |HIP proxy n +---+                        | 
      |    Private Network  +---+--------+   |     Public Network     | 
      |                         |            |                        | 
      +-------------------------+            +------------------------+ 

                        Figure 1: An example of LBM 

    Figure 1 illustrates a example of LBM. In this mechanism, n DI1 
    proxies are deployed at the border of a private network. In order to 
    share the overhead of processing data packets, each proxy needs to 
    advertise a route of the HIT section it manages. In addition, each 

  
  
 Zhang and Xu.           Expires April 19, 2010                 [Page 7] 

 Internet-Draft       Investigation in HIP Proxies          October 2009 
     

    proxy also needs to advise a route of a section of IP addresses (or 
    a default route) inside the private network to intercept DNS lookups. 
    Therefore, the DNS queries and the data packets sent by a legacy 
    host may be intercepted by different proxies. In such cases, the 
    proxy intercepting the data packets lacks essential knowledge to 
    correctly process them because it did not intercept the associated 
    DNS communication.  

    If the proxies in Figure 1 are DI3 proxies, then each proxy only 
    needs to advertise a route of a section of IP addresses. However, if 
    a HIP host and the DNS server maintaining its RR fall into two 
    different IP sections, the proxy intercepting the lookups for the 
    HIP host will not be the one intercepting subsequent data packets. 
    Therefore, DI3-proxy-based LBMs also suffer from this problem. 

    A candidate solution to this problem is to propagate the knowledge 
    obtained from DNS lookups amongst HIP proxies. Therefore, after 
    intercepting a DNS conversation, a proxy can forward the information 
    it gained to the proxy which is expected to process the subsequent 
    data packets. Alternatively, a proxy can attempt to collect required 
    information from resolution systems after intercepting a data packet, 
    which, however, may impose addition overhead to resolution systems 
    and introduce delays in processing data packets.  

    If the proxies in Figure 1 are DI2 proxies, the problem can be 
    eliminated. In such a DI2-proxy-based LBM, each DI2 proxy has a pool 
    of IP addresses and needs to advertise a route of the section of IP 
    addresses in the pool, besides advertising a route of a section of 
    IP address for intercepting DNS lookups. After intercepting a DNS 
    lookup, a DI2 proxy will return an IP address within the pool in the 
    answer. Therefore, the subsequent data packets will be routed to the 
    proxy it as well.   

 3.1.2. Issues with Routing packets sent by HIP hosts 

    When representing a ML host to communicate with a HIP host in the 
    public network, a HIP proxy needs to capture the packets sent by the 
    HIP host. In order to achieve this, the HIP proxy can either use an 
    IP address it manages as the source address of the packets forwarded 
    to the HIP host, or advertise the routes for all the legacy hosts it 
    serves. The preceding solution is feasible in the load balancing 
    scenarios where multiple HIP proxies serve a same group of ML hosts 
    while the succeeding solution may cause a kind of asymmetric path 
    issue. Using the succeeding solution, the HIP hosts in an LBM may 
    advertise the routes which have overlaps in IP addresses. As a 
    result, the packets in a same HIP context may traverse different HIP 

  
  
 Zhang and Xu.           Expires April 19, 2010                 [Page 8] 

 Internet-Draft       Investigation in HIP Proxies          October 2009 
     

    proxies, and the proxy intercepting a packet may lack the proper HIP 
    association to process it. This issue theatrically can be addressed 
    by sharing HIP context information (e.g., HIP associations, sequence 
    number of IP packets) amongst related proxies in a real-in-time 
    fashion. However, this solution may result in the highly frequent 
    update of the HIP context information. During communication, some 
    context information such as the sequence numbers of packets can 
    change very fast, and thus a HIP host has to exchange update 
    messages in an extreme high frequency in order to guarantee that 
    other proxies can get the latest context information. Large amounts 
    of bandwidth and the computing resources will be occupied to 
    transport and process the update messages, which can seriously 
    affect the performances of HIP proxies. A similar issue is discussed 
    in [TSC05], and an extended HIP base exchange is proposed to address 
    it. The proposed solution can also be proposed to address issue 
    caused by the succeeding solution. However, we argue the preceding 
    solution is more desired as it introduces little modification to HIP 
    protocols.  

3.2. Issues with HIP Proxies in Supporting HIP Hosts to Initiate 
 Communication 

    In the discussion in section 3.1, we only consider the conditions 
    where legacy hosts initiate communication with HIP hosts. In this 
    section, we analyze the issues that HIP proxies have to encounter in 
    the conditions where HIP hosts proactively initiate communication 
    with legacy hosts.  

    In order to support the communication initiated by HIP hosts, the 
    HIP proxies of a private network should have the knowledge necessary 
    for representing inside legacy hosts to perform the HIP base-
    exchange. Such knowledge consists of the IP addresses of the legacy 
    hosts, their pre-assigned HITs, the corresponding public key pairs, 
    and any other necessary information. In addition, the information of 
    the ML hosts should be advertised in resolution systems (e.g., DNS 
    and DHT) as HIP hosts. Otherwise, a HIP host has to obtain the HIT 
    of the ML host using opportunistic model which is not adopted in 
    insecure networks.  

 3.2.1. DNS Resource Records for Made-up Legacy Hosts  

    In practice, the AAAA RR of a ML host can consist of either the IP 
    address of the legacy host or the address of its HIP proxy. In the 
    preceding approach, the packets destined to legacy hosts are 
    transported to their destinations directly, and thus HIP proxies 
    must be located on the path of such packets to intercept them. In 

  
  
 Zhang and Xu.           Expires April 19, 2010                 [Page 9] 

 Internet-Draft       Investigation in HIP Proxies          October 2009 
     

    the succeeding approach, the packets for a legacy host are firstly 
    transported to an associated HIP proxy. Therefore the proxy can be 
    deployed anywhere desired. In addition, the succeeding approach is 
    more efficient that the preceding one in private networks where 
    legacy hosts and HIP hosts are deployed in an intermixed way, since 
    the HIP proxy only need to process the packets for ML hosts. However, 
    the succeeding approach may cause problems in the process of packets 
    sent by legacy hosts in the public network. Assume a HIP proxy 
    serves multiple ML hosts. According to the succeeding approach, the 
    packets for these ML hosts have the same destination address (i.e., 
    the IP address of the proxy). Therefore, when receiving a packet 
    from a legacy host locating in the public network, the proxy may 
    find it is difficult to identify the ML host the packet destines to. 

    A simple approach combining the advantages of the above two 
    solutions but avoiding their disadvantages is to extend the RDATA in 
    HIP RR [RFC5205] with a new proxy field, which contains the IP 
    address of a HIP proxy. In the extended HIP RR of a ML host, the 
    proxy field consists of the IP address of its HIP proxy, while the 
    proxy field in the RR of an ordinary HIP host is left empty. 
    Therefore, a HIP host intending to communicate with the ML host can 
    obtain the IP address of the proxy from DNS servers and set it as 
    the destination address of the packets. The packets are then routed 
    to the proxy. When a non-HIP host intends to communicate with the 
    legacy host, it can obtain the IP address of the legacy host from 
    the AAAA RR from the DNS answer and set it as the destination 
    address of the packets; the packets are then transported to legacy 
    host directly.  

    It is also possible to use the RVS field in a HIP RR to transport 
    the information of a HIP proxy. However, the proxy field can bring 
    benefits in security. For instance, it is normally assumed that the 
    base-exchange protocol is able to establish a security channel for 
    the hosts on the both sides of communication to securely exchange 
    messages. However, this presumption may be no longer valid in the 
    presence of HIP proxies, as the messages between legacy hosts and 
    proxies can be transported in plain text. With the Proxy field, it 
    is easy to distinguish the legacy hosts made up by HIP proxies from 
    the ordinary HIP hosts. Therefore, a HIP host can assess the risks 
    of exchanging sensitive information with its communicating peers in 
    a more specific way.  

 3.2.2. The Asymmetric Path Issue  

    In a load balancing scenario where multiple HIP proxies are deployed 
    at the border of a private network, the packets transported between 

  
  
 Zhang and Xu.           Expires April 19, 2010                [Page 10] 

 Internet-Draft       Investigation in HIP Proxies          October 2009 
     

    a legacy host and a HIP host may be routed via different HIP proxies. 
    Therefore, when a packet is intercepted by a HIP proxy, the proxy 
    may find that it lacks essential knowledge to appropriately process 
    the packet. This issue is referred to as the asymmetric path issue. 

    In order to explain the asymmetric path issue in more detail, let us 
    revisit the LBM illustrated in Figure 1. In addition, assume that 
    the IP addresses of both proxies are maintained in the RRs of the ML 
    hosts. When a HIP host (e.g., HH1) looks up a legacy host at a DNS 
    server, the DNS server returns the IP addresses of the two HIP 
    proxies in an answer. Upon receiving the answer, HH1 selects an 
    address, e.g., the address of HIP proxy1, and sends HIP control 
    packets to HIP proxy1. After successfully performing a base exchange, 
    both HIP proxy1 and HH1 establish a HIP association respectively. 
    Therefore, upon receiving the first data packet from HH1, the HIP 
    proxy uses the HIP association to decapsulate the packet and 
    forwards it to the legacy host. The source IP address of the 
    forwarded packet is the HIT of HH1. Thus, the legacy host will set 
    the HIT of HH1 as the destination address of the reply packets. 
    Assume that the HIT of HH1 is within the section managed by HIP 
    proxyn. According the routes to HIT range published by the proxies, 
    the packet is forwarded to the HIP proxyn which, however, does not 
    have the corresponding HIP association to deal with the packet. 
    Similarly with DI1 proxies, DI3 proxies and N-DI proxies also suffer 
    from the asymmetric path issue in the load balancing scenarios, 
    since they cannot guarantee the data transported between a legacy 
    host and a HIP host can only pass a single HIP proxy too.  

                                                                                       
      +-------------------------+            +-------------------------------------+ 
      |                         |            |                                     | 
      |                     +---+-------+    |  (3)                                | 
      |               (4)  -|HIP proxy 1+----+<  -                                 | 
      |                   / +---+-------+    |    \   +---------+    (1) +--------+| 
      |   +-----------+< -      |     .      |     -- |HIP Host |----- > |   DNS  || 
      |   |Legacy Host|-        |     .      |        |  (HH1)  |< ----- | Server || 
      |   +-----------+ \   +---+--------+   |        +---------+   (2)  +--------+| 
      |              (5) - >|HIP proxy n +---+                                     | 
      |    Private Network  +---+--------+   |     Public Network                  | 
      |                         |            |                                     | 
      +-------------------------+            +-------------------------------------+ 
             Figure 2. An example of the asymmetric path issue 

    Several candidate solutions can be used to address this issue. In 
    the simplest solution, a HIP proxy just simply discards an I1 packet 
    if it is not original from a HIP host which the proxy takes in 

  
  
 Zhang and Xu.           Expires April 19, 2010                [Page 11] 

 Internet-Draft       Investigation in HIP Proxies          October 2009 
     

    charge of. In addition, using ICMP packets, the proxy can inform the 
    HIP hosts of the incidents. Therefore, after waiting for a certain 
    period or receiving ICMP packets from the HIP proxy, the HIP host 
    will attempt to resend the I1 packet to another HIP proxy. This 
    process can be recursive, until all the HIP proxies available have 
    been contacted. Because a HIP host may need to send the multiple I1 
    messages in order to communicate with a ML host, this solution can 
    yield a long delay. Note that in some DNS based load balancing 
    approaches, a DNS server only returns one HIP proxy in an answer. 
    Under such a circumstance, HIP hosts have to also communicate with 
    DNS servers repeatedly, and thus the negative influence caused by 
    this solution can be even exacerbated. 

    A candidate solution which can avoid the delay issue is to extend 
    DNS servers so that a DNS server can return the IP address of an 
    appropriate HIP proxy in an answer according to the HIT (if the 
    proxy is a DI1 proxy or a N-DI proxy) or the IP address (if the 
    proxy is a DI3 proxy) of the requester. That is, the HIP proxy 
    described in a DNS answer should be the one which takes in charge of 
    the packets sent by DNS requester. In order to achieve such 
    capability, DNS servers need to 1) maintain the information about 
    the sections of the namespace that HIP proxies take in charge of, 2) 
    locate the appropriate HIP proxy according to the HIT or the IP 
    address of a HIP requester. These requirements result in 
    modifications to current DNS servers in terms of the format of RRs, 
    the functionality the DNS server applications and the conversation 
    protocol between requesters and DNS servers. For instance, HIP hosts 
    need to transport their HITs in DNS requests so that DNS servers can 
    use them to locate appropriate HIP proxies.   

    It is also possible to select a HIP proxy and endow it with the 
    capability of RVS. The IP address of the proxy should be maintained 
    in the RVS fields of the HIP RRs of the ML hosts so that HIP-aware 
    requesters will send I1 packets to the HIP proxy directly. When 
    obtaining an I1 packet, the proxy can forward it to the 
    corresponding proxy to process.  

    If DI2 proxies are adopted in the scenario depicted in Figure 1, the 
    asymmetric path issue can be eliminated. A DI2 proxy located at the 
    border of a private network maintains a pool of IP addresses which 
    are routable in the private network. After receiving a packet from a 
    HIP host, the DI2 proxy processes the packet and forwards it to the 
    destination legacy host. In addition, an IP address selected from 
    the pool is adopted as the source address of the packet. Therefore, 
    when the legacy host sends responding packets to the HIP host, the 


  
  
 Zhang and Xu.           Expires April 19, 2010                [Page 12] 

 Internet-Draft       Investigation in HIP Proxies          October 2009 
     

    packets will be transported to the same HIP proxy. The asymmetric 
    path issue is thus avoided.  

 4. Security Consideration 

    Security is an important benefit introduced by HIP. In the basic HIP 
    architecture, security requirement on DNS communications is not 
    compelled. But in practice, DNSSEC [RFC4305] is recommended in order 
    to prevent attackers from tampering or forging DNS lookups between 
    resolvers and DNS server. This solution may affect the deployment of 
    HIP proxies. For instance, DI1 and DI2 proxies need to modify the 
    contents of NDS answers, and thus they should be only deployed on 
    the path between legacy hosts and their resolvers. Therefore, a DI1 
    proxy (or a DI2 proxy) should not be deployed at the border of a 
    private network if there is a DNSsec-enabled resolver.      

 5. Conclusions 

    The different types of HIP proxies are designed based on different 
    presumptions. The presumptions of different type of HIP proxies 
    maybe conflict with each other. Then how to make a trade-off and 
    enable different types of proxies work cooperatively is an important 
    issue that the designers of HIP extensible solutions have to 
    consider.    

 6. IANA Considerations 

    No such considerations. 

 7. Acknowledgments 

 8. References 

    [PAT07] P. Salmela, J. Wall and P. Jokela, "Addressing Method and 
    Method and Apparatus for Establishing Host Identity Protocol (Hip) 
    Connections Between Legacy and Hip Nodes," US. 20070274312, 2007. 

    [SAL05]P. Salmela, "Host Identity Protocol proxy in a 3G system," 
    Master's thesis. Helsinki University of Technology 2005. 

    [TSC05] H. Tschofenig, A. Gurtov, J. Ylitalo, A. Nagarajan and 
    M. Shanmugam, "Traversing Middleboxes with the Host Identity 
    Protocol," Proc. ACISP, 2005. 

    [RFC5338] T. Henderson, P. Nikander and M. Komu, "Using the Host 
    Identity Protocol with Legacy Applications," RFC 5338, Sep. 2008. 

  
  
 Zhang and Xu.           Expires April 19, 2010                [Page 13] 

 Internet-Draft       Investigation in HIP Proxies          October 2009 
     

    [RFC5205] P. Nikander and J. Laganier, "Host Identity Protocol (HIP) 
    Domain Name System (DNS) Extension," RFC 5205, April 2008. 

    [RFC4035] R. Arends, R. Austein , M. Larson, D. Massey and S. Rose, 
    "Protocol Modifications for the DNS Security Extensions," RFC 4035, 
    March 2005. 

 Authors' Addresses 

    Dacheng Zhang 
    Huawei Technologies Co.,Ltd 
    KuiKe Building, No.9 Xinxi Rd., 
    Hai-Dian District  
    Beijing, 100085 
    P.R. China 
    Email: zhangdacheng@huawei.com 
     
    Xiaohu Xu 
    Huawei Technologies Co.,Ltd 
    KuiKe Building, No.9 Xinxi Rd., 
    Hai-Dian District  
    Beijing, 100085 
    P.R. China 
    Email: xuxh@huawei.com 
     
    Jiankang Yao 
    CNNIC 
    No.4 South 4th Street, Zhongguancun 
    Bejing, 
    P.R. China 
    Phone: +86 10 58813007 
    Email: yaojk@cnnic.cn 















  
  
 Zhang and Xu.           Expires April 19, 2010                [Page 14] 

