


Network Working Group                                           L. Zhang
Internet-Draft                                                     Z. Li
Intended status: Informational                       Huawei Technologies
Expires: April 24, 2014                                           D. Liu
                                                            China Mobile
                                                        October 21, 2013


              Use Cases of I2RS in Mobile Backhaul Network
                    draft-zhang-i2rs-mbb-usecases-00

Abstract

   In mobile backhaul network, traditional configuration and diagnoses
   mechanisms base on device-level management tools and manual
   processing are ill-suited to meet the requirements of today's
   scalable, flexible, and complex network.  Thanks to the new
   innovation of Interface to the Routing System's (I2RS) programmatic
   interfaces, as defined in [I-D.ward-i2rs-framework], an alternative
   way has been rolled out to control the configuration and diagnose the
   operation results.  This document discusses the use case of I2RS in
   mobile backhaul network.

Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 24, 2014.

Copyright Notice




Zhang, et al.            Expires April 24, 2014                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft          Use Cases of I2RS in MBB            October 2013


   Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   3.  Application Configuration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     3.1.  Application Configuration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     3.2.  Requirements for I2RS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   4.  Route Policy Enforcement  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     4.1.  Route Policy Description  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     4.2.  Requirements for I2RS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   5.  Service Tunnel Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     5.1.  Service Tunnel Description  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     5.2.  Requirements for I2RS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   6.  Protection Mechanism  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     6.1.  Protection Mechanism Description  . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     6.2.  Requirements for I2RS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   7.  Network Monitoring  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     7.1.  Network Monitoring Description  . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     7.2.  Requirements for I2RS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   8.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   9.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     9.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     9.2.  Informative Reference . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10

1.  Introduction

   In mobile backhaul network, traditional configuration and diagnoses
   mechanisms base on device-level management tools and manual
   processing are ill-suited to meet the requirements of today's
   scalable, flexible, and complex network.  The mobile backhaul network
   now need to serve various radio access modes and applications across
   2G/3G / LTE/5G, build various network architectures based on the
   amount of network devices or the integration of different Areas or
   Autonomous System Numbers (ASNs), and support various network



Zhang, et al.            Expires April 24, 2014                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft          Use Cases of I2RS in MBB            October 2013


   protocols can be adopted to meet different network requirements,
   which make the mobile backhaul network configuration more and more
   arduous.

   Interface to the Routing System's (I2RS) Programmatic interfaces, as
   defined in [I-D.ward-i2rs-framework], provides an alternative way to
   control the configuration and diagnose the operation results.  The
   use cases described in this document cover the critical elements of
   mobile backhaul network, such as: application configuration, route
   policy enforcement, service tunnel implementation, protection
   mechanism and network monitoring.  The goal is to inform the
   community's understanding of the mobile backhaul requirements for
   I2RS in a viewpoint of entire network solution.

2.  Definitions

   I2RS: Interface to the Routing System

   IGP: Interior Gateway Protocol

   BGP: Border Gateway Protocol

   MPLS: Multi-Protocol Label Switching

   LDP: Equal Cost Multi-path

   RSVP-TE: Resource Reservation Protocol Traffic Engineering

   PWE3: Pseudo Wire Emulation Edge-to-Edge

   VPN: Virtual Private Network

   L2VPN: L2 Virtual Private Network

   L3VPN: L3 Virtual Private Network

   SS-PW: Singe Segment PW

   MS-PW: Multi-Segment PW

   HVPN: Hierarchical VPN

   EPC: Pseudo Wire Emulation Edge-to-Edge

   LTE: Long Term Evolution

   FRR: Fast Reroute




Zhang, et al.            Expires April 24, 2014                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft          Use Cases of I2RS in MBB            October 2013


   ECMP: Equal Cost Multi-path

3.  Application Configuration

3.1.  Application Configuration

   The mobile backhaul network has evolved into an IP-based network,
   which faces three main challenges in network construction, including:

   1.  various radio access modes:

          Due to protect existing investment and end user resource, TDM/
          ATM-based access mode belongs to 2G and 3G will coexist with
          Ethernet-based access mode belongs to 3G, LTE and 5G for a
          long period in future.  The radio architecture evolution will
          bring out new radio interfaces, such as X2 interface in LTE
          which will not work in hub-spoke communication mode any more
          while needs much more shorter time delay.  A mobile backhaul
          network must be built to have the ability to adapt to all of
          the mobile access modes, providing PWE3 service for TDM /ATM-
          based access mode and Native IP/Ethernet, PWE3/VPLS or L3VPN
          service for IP-based access mode.

   2.  various radio applications:

          A variety of radio applications (such as OM, signaling, data,
          video, etc. ) which have different quality of services (QoS),
          should be delivered in specific service channels in mobile
          backhaul network, that means there will be more than one PW or
          L3VPN instances binding with specific interfaces and service
          tunnels.

   3.  various network architectures:

          The mobile backhaul network maybe consist of hundreds of nodes
          in a small county or thousands of nodes in a populous region.
          It will be an integration of different ASNs rather than a
          single AS, when the EPC is deployed in the Core network when
          LTE.  The network devices on different points of the network
          (e.g. access\aggregation\core) have different routing and
          protocol processing capabilities, resulting in an integration
          of different IGP routing areas rather than a single large IGP
          routing area.  Refer to various network architectures,
          different service modes should be provided, such as SS- PW or
          MS-PW, E2E L3VPN or HVPN, Seamless MPLS, and the integration
          of them.





Zhang, et al.            Expires April 24, 2014                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft          Use Cases of I2RS in MBB            October 2013


3.2.  Requirements for I2RS

   The challenges in mobile backhaul network construction show the
   flexibility and complexity requirements of network configuration and
   modification, such as where the T-LDP should be configured, where the
   BGP peer should be established, where the VPN instance should be
   deployed, and where the BGP LSP should be set up.  Faced with flat or
   reduced budget, the network operators are trying to squeeze the most
   from their network using device-level management tools and manual
   processing.  In contrast to management of entire network devices,
   I2RS' programmable interface would allow network operators to
   distribute such configuration from a central location where a global
   mobile backhaul network solution provisioning information could be
   stored.  Use of I2RS controllers to announce network configuration
   information would simplify and automate configuration of mobile
   backhaul network that readily adapt to changing network scales and
   radio applications.

4.  Route Policy Enforcement

4.1.  Route Policy Description

   The route policy in mobile backhaul network mainly refers to BGP
   policy when L3VPN is used to serve the radio applications.  The
   complexity of today's network architecture and radio interfaces make
   it very difficult to apply a network-wide route policy, for:

   o  avoiding route advertisement across entire network

         When a mobile backhaul network contains more than 500 nodes,
         complementing a multi-segments service like HVPN is recommended
         to reduce the routing and protocol processing quantity of
         network devices.  BGP policy should be configured with prefix
         filters to advertise only the default or aggregate route to the
         access nodes which have poor capability, while to advertise the
         whole network routes to the core nodes which must have
         capability of fairly large routes.

   o  supporting best route selection for VPN FRR or ECMP

         The mobile backhaul network is recommended to be built with a
         multi-homed network architecture for node failure protection,
         where VPN FRR or ECMP should be configured.  The best route
         selection relay on the BGP Policy using Local Preference, MED
         or other path attributes defined in [RFC4760].  When BGP RR is
         adopted to simplify the BGP peer architecture from full-mesh
         mode, the policy would be more complex, in some cases may be
         per-peer or per-route more worse.



Zhang, et al.            Expires April 24, 2014                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft          Use Cases of I2RS in MBB            October 2013


   o  allowing On-demand route advertisement

         The advent of X2 interface in LTE, which needs specific route
         information between any two access nodes, make the network
         route advertisement more dynamically and unpredictably.  The
         BGP policy should be adjusted dynamically to meet this route
         advertisement need across the entire network.

4.2.  Requirements for I2RS

   Route policy enforcement in mobile backhaul network need to be much
   more dynamical and flexible, and when to implement a network-wide
   route policy, network operators should configure thousands of devices
   with different policy details individually according to the role of
   the devices, such as ASRs in one AS, ASBRs between different ASs and
   other service-touch nodes.  It will take hours, in some cases days to
   configure the route policy across the entire network.  I2RS
   controllers could use common APIs to collect network information
   required to create different BGP policies dynamically, then push such
   policy onto the corresponding network device, and make it tack effect
   automatically.

5.  Service Tunnel Implementation

5.1.  Service Tunnel Description

   In mobile backhaul network, more than one kind of Service Tunnel can
   be used according to network ability or other consideration in
   different scenarios.  The Tunnel deployment use case in mobile
   backhaul includes:

   o  MPLS LDP LSP

         MPLS LDP LSP is set up through LDP protocol.  Both Label
         Advertisement Mode of Downstream Unsolicited (DU) and
         Downstream on Demand (DOD) defined in [RFC3036] can be used
         individually or integrated across access network and aggregate/
         core network.  If needed, the longed length match define in
         [RFC5283] for LDP LSP should be supported.  MPLS LDP LSP has
         great scalability with flexible policy to control the label
         advertisement of route, especially in DU mode, to decrease the
         needless LSPs, that is help to reduce the LSP capability
         requirement of network devices.

   o  MPLS-TE LSP

         MPLS-TE LSP is set up through RSVP-TE protocol, which has
         multiple path control attributes (such as explicit-path, path



Zhang, et al.            Expires April 24, 2014                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft          Use Cases of I2RS in MBB            October 2013


         affinity property , path bandwidth assurance , path hop
         limitation, e.g.) and multiple protection modes (such as hot-
         standby, Fast Re-Route, protection group, e.g.).  MPLS-TE LSP
         should be designed using the attributes and protection modes
         according to the requirements of the service delivery
         individually of integrated across access network and aggregate/
         core network.

   o  MPLS-TP LSP

         MPLS-TP includes unidirectional LSP, bidirectional co-routed
         LSP, and bidirectional associated LSP, which can be calculated
         and set up manually or using dynamic network protocols such as
         GMPLS.  In mobile backhaul network, the LSP selection depends
         on the service need, and the creation of MPLS-TP LSP is always
         asked to be decoupled with the protocol control plane running
         on the separate network devices.  In this case, the static
         MPLS-TP LSP should be designed and configured on the
         centralized control plane ideally.

5.2.  Requirements for I2RS

   Since mobile backhaul network is divided into access network and
   aggregation/core network, where service tunnel implementation is not
   constant and unique, perhaps need to deploy different kind of LSPs
   separately (such as LDP LSP or MPLS-TE LSP in both access network and
   aggregate/core network) or simultaneously (such as MPLS-TP static LSP
   in access network while LDP LSP or MPLS-TE LSP in aggregate/core
   network). in this case, network operators should clearly know the
   ability of all of the network devices and the service requirements to
   make the most appropriate tunnel implementation.  I2RS provide a
   centralized control of network devices, which should automate the
   collection and analysis of the device ability to calculate optimal
   LSP path and distribute the configuration to exact devices.

6.  Protection Mechanism

6.1.  Protection Mechanism Description

   The SLA for radio services is strict, which need interworking among
   multiple protection mechanisms.  Two critical aspects should be taken
   into account for inter-working, hierarchical protection architectures
   and multiple OAM protocol interactions.

   1.  tunnel protection:

          The protection mechanism of different tunnel protocols,
          mentioned above, is different from each other.  To enhance the



Zhang, et al.            Expires April 24, 2014                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft          Use Cases of I2RS in MBB            October 2013


          reliability, LDP LSP should configure LDP FRR, which is
          calculated depends on the protect route algorithm, which can
          be Loop-Free Algorithm (LFA), Remote-LFA, or Maximally
          Redundant Trees (MRT) used together with LDP MT described in
          [I-D.ietf-mpls-ldp-multi-topology].  MPLS-TE LSP should apply
          TE Fast Reroute or TE hot-standby.  When MPLS-TP LSP is used,
          the LSP protection group should be configured with 1:1 or 1+1
          mode for MPLS-TP line protection, as well as wrapping or
          steering modes fault processing for MPLS-TP ring protection.

   2.  service protection:

          Service protection is commended to be configured for node
          failure handover in mobile backhaul network, where PW
          redundancy defined in [RFC6718] or BGP VPN FRR or ECMP
          realization should be deployed exactly.

6.2.  Requirements for I2RS

   The hierarchical protection architecture in mobile backhaul network
   offer high network reliability but more flexibility to meet the
   various needs of the tunnels and services.  I2RS interface in this
   use case is needed to automate the configuration and make tunnel
   protection and service protection interwork with each other ideally.

7.  Network Monitoring

7.1.  Network Monitoring Description

   The mobile backhaul network operators are asked to give an accurate
   positioning when a link or node failure occurred, and get the real
   reason for service quality descent.  This need to apply different
   network monitor tools for different service mode, like Network
   Quality Analysis (NQA), MPLS-TP OAM, and IP Flow Performance Monitor
   (IPFPM).  In addition, to acquire the exact traffic path is really
   significant when use IPFPM for point-to-point detection.

   Multiple monitor tools require network operators to distinguish
   granular traffic flow to apply the appropriate one.  At the same
   time, traditional device-level management tools is difficult to get
   the traffic path, which may need enhance the existing protocols or
   design a new specific protocol to do this work, both will increase
   the burden of mobile backhaul network.

7.2.  Requirements for I2RS

   I2RS should solve the two problems mentioned above naturally by using
   centralized controllers, which control and manage the entire network



Zhang, et al.            Expires April 24, 2014                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft          Use Cases of I2RS in MBB            October 2013


   devices and store the whole routing and service information directly.
   Meanwhile, the defect and traffic congestion or dropping can be
   detected real-time with I2RS, which make the network keep optimal
   state dynamically all the time.

8.  Security Considerations

   The mobile backhaul network use cases described in this document
   assumes use of I2RS's programmatic interfaces described in the I2RS
   framework mentioned in[I-D.ward-i2rs-framework].  This document does
   not change the underlying security issues inherent in the existing
   [I-D.ward-i2rs-framework].

9.  References

9.1.  Normative References

   [I-D.ward-i2rs-framework]
              Atlas, A., Nadeau, T., and D. Ward, "Interface to the
              Routing System Framework", draft-ward-i2rs-framework-00
              (work in progress), February 2013.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

9.2.  Informative Reference

   [I-D.ietf-mpls-ldp-multi-topology]
              Zhao, Q., Fang, L., Zhou, C., Li, L., and K. Raza, "LDP
              Extensions for Multi Topology Routing", draft-ietf-mpls-
              ldp-multi-topology-09 (work in progress), October 2013.

   [I-D.ietf-mpls-seamless-mpls]
              Leymann, N., Decraene, B., Filsfils, C., Konstantynowicz,
              M., and D. Steinberg, "Seamless MPLS Architecture", draft-
              ietf-mpls-seamless-mpls-04 (work in progress), July 2013.

   [I-D.li-mpls-seamless-mpls-mbb]
              Li, Z., Li, L., Morillo, M., and T. Yang, "Seamless MPLS
              for Mobile Backhaul", draft-li-mpls-seamless-mpls-mbb-00
              (work in progress), July 2013.

   [RFC3036]  Andersson, L., Doolan, P., Feldman, N., Fredette, A., and
              B. Thomas, "LDP Specification", RFC 3036, January 2001.

   [RFC4760]  Bates, T., Chandra, R., Katz, D., and Y. Rekhter,
              "Multiprotocol Extensions for BGP-4", RFC 4760, January
              2007.



Zhang, et al.            Expires April 24, 2014                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft          Use Cases of I2RS in MBB            October 2013


   [RFC5283]  Decraene, B., Le Roux, JL., and I. Minei, "LDP Extension
              for Inter-Area Label Switched Paths (LSPs)", RFC 5283,
              July 2008.

   [RFC6718]  Muley, P., Aissaoui, M., and M. Bocci, "Pseudowire
              Redundancy", RFC 6718, August 2012.

Authors' Addresses

   Li Zhang
   Huawei Technologies
   Huawei Bld., No.156 Beiqing Rd.
   Beijing  100095
   China

   Email: monica.zhangli@huawei.comZ


   Zhenbin Li
   Huawei Technologies
   Huawei Bld., No.156 Beiqing Rd.
   Beijing  100095
   China

   Email: lizhenbin@huawei.com


   Dapeng Liu
   China Mobile
   Unit2, 28 Xuanwumenxi Ave,Xuanwu District
   Beijing  100053
   China

   Email: liudapeng@chinamobile.com

















Zhang, et al.            Expires April 24, 2014                [Page 10]

