INTERNET-DRAFT                                              Mingui Zhang
Intended Status: Proposed Standard                                Huawei
Expires: April 18, 2011                                          Bin Liu
                                                     Tsinghua University
                                                           Dacheng Zhang
                                                                  Huawei
                                                          Beichuan Zhang
                                               The University of Arizona
                                                        October 15, 2010


  Secure Extension of BGP by Decoupling Path Propagation and Adoption
                     draft-zhang-idr-decoupling-00


Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as
   Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html


Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors. All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document. Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document. Code Components extracted from this document must
 






Zhang                    Expires April 18, 2011                 [Page 1]

INTERNET-DRAFT                    DBGP                  October 15, 2010


   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.
















































 






Zhang                    Expires April 18, 2011                 [Page 2]

INTERNET-DRAFT                    DBGP                  October 15, 2010


Abstract

   This draft proposes an extension of BGP which can be used to mitigate
   the issue of false routing announcement and works well with attack
   detection and prevention systems.  

Conventions used in this document 

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].


Table of Contents

   1  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   2  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   3  False Routing Announcements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
      3.1  Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
      3.2 Countermeasures  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
         3.2.1 Prevention  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
         3.2.2 Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
         3.2.3. Traditional Mitigation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
      3.3 Paradox of Blocking Suspicious Routing Updates and Attack 
          Detection  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   4. DBGP's Mitigation: Decoupling Path Propagation and Adoption  . . 7
      4.1 Quarantine Time  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   5 Protocol Descriptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
      5.1 DAS_PATH Attribute TLV . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
      5.2 Identification of Suspicious Paths . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
      5.3 Propagating Updates  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
      5.4 Choosing Alternative Paths . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
      5.5 Releasing Quarantined Paths  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   6  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   7  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   8  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
      8.1  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
      8.2  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
   Appendix A: Empirical Evaluation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
   Author's Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14








 






Zhang                    Expires April 18, 2011                 [Page 3]

INTERNET-DRAFT                    DBGP                  October 15, 2010


1  Introduction

   The false routing announcement in the global routing system is a
   serious security problem that can lead to widespread service
   disruptions. Existing work such as Pretty Good BGP (PGBGP)[PGBGP]
   blocks suspicious routing updates to protect data delivery. However,
   such an approach has the side effect of blocking the view of any
   detection system at the control plane or data plane. As a result, an
   attack will not be detected and operators will not be alerted to take
   actions stopping the attack. This draft proposes an extension of BGP,
   to solve this paradox by decoupling path propagation and adoption in
   BGP (dubbed as DBGP).

2  Terminology

   BGP: Broad Gateway Protocol
   DBGP: Decoupling path propagation and adoption in BGP

3  False Routing Announcements 

3.1  Problem

   False routing announcements can be caused by either inadvertent mis-
   configurations or malicious attacks. For the ease of exposition, we
   use "attacker" to refer to the network (or Autonomous System, AS)
   that makes the false routing announcements regardless of the
   intention. Based on which part of the routing path is false, such
   announcements can be classified into five types, each of which has
   different severity:

      o  Prefix origin: The attacker originates someone else's prefix.
         Depending on where a network is in the Internet topology, some
         will choose paths leading to the true origin and some will
         choose paths leading to the false origin.

      o  Intermediate node: The attacker does not forge the prefix or
         its origin, but inserts itself into the path as an intermediate
         AS. Similar to the case of false origin, some networks will
         choose the correct paths and some the false paths. But usually
         fewer networks will choose the false path since it is longer
         than that of false origin attack.

      o  Intermediate link: The attacker forges a new link to bypass
         some of the ASes to get a shorter path. The shortened path is
         expected to attract more networks' traffic.

      o  Sub-prefix: The attacker originates a sub-prefix of someone
         else's prefix. Due to the longest match in routing lookup, a
 






Zhang                    Expires April 18, 2011                 [Page 4]

INTERNET-DRAFT                    DBGP                  October 15, 2010


         false sub-prefix will win over the original prefix. Thus, all
         traffic destined to the sub-prefix range will be forwarded to
         the attacker.

      o  Super-prefix: Theoretically the attacker can also announce a
         false super-prefix, but that will not attract any traffic
         unless part of the prefix range is unused by the real owner, in
         which case it is equivalent to announcing a false origin of the
         unused prefix range.

3.2 Countermeasures

   The current strategies proposed for the problem of false
   announcements fall in three categories: prevention, detection and
   mitigation.

3.2.1 Prevention

   Prevention schemes (e.g., [SBGP], [SoBGP], and [SPV]) use
   cryptographic mechanisms to protect the routing updates and let
   routers reject any forged announcement. Unfortunately no prevention
   scheme has seen much deployment on the Internet due to the lack of
   incentives for those first movers. Since crypto-based schemes add
   significant computational load to routers and require upgrade on
   software or hardware, individual ISPs need to see immediate benefits
   to justify the deployment. On the current Internet, however, the
   first mover's routing announcements will be accepted by other
   networks without authentication, and adding authentication does not
   bring any immediate benefit.

3.2.2 Detection

   The representative detection systems proposed in recent years include
   [Cyclops], [PHAS], [MyASN], [IAR], [iSPY], [NWatch], [OList], and
   [LWeight]. Such systems are designed to detect false routing by
   examining routing updates, probing data paths, cross-checking with
   registry databases, or a combination of these techniques. Once a
   false routing case is detected, the owner of the prefix will be
   notified, and it is expected that the owner will take actions to
   resolve the problem, which, in today's Internet, usually involves
   contacting the offending network or its upstream provider to stop the
   false routing announcements. This process of detection, notification
   and resolution takes time, ranging from an hour to a day in some past
   incidents and varying from network to network [NWatch][RIPE]. In the
   meantime, the damage to data traffic has already been made and
   malicious attackers may have already achieved their objectives.


 






Zhang                    Expires April 18, 2011                 [Page 5]

INTERNET-DRAFT                    DBGP                  October 15, 2010


3.2.3. Traditional Mitigation

   A mitigation schemes attempts to protect the data traffic while an
   attack is going on. The common approach is to somehow identify
   abnormal routing updates and block them. As proposed in [PGBGP] and
   [PGBGP++], a router can examine the content of incoming updates. If
   an AS path contains unexpected prefix origin or links, it will be
   suppressed from propagating for a period of time to wait for the
   network operator's validation. The length of the time is configurable
   by the network operators. Instead, an alternative path (via trusted
   prefix origin and links) will be employed for data delivery in the
   suppression period. After this period,if the path is not proved to be
   illegal, the router will adopt and announce the new path. PGBGP gives
   operators certain reaction time to resolve potential false
   announcements while protecting data delivery in the meantime. When a
   real attack is detected and resolved, the corresponding false
   announcement will be withdrawn from the routing system, whereas
   legitimate announcement will stay in the routing system and
   eventually be accepted.

   But blocking false routing announcements can get in the way of
   detection systems. For instance, on September 22, 2008, a Russian ISP
   AS8997 hijacked a large number of prefixes as it leaked an entire
   table [ASN8997]. However, since the upstream ISP of AS8997 blocked
   the routing updates, detection systems such as MyASN and IAR did not
   pick up this incident. The attack mainly affected ISPs and users
   within Russia but largely went unnoticed by prefix owners.

   Each existing solution has its drawbacks, and none is sufficiently
   effective by itself. The future of the Internet probably will have
   several different solutions at the same time, complementary to each
   other, forming a multi-line defense to protect routing and data
   delivery before, during, and after attacks.

3.3 Paradox of Blocking Suspicious Routing Updates and Attack Detection

   It has been realized that a mitigation mechanism and a detection
   system that complement each other well can be integrated into an
   effective routing defense solution. For instance, the mitigation
   mechanism can help the detection system to confine the damage caused
   by an attack, as the affected data traffic may be vulnerable for
   hours before the attack can be actually detected by the detection
   mechanism and be eventually stopped. Also, the mitigation mechanism
   can also obtain benefit from the detection system because a
   mitigation mechanism normally cannot identity false routing
   information accurately with its limited knowledge, resource and time.
   The output from the detection system can be used to correct the many
   false positives generated by the mitigation mechanism and also inform
 






Zhang                    Expires April 18, 2011                 [Page 6]

INTERNET-DRAFT                    DBGP                  October 15, 2010


   the prefix owner to resolve the attack.

   However, there is a dilemma: the mitigation mechanism tries to render
   the attack ineffective while the detection system needs the attack to
   be effective in order to detect it.

4. DBGP's Mitigation: Decoupling Path Propagation and Adoption

   In order to solve the dilemma mentioned in Section 3.3, this document
   proposes a solution which decouples path propagation and path
   adoption. In current BGP, the path a router adopts for data
   forwarding is the same path being propagated to neighbors. As a
   consequence, upon receiving a suspicious path, a router has to either
   accept it (no mitigation but good detection) or reject it (good
   mitigation but no detection). 

   The basic idea of this solution is to extend BGP so that a router can
   use trusted paths for data forwarding and can also inform its
   neighbor routers about the suspicious path. In this way, the data
   traffic is protected while the false routing announcements are being
   propagated and will likely be monitored by the detection system. In
   order to achieve this, a new BGP attribute, DAS_PATH, is defined in
   Section 5 to transport suspicious path information. Additionally,
   based on historical operating experiences, a false routing
   announcement can be detected and corrected in a certain period (e.g.,
   one day) after it is launched, and so an announcement will be trusted
   if it is not withdrawn in a pre-defined period.      The rest of this
   section will discuss the design details in identifying suspicious
   paths, choosing alternative paths for data forwarding, propagating
   the paths, and releasing quarantined paths.

4.1 Quarantine Time

   In mitigation schemes, when a new path is identified as a suspicious
   one, it will be quarantined (or blocked) from being used for a period
   of time, which is call the quarantine time and noted as T_q.

   A router MAY determine the quarantine time itself. Assume there are
   two routers, R1 and R2. R1 is the downstream of R2, and the
   quarantine time of R1 and R2 is T1 and T2 respectively. The
   suspicious path is PATH at R1. There are two possibilities.

      o  T1 is shorter than T2. When T1 expires, PATH becomes trusted by
         R1 and R1 begins to use it for data delivery. R1 will announce
         R1-PATH as a legitimate AS path to R2. However, at this time,
         the path R1-PATH is still being quarantined by R2.

      o  T1 is longer than T2. When T2 expires, R1-PATH becomes trusted
 






Zhang                    Expires April 18, 2011                 [Page 7]

INTERNET-DRAFT                    DBGP                  October 15, 2010


         by R2. However, R2 can not use this path for data delivery as
         R1 has not announced R1-PATH as an AS path. It will be cached
         in the Adj-RIBs-In until the downstream router R1 has announced
         it as an AS path when T1 expires.


5 Protocol Descriptions

   Take Figure 1 for example. A, B, C, and O are DBGP routers residing
   in different ASes, , X is the attacker and p is the prefix of
   interest. Before the attack, the preferred path for traffic is ABCO.
   Here, we use the notation "R1R2...Rn-p" to denote the AS path which
   is destined to prefix "p" via routers R1, R2, ..., Rn. When X makes a
   false announcement of X-p to B, B will regard this new path as
   suspicious because it would divert traffic to an AS(X) that
   previously was not on the data path (BCO). B will store the
   suspicious path in its Adj-RIBs-In (The routing tables of an AS
   router is comprised of three sub-tables: Adj-RIBs-In, Loc-RIB and
   Adj-RIBs-Out [BGP4]), but keep using the existing path in its Loc-RIB
   for data forwarding. At the same time, B re-announces its path (BCO)
   in an update message to A, and encapsulates the new, suspicious path
   (BX) as an optional transitive attribute which is defined in Section
   5.1. After receiving the update message, router A learns this
   suspicious path, stores it, and propagates it further to its
   neighbors using the optional attribute the same way. Therefore, the
   suspicious path is propagated to the Internet while not adopted for
   data forwarding. This approach enable the detection systems to
   intercept the suspicious path and notify the prefix owner to take
   actions. Once the attack is stopped, the false announcements will be
   withdrawn from the routing system, i.e., deleted or replaced in the
   Adj-RIBs-In of the involved routers. However, a router realizes that
   the quarantine time has been expired and the suspicious path is still
   in the Adj-RIBs-In, the router regards the path as a legitimate one.
   Hence the DBGP router will install the path in its Loc-RIB for data
   forwarding and re-announce the path using the regular ASPATH
   attribute in the update message. For example, if BX-p has been
   validated as legitimate, B will announce it to A as its AS_PATH. The
   rest of this section will discuss the design details in new BGP
   attribute definition, identifying suspicious paths, choosing
   alternative paths for data forwarding, propagating the paths, and
   releasing quarantined paths.

                                   [X]->p
                                    ^
                                    |          
                         [A]->[B]->[C]->[O]-p

                       Figure 1: Attack Example 1
 






Zhang                    Expires April 18, 2011                 [Page 8]

INTERNET-DRAFT                    DBGP                  October 15, 2010


5.1 DAS_PATH Attribute TLV

   DAS_PATH (Decoupled AS_PATH) is defined as an optional transitive
   attribute. It is composed of a sequence of DAS path segments. Each
   DAS path segment is represented by a triple <path segment type, path
   segment length, path segment value>. 

   The path segment type is a 1-octet long field with the following
   values defined:

      Value   Segment              Type
       1      DAS_SET             unordered set of ASs a route in the
                                  UPDATE message has traversed
       2      DAS_SEQUENCE        ordered set of ASs a route in the
                                  UPDATE message has traversed

   The path segment length is a 1-octet long field containing the number
   of ASs in the path segment value field.

   The path segment value field contains one or more AS numbers, each
   encoded as a 2-octets long field.

   When a DAS_PATH is propagated across the network, the operations on
   DAS_PATH follows the well-known AS_PATH attribute only that DAS_PATH
   is non-mandatory. If a router which does not deploy DBGP receives the
   update messages containing DAS_PATH attribute, i.e., does not
   understand this attribute, it will just pass it on to the next
   router. If its downstream router is a DBGP router, it will be able to
   pick up the information from this attribute and continue DBGP
   operations. Therefore DBGP can be incrementally deployed over the
   Internet.

5.2 Identification of Suspicious Paths

   For a given prefix p, a path is trusted if it has been staying in the
   Adj-RIBs-In continuously for the required quarantine time, T_q. All
   the nodes, links, and origins that appear in trusted paths are
   trusted components, and the set of them is denoted by trusted(p).
   This set of trusted components is derived from current contents of
   all Adj-RIBs-In without using a database to store historical
   information like PGBGP does. Nodes, links, and origins that do not
   belong to trusted(p) are said to be suspicious components for this
   particular prefix p. A new path is suspicious if it contains any
   suspicious component for its prefix. However, not all suspicious
   paths need to be explicitly quarantined. DBGP quarantines paths that
   satisfy the following condition:

      o  A new path is quarantined if and only if it is suspicious, more
 






Zhang                    Expires April 18, 2011                 [Page 9]

INTERNET-DRAFT                    DBGP                  October 15, 2010


         preferred than other alternative paths, and contains an AS that
         is not in the current data forwarding path.

   If the new path is not better than alternative paths, it will not be
   able to divert any traffic. One may suggest that the attacker can
   first announce a less preferred path so that DBGP routers will take
   it as a backup path without suspicion, and then make the primary path
   fail to trick the router to use the false backup path. But in this
   case, if the attacker has the control of the primary path, it can
   already get the traffic without doing this. If the attacker does not
   have control of the primary path, it will not know when the primary
   path may fail and which backup path the router will choose, thus the
   attack will not be effective. 

   If the new path does not introduce any new AS on the data path, it is
   not quarantined since it does not divert any traffic. In Figure 2,
   when X launches an attack by announcing X-p, this path is not
   quarantined by B since B already sends its traffic to X. B will
   accept this path and announces it to A. Assuming ABX-p is more
   preferred than ACO-p, A will quarantine ABX-p since this new path
   would divert A's traffic to a new place, AS X, and X is a suspicious
   origin to A.

   To reduce the potential false positives in quarantining paths, we
   introduce an optimization rule. If the current best path is replaced
   by a suspicious path (i.e., the same neighbor that sent the best path
   previously sends another path to replace it), then the current best
   path is cached for a short time period. This rule is used to
   accommodate some unstable prefixes, which may get announced and
   withdrawn or oscillate between two paths frequently. With this rule,
   quick re-announcement of a path will not be treated as suspicious.
   Previous measurement work has shown that (1) most prefixes are
   stable, and only a small number of prefixes are very unstable; (2)
   the most popular prefixes are stable; and (3) the most preferred
   paths are being used by routers for most of the time
   [BGPpop][Stable][BGPHA]. Therefore, DBGP's criterion for suspicious
   paths will not generate excessive false positives in reality. The
   majority of the rest prefixes is only suspicious infrequently.










 






Zhang                    Expires April 18, 2011                [Page 10]

INTERNET-DRAFT                    DBGP                  October 15, 2010


                       +---------------+
                       |               |
                       |               v
                       [A]->[B]->[X]->[C]->[O]-p
                                       |
                                       p

                       Figure 2: Attack Example 2

5.3 Propagating Updates

   DBGP uses the new BGP attribute, DAS_PATH, to carry the suspicious
   path in updates. In certain cases DBGP update may need to carry
   multiple DAS_PATHs. For example, in Figure 3, assume C does not
   deploy DBGP and accepts the false announcement of X-p. When B
   receives BCX-p, B quarantines this new path and switches to its
   backup BDO-p. The update from B to A will have BDO as the AS_PATH,
   and BCX as the DAS_PATH attribute. However, since BDO is suspicious
   to A as well, A will quarantine BDO and switch to AEFO. Thus the
   update from A will contain two DAS_PATHs: ABCX and ABDO. Whether an
   update contains multiple DAS_PATHs depends on the topology and
   routing policy. In the worst case, the number of DAS_PATH in an
   update is the same as the AS hop count of the AS_PATH. Given AS e 10
   hops, we do not expect this will make DBGP message too large and it
   is confirmed in our simulations.

                                   [X]->p
                                    ^
                                    |          
                         [A]->[B]->[C]->[O]-p
                          |    |         ^ 
                          |    |        /|
                          |    +-->[D]-+ |
                          |              |
                          +------->[E]->[F]

                       Figure 3: Attack Example 3

5.4 Choosing Alternative Paths

   When a new path is the most preferred but suspicious, DBGP routers
   will use an alternative path for data delivery. The question is which
   alternative path to be chosen. First, if the existing path that is
   being used for data forwarding is still the best, then the router can
   stick to that path without any changes. Second, if the existing path
   in use will have been replaced by the suspicious path, then the
   router needs to pick an alternative. For example, in Figure 3,
   suppose C does not deploy DBGP and blindly accepts the false
 






Zhang                    Expires April 18, 2011                [Page 11]

INTERNET-DRAFT                    DBGP                  October 15, 2010


   announcement X-p. B's existing path BCO-p will be replaced by a
   suspicious path BCX-p, therefore B needs to temporarily switch to a
   backup path BDO-p from its Adj-RIBs-In. Third, if there is no
   alternative path or all alternative paths are labeled as suspicious,
   then the router err on data delivery by adopting a suspicious path to
   forward packets.

5.5 Releasing Quarantined Paths

   If the quarantined paths are false announcements, it is likely that
   within T_q, the attack will be stopped and these paths being
   withdrawn from the routing system. In this case, there is no explicit
   release of the quarantined path. Just the upstream router will send
   an update with empty DAS_PATH attribute. If T_q has passed and the
   quarantined path is still in the Adj-RIBs-In, then it is more likely
   that this is a legitimate path. The router will treat the path as a
   regular path and make it go through the path selection process. If
   the path turns out to be the most preferred one, it will be used for
   data forwarding and trigger routing updates to neighbor routers.

6  Security Considerations

   The entire document is about security consideration.

7  IANA Considerations

8  References 

8.1  Normative References

   [PGBGP]     J. Karlin, S. Forrest, and J. Rexford, "Pretty Good BGP:
               Improving BGP by Cautiously Adopting Routes," in
               Proceedings of IEEE ICNP, 2006. 
   [SBGP]      S. Kent, C. Lynn, and K. Seo, "Secure Border Gateway
               Protocol (SBGP)," IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in
               Communications, vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 582 - 592, 2000.
   [Cyclops]   Y.-J. Chi, R. Oliveira, and L. Zhang, "Cyclops: the as-
               level connectivity observatory," SIGCOMM Comput. Commun.
               Rev., vol. 38, no. 5, pp. 5-16, 2008.
   [PHAS]      M. Lad, D. Massey, D. Pei, B. Zhang, and L. Zhang, "PHAS:
               A Prefix Hijack Alert System," in 15th USENIX Security
               Symposium, 2006, pp.153-166.
   [MyASN]     "RIPE myASN System," http://www.ris.ripe.net/myasn.html.
   [IAR]       [Online]. Available: http://iar.cs.unm.edu/
   [iSPY]      Z. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Y. C. Hu, Z. M. Mao, and R. Bush,
               "iSPY: Detecting IP Prefix Hijacking on My Own," in
               Proceedings of ACM SIGCOMM, 2008.
   [NWatch]    G. Siganos and M. Faloutsos, "Neighborhood Watch for
 






Zhang                    Expires April 18, 2011                [Page 12]

INTERNET-DRAFT                    DBGP                  October 15, 2010


               Internet Routing: Can We Improve the Robustness of
               Internet Routing Today?" in Proceedings of IEEE INFOCOM,
               2007.
   [Olist]     X. Zhao, D. Pei, L. Wang, D. Massey, A. Mankin, S. Wu,
               and L. Zhang,"Dection of Invalid Routing Announcement in
               the Internet," in Proceedings of the IEEE DSN, June 2002.
   [LWeight]   C. Zheng, L. Ji, D. Pei, J. Wang, and P. Francis, "A
               Light-weight Distributed Scheme for Detecting IP Prefix
               Hijacks in Real-time," in Proceedings of ACM SIGCOMM,
               2007.
   [SBGP]     S. Kent, C. Lynn, and K. Seo, "Secure Border Gateway
               Protocol (SBGP),"IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in
               Communications, vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 582 - 592, 2000.
   [SoBGP]    J. Ng, "Extensions to BGP to Support Secure Origin BGP,"
               April 2004, ftp://ftp-eng.cisco.com/sobgp/drafts/draft-
               ng-sobgp-bgp-extensions-02.txt.
   [SPV]      Y.-C. Hu, A. Perrig, and M. Sirbu, "SPV: Secure Path
               Vector Routing for Securing BGP," in Proceedings of ACM
               SIGCOMM, 2004.
   [RIPE]     [Online]. Available: http://www.ripe.net/news/study-
               youtubehijacking.html
   [ASN8997]  "Prefix hijack by ASN 8997." [Online]. Available:
               http://www.merit.edu/mail.archives/nanog/2008-
               09/msg00704.html
   [BGPpop]    J. Rexford, J. Wang, Z. Xiao, and Y. Zhang, "BGP Routing
               Stability of Popular Destinations," in Proceedings of ACM
               IMC, 2002, pp. 197-202.
   [Stable]    K. Butler, P. McDaniel, and W. Aiello, "Optimizing BGP
               Security by Exploiting Path Stability," in Proceedings of
               ACM CCS, Alexandria, VA, United States, 2006, pp.
               298-310.
   [BGPHA]     R. V. Oliveira, R. Izhak-Ratzin, B. Zhang, and L. Zhang,
               "Measurement of Highly Active Prefixes in BGP," in
               Proceedings of IEEE Globecom,2005.
   [BGP4]      J. W. Stewart, BGP4: Inter-Domain Routing in the
               Internet. Boston,MA, USA: Addison-Wesley Longman
               Publishing Co., Inc., 1998.

8.2  Informative References

Appendix A: Empirical Evaluation

   The following aspects of DBGP are tested on the SSFNet-2.0 simulation
   platform which has a implementation of BGP4.
      o  The capacity to counter attacks
      o  The ability to rectify the false positives
      o  The memory and message overhead
   The evaluation proves that DBGP can be used to mitigate all types of
 






Zhang                    Expires April 18, 2011                [Page 13]

INTERNET-DRAFT                    DBGP                  October 15, 2010


   attacks. Compared with previous mitigation approaches [PGBGP], it
   reduces the delay of legitimate announcements significantly, only
   incurs a small amount of messages and memory overhead.

Author's Addresses


   Mingui Zhang
   Huawei Technologies Co.,Ltd
   HuaWei Building, No.3 Xinxi Rd., Shang-Di
   Information Industry Base, Hai-Dian District, 
   Beijing, 100085 P.R. China
   
   Email: mingui@huawei.com

   Bin Liu
   Tsinghua University
   East Main Building RM9-416
   Tsinghua University, Hai-Dian District, 
   Beijing, 100084 P.R. China

   Email: lmyujie@gmail.com

   Dacheng Zhang
   Huawei Technologies Co.,Ltd
   HuaWei Building, No.3 Xinxi Rd., Shang-Di
   Information Industry Base, Hai-Dian District, 
   Beijing, 100085 P.R. China

   Email: zhangdacheng@huawei.com

   Beichuan Zhang
   University of Arizona
   Computer Science Department,
   The University of Arizona
   Tucson, AZ 85721 U.S.A.

   Email: bzhang@arizona.edu






Zhang                    Expires April 18, 2011                [Page 14]

