



Network Working Group                                           D. Zhang
Internet-Draft                                                    Huawei
Intended status: Experimental                                 S. Hartman
Expires: April 24, 2014                                Painless Security
                                                               W. Atwood
                                                Concordia University/CSE
                                                        October 21, 2013


                 Routing Authentication Policy Database
                        draft-zhang-karp-rapd-00

Abstract

   This document proposes a conceptual database, the Routing
   Authentication Policy Database (RAPD), which cooperates with the key
   table to provide the configuration information for the automated key
   management protocols in generating key materials for routing
   protocols.  Additionally, the RAPD also provides authorization
   policies so as to guarantee that the keying material for securing
   routing protocol exchanges is distributed only to the appropriate
   peers.

Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 24, 2014.

Copyright Notice




Zhang, et al.            Expires April 24, 2014                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                    RAPD                      October 2013


   Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Contents of an RAPD Entry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   3.  RAPD Authentication Information for IKEv2 . . . . . . . . . .   4
   4.  Organization and Lookup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   5.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   6.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   7.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   8.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     8.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     8.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6

1.  Introduction

   This specification introduces a conceptual database, the Routing
   Authentication Policy Database (RAPD).  The RAPD compliments the key
   table [I-D.ietf-karp-crypto-key-table], which provides manually
   configured keys, while the RAPD provides policies for automated key
   management.

   According to the key table, in order to request a key to send a
   message, a routing protocol implementation needs to specify the
   information of "peer" and "protocol".  The peer is either the
   identity of a unicast peer or of a group.  The form of the peer
   identifier is specified by the specific routing protocol in question.
   The peer and protocol values are sufficient to find an existing key.
   If no proper key exists, the RAPD will be consulted.  In this case,
   the peer and protocol values are also used to locate the appropriate
   automated key management policies from the RAPD.

   During the authentication and key distribution with a remote peer,
   the RAPD is also used by the key management application to obtain the
   authentication and authorization information necessary for the key



Zhang, et al.            Expires April 24, 2014                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                    RAPD                      October 2013


   management.  In this case, the key management application needs to
   provide the RAPD with the IKE identity of the peer.

   The critical functions embodied by the RAPD are listed as follows:

   o  Identifying the peers or groups of peers that are authorized for a
      particular routing protocol

   o  Judging whether automated key management is expected for a
      particular routing protocol peer or group

   o  Specifying the key management protocols that this router needs to
      participate in and on what interfaces

   o  Provisioning the identities and credentials used to authenticate
      to a remote key-management peer

   o  Constraining the acceptable identities and credentials when a
      remote key-management peer authenticates to the local system

   o  Specifying the parameters and transforms used for a particular
      security association

   The services that the RAPD provides are analogus to the services that
   the Security Policy Database (SPD) and the Peer Authorization
   Database (PAD) provide to IKEv2 [RFC4301].

   This document requires the support of the IKEv2 extension specified
   in [I-D.mahesh-karp-rkmp].  To benefit the discussion, in this
   document, the IKEv2 extension is used as an example to describe how
   the RAPD can be applied in securing unicast routing protocol packets.

2.  Contents of an RAPD Entry

   The RAPD contains an entry for each peer or group of peers to which
   automated key management mechanisms will be applied by the local
   system in securing the routing protocol exchanges.

   An RAPD entry also includes the information identifying the expected
   automated key management protocol and provides associated information
   used for authentication by the automated key management protocol.

   For instance, in order to establish an IKE SA, the following
   information is needed:

   o  Identity of the local system to use

   o  Identities acceptable for the remote endpoint



Zhang, et al.            Expires April 24, 2014                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                    RAPD                      October 2013


   o  Credential to use for the local system

   o  Authentication information for the remote system; see Section 3.

   o  Lifetime information

   o  Acceptable transforms

   In order to establish a routing SA keyed by an IKE SA, the following
   information is needed:

   o  Peer and protocol

   o  Acceptable transforms

   Additional information is required for multicast policy.

3.  RAPD Authentication Information for IKEv2

   An RAPD entry needs to include enough authentication information so
   that the remote peer can be authenticated according to the pre-
   specified policies.  The required information tends to break down
   along the same lines as the credential types discussed in section 4
   of [I-D.ietf-karp-ops-model].

   For pre-shared keys, mutual authentication is obtained by using the
   same key in both directions.  In this case the credential for
   outbound authentication is a pre-shared key.  For inbound
   authentication, multiple acceptable credentials can be provided.

   For public keys used outside of authentication, authentication needs
   to happen in each direction.  Each peer needs a private key and
   potentially a certificate to send as a credential.  Each peer also
   needs a set of acceptable fingerprints for the remote key-management
   peer's key or certificate.

   When a PKI is used, each peer needs a private key and a certificate
   as a credential.  In addition, trust anchors and constraints on how
   to validate whether an asserted identifier is appropriate for the
   presented certificate are required.  An entry used with certificate-
   based authentication MAY include additional data to facilitate
   certificate revocation status, e.g., a pointer to a CRL repository or
   the name of an Online Certificate Status Protocol (OCSP) server.

4.  Organization and Lookup

   One open question is how to organize the RAPD.




Zhang, et al.            Expires April 24, 2014                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                    RAPD                      October 2013


   As described in Section 1, when processing an outgoing packet, the
   local system will try to find the proper key table entry using the
   peer and protocol information first.  If no proper key material can
   be found in the key table, the local system will try to use the same
   information to find a proper RAPD entry.

   When an incoming packet belongs a automated key management exchange,
   the RAPD may be consulted by the automated key management mechanism
   to find out the necessary knowledge to perform authentication and
   authorization.  Use IKEv2 as an example.  When a local system
   receives an IKE_INIT packet, it needs to perform the IKE_INIT
   exchange with its remote peer without consulting the RAPD, since at
   this stage, the incoming packet does not contain any information to
   prove the peer's identity.  Then, when receiving an IKE_AUTH packet,
   the local system can use the remote peer's IKE ID from the
   Identification Payload, the protocol ID in the Proposal, and the peer
   information from the Traffic Selector.  Therefore, the automated key
   management mechanism can use peer and protocol information to look up
   the associated policies in the key table.  Note that it is not
   mandated in the key table to use the protocol IDs specified in
   [I-D.mahesh-karp-rkmp] to present security or routing protocols in
   the protocol field.  Therefore, the automated key management
   mechanism needs to transfer the information into the key table
   compatible format before using them to find the RAPD entry.

   One approach to organizing the RAPD could be to separate incoming and
   outgoing policies and use two different databases.  This is highly
   undesirable from an operational standpoint.  In general it is not
   possible to know ahead of time which router will initiate a key
   management exchange.  For this reason, it is strongly desired that
   the policy be symmetric.  That is, an association SHOULD successfully
   authenticate and be authorized independent of which party initiates
   the association.  There are exceptions; for example, in a multicast
   association, one router MAY be configured not to take on the role of
   a Group Controller/Key Server (GCKS) and such a router could not
   respond to key-management associations.

   The second approach is to have a single database indexed by the tuple
   containing peer and protocol as well as the set of acceptable remote
   identifiers.

   The third approach is to have two databases.  One contains the peer,
   protocol, unicast key management endpoint and a policy identifier.
   The second database contains the remaining information along with a
   policy identifier.  It is indexed by the policy identifier and by the
   set of acceptable remote identifiers.  This layout is very similar to
   the breakdown between IPsec's SPD and PAD.




Zhang, et al.            Expires April 24, 2014                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                    RAPD                      October 2013


   All of these approaches assume that the set of acceptable remote
   identifiers is enumerated in the policy database.  In a PKI this may
   be undesirable.

5.  IANA Considerations

   This document makes no request of IANA.

   Note to RFC Editor: this section may be removed on publication as an
   RFC.

6.  Security Considerations

7.  Acknowledgements

8.  References

8.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

8.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.ietf-karp-crypto-key-table]
              Housley, R., Polk, T., Hartman, S., and D. Zhang,
              "Database of Long-Lived Symmetric Cryptographic Keys",
              draft-ietf-karp-crypto-key-table-08 (work in progress),
              July 2013.

   [I-D.ietf-karp-ops-model]
              Hartman, S. and D. Zhang, "Operations Model for Router
              Keying", draft-ietf-karp-ops-model-09 (work in progress),
              October 2013.

   [I-D.mahesh-karp-rkmp]
              Jethanandani, M., Weis, B., Patel, K., Zhang, D., Hartman,
              S., Chunduri, U., Tian, A., and J. Touch, "Negotiation for
              Keying Pairwise Routing Protocols in IKEv2", draft-mahesh-
              karp-rkmp-04 (work in progress), February 2013.

   [RFC4301]  Kent, S. and K. Seo, "Security Architecture for the
              Internet Protocol", RFC 4301, December 2005.

Authors' Addresses






Zhang, et al.            Expires April 24, 2014                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                    RAPD                      October 2013


   Dacheng Zhang
   Huawei

   Email: zhangdacheng@huawei.com


   Sam Hartman
   Painless Security

   Email: hartmans@painless-security.com


   William Atwood
   Concordia University/CSE
   1455 de Maisonneuve Blvd, West
   Montreal, QC  H3G 1M8
   Canada

   Phone: +1(514)848-2424 ext3046
   Email: william.atwood@concordia.ca
   URI:   http://users.encs.concordia.ca/~bill






























Zhang, et al.            Expires April 24, 2014                 [Page 7]
