


Network Working Group                                           J. Zhang
Internet-Draft                                                     Z. Li
Intended status: Standards Track                     Huawei Technologies
Expires: April 24, 2014                                 October 21, 2013


                      Selective Multicast in EVPN
               draft-zhang-l2vpn-evpn-selective-mcast-00

Abstract

   [I-D.ietf-l2vpn-evpn] describes a solution of carrying multicast
   traffic using replication ingress and inclusive trees (P2MP LSPs).
   It does not provide the usage of selective trees for carrying
   multicast traffic.  This document provides protocols and procedures
   by which an selective tree can be used to carry traffic belonging
   only to a specified set of IP multicast streams from one or more EVPN
   instances.

Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 24, 2014.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.





Zhang & Li               Expires April 24, 2014                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                                              October 2013


   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

   This document may contain material from IETF Documents or IETF
   Contributions published or made publicly available before November
   10, 2008.  The person(s) controlling the copyright in some of this
   material may not have granted the IETF Trust the right to allow
   modifications of such material outside the IETF Standards Process.
   Without obtaining an adequate license from the person(s) controlling
   the copyright in such materials, this document may not be modified
   outside the IETF Standards Process, and derivative works of it may
   not be created outside the IETF Standards Process, except to format
   it for publication as an RFC or to translate it into languages other
   than English.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   3.  BGP EVPN NLRI Extensions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     3.1.  Selective Multicast A-D Route . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     3.2.  Leaf A-D Route  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   4.  Optimizing Multicast Distribution via Selective Trees . . . .   5
     4.1.  Originating Selective Multicast A-D Routes  . . . . . . .   5
       4.1.1.  Construction of the Selective Multicast A-D Route . .   5
       4.1.2.  P-Tunnel Identification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
         4.1.2.1.  P2MP LSPs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
         4.1.2.2.  MP2MP LSPs  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     4.2.  Receiving Selective Multicast A-D Route by PE . . . . . .   7
   5.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   6.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   7.  Reference . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9

1.  Introduction

   [I-D.ietf-l2vpn-evpn] describes a solution of carrying multicast
   traffic using replication ingress and inclusive trees (P2MP LSPs).
   It does not provide the usage of selective trees for carrying
   multicast traffic.  When replication ingress or inclusive tree is
   used to carry multicast traffic, it is likely that a PE may receive



Zhang & Li               Expires April 24, 2014                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                                              October 2013


   multicast traffic for a multicast stream even if it doesn't have any
   receivers that are interested in receiving traffic for that stream.
   If a particular stream has a large amount of traffic, it may result
   in highly non-optimal bandwidth utilization in the provider network.
   To improve bandwidth utilization for IP multicast streams, this
   document provides protocols and procedures by which an selective tree
   can be used to carry traffic belonging only to a specified set of IP
   multicast streams from one or more EVPN instances.

   Optimizing multicast distribution needs the binding of particular IP
   multicast stream to an selective tree and the explicit tracking of
   particular IP multicast stream.  The granularity of binding to an
   selective tree is <RD, PE, S, G> where S is an IP multicast source
   address and G is an IP multicast group address.  Wildcard sources and
   wildcard groups are supported.

   This document assumes that the exchanging of BGP messages is within
   the AS.

   Section 3 describes the needed extensions of the current defined BGP
   EVPN NLRI.  Section 4 describes the procedures of binding and
   explicit tracking.

2.  Terminology

   This document uses terminology described in [I-D.ietf-l2vpn-evpn].

3.  BGP EVPN NLRI Extensions

   This section describes the encoding of the BGP EVPN NLRI extensions
   required by this document.

   This document defines the following three new route type of EVPN
   NLRI:

      + 5 - Selective Multicast Auto-Discovery (A-D) Route

      + 6 - Leaf Auto-Discovery (A-D) Route

   The detailed encoding are described in subsequent sections.

3.1.  Selective Multicast A-D Route

   An Selective Multicast A-D Route type specific EVPN NLRI consists of
   the following:

                 +---------------------------------------+
                 |      RD   (8 octets)                  |



Zhang & Li               Expires April 24, 2014                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                                              October 2013


                 +---------------------------------------+
                 |      Ethernet Tag ID (4 octets)       |
                 +---------------------------------------+
                 |  Multicast Source Length (1 octet)    |
                 +---------------------------------------+
                 |    Multicast Source (Variable)        |
                 +---------------------------------------+
                 |    Multicast Group Length (1 octet)   |
                 +---------------------------------------+
                 |     Multicast Group (Variable)        |
                 +---------------------------------------+
                 |    Originating Router's IP Addr       |
                 +---------------------------------------+


   The RD and the Ethernet Tag ID are encoded as described in
   [I-D.ietf-l2vpn-evpn].

   The Multicast Source field contains the C-S address i.e the address
   of the multicast source.  If the Multicast Source field contains an
   IPv4 address, then the value of the Multicast Source Length field is
   32.  If the Multicast Source field contains an IPv6 address, then the
   value of the Multicast Source Length field is 128.  The value of the
   Multicast Source Length field may be set to 0 to indicate a wildcard.

   The Multicast Group field contains the C-G address i.e. the address
   of the multicast group.  If the Multicast Group field contains an
   IPv4 address, then the value of the Multicast Group Length field is
   32.  If the Multicast Group field contains an IPv6 address, then the
   value of the Multicast Group Length field is 128.  The Multicast
   Group Length field may be set to 0 to indicate a wildcard.

   Usage of Selective Multicast A-D Route is described in section 4.

3.2.  Leaf A-D Route

   A Leaf A-D Route type specific EVPN NLRI consists of the following:

                 +---------------------------------------+
                 |        Route Key (variable)           |
                 +---------------------------------------+
                 |     Originating Router's IP Addr      |
                 +---------------------------------------+


   Leaf A-D routes may be originated as a result of processing a
   received Selective Multicast A-D route.  A Leaf A-D route is
   originated in these situations only if the received route has a PMSI



Zhang & Li               Expires April 24, 2014                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                                              October 2013


   Tunnel attribute whose "Leaf Information Required" bit is set to 1,
   and the Route Key of the Leaf A-D route is set to the NLRI of the
   received route.

   Usage of Leaf A-D routes is described in Section 4.

4.  Optimizing Multicast Distribution via Selective Trees

   This section describes the binding (C-S, C-G) to an Selective Tree
   using Selective Multicast A-D Route and the explicit tracking of the
   IP multicast stream using Leaf A-D Route.

4.1.  Originating Selective Multicast A-D Routes

   The ingress PE informs all the PEs that are on the path to receivers
   of the (C-S, C-G) of the binding of the Selective tree to the (C-S,
   C-G), using Selective Multicast A-D Route.  The format of the NLRI of
   this route is described in section 3.  The following describes
   procedures for originating Selective Multicast A-D Route by a PE.

4.1.1.  Construction of the Selective Multicast A-D Route

   The settings of the RD, Ethernet Tag ID, Originating Router's IP
   address, Next Hop field of the MP_REACH_NLRI, RT attributes of the
   Selective Multicast A-D Route are the same as the Inclusive Multicast
   Ethernet Tag Route described in [I-D.ietf-l2vpn-evpn].

   The Multicast Source field MUST contain the source address associated
   with the C-multicast stream, and the Multicast Source Length field is
   set appropriately to reflect this.  If the source address is a
   wildcard the source address is set to 0.

   The Multicast Group field MUST contain the group address associated
   with the C-multicast stream, and the Multicast Group Length field is
   set appropriately to reflect this.  If the group address is a
   wildcard the group address is set to 0.

4.1.2.  P-Tunnel Identification

   The selective multicast A-D route MUST carry a "PMSI Tunnel
   Attribute" as specified in [RFC6514].  Depending on the technology
   used for the selective tree for the EVPN instance on the PE, the PMSI
   Tunnel attribute of the selective multicast A-D Route is constructed
   differently.

4.1.2.1.  P2MP LSPs





Zhang & Li               Expires April 24, 2014                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                                              October 2013


   The P-Tunnel attribute MUST contain the identity of the tree (note
   that the PE could create the identity of the tree prior to the actual
   instantiation of the tree).

   If in order to establish the P-Multicast tree the PE needs to know
   the leaves of the tree, then the PE obtains this information from the
   leaf A-D routes received from other PEs (as other PEs originate leaf
   A-D routes in response to receiving the selective multicast A-D
   route) by setting the Leaf Information Required flag in the PMSI
   Tunnel attribute to 1.  This enables explicit tracking for the
   multicast stream(s) advertised by the selective multicast A-D route.

   If a PE originates Selective Multicast A-D routes with the Leaf
   Information Required flag in the PMSI Tunnel attribute set to 1, then
   the PE MUST be (auto)configured with an import Route Target, which
   controls acceptance of leaf A-D routes by the PE.  This Route Target
   is IP address specific.  The Global Administrator field of this Route
   Target MUST be set to the IP address carried in the Next Hop of all
   the selective multicast A-D routes advertised by this PE (if the PE
   uses different Next Hops, then the PE MUST be (auto)configured with
   multiple import RTs, one per each such Next Hop).  The Local
   Administrator field of this Route Target MUST be set to 0.

   A PE MAY aggregate two or more selective trees originated by the PE
   onto the same P-Multicast tree.  If the PE already advertises
   selective multicast A-D routes for these selective trees, then
   aggregation requires the PE to re-advertise these routes.  The re-
   advertised routes MUST be the same as the original ones, except for
   the PMSI tunnel attribute.  If the PE has not previously advertised
   selective multicast A-D routes for these selective trees, then the
   aggregation requires the PE to advertise (new) selective multicast
   A-D routes for these selective trees.  The PMSI Tunnel attribute in
   the newly advertised/re-advertised routes MUST carry the identity of
   the P-Multicast tree that aggregates the selective trees.  If at
   least some of the selective trees aggregated onto the same
   P-Multicast tree belong to different EVPN instances, then all these
   routes MUST carry an MPLS upstream assigned label [RFC5331].  If all
   these aggregated selective trees belong to the same EVPN, then the
   routes MAY carry an MPLS upstream assigned label [RFC5331].  The
   labels can be assigned per EVPN instance or per selective multicast
   A-D route.

4.1.2.2.  MP2MP LSPs








Zhang & Li               Expires April 24, 2014                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                                              October 2013


   Construction of MP2MP LSPs P-Tunnel identification is the same as
   specified in 6.1.2.1 except the upstream assigned label
   demultiplexing the EVPN multicast traffic received over the selective
   tree.  The allocation of this label will be described in future
   version.

4.2.  Receiving Selective Multicast A-D Route by PE

   When a PE receives a BGP Update message that carries an Selective
   Multicast A-D route such that (a) at least one of the Route Targets
   of the route matches one of the import Route Targets configured for a
   particular EVI on the local PE, (b) the BGP route selection
   determines that this is the best route with respect to the NLRI
   carried by the route, and (c) the multicast state snooped on the PE-
   CE interfaces match the Selective Multicast A-D route.  (The
   procedures of determining the multicast snooped state will be
   described in a future version.), the PE performs the following:

    + If the Tunnel Type in the PMSI Tunnel attribute is set to P2MP
      LSP, the PE SHOULD join the P-Multicast tree whose identity is
      carried in the PMSI Tunnel attribute.  (The procedures of building
      P2MP LSP are described in [RFC6388].).  If the PMSI Tunnel
      attribute does not carry a label, then all packets that are
      received on the P-Multicast tree, as identified by the PMSI Tunnel
      attribute, are forwarded using the EVI that has at least one of
      its import Route Targets that matches one of the Route Targets of
      the received Selective Multicast A-D route.  If the PMSI Tunnel
      attribute carries an MPLS label, then the egress PE MUST treat
      this as an upstream-assigned label, and all packets that are
      received on the P-Multicast tree, as identified by the PMSI Tunnel
      attribute, with that upstream label are forwarded using the EVI
      that has at least one of its import Route Target that matches one
      of the Route Targets of the received Selective Multicast A-D
      route.

    + The process in case of Tunnel Type set to mLDP MP2MP LSP will be
      described in future version.

   If the received Selective Multicast A-D route has a PMSI Tunnel
   attribute with the Leaf Information Required flag set to 1, then the
   PE originates a Leaf A-D route constructed as follows (The format of
   the NLRI of the Leaf A-D route is described in section 3.).

    + The route carries a single EVPN NLRI with the Route Key field set
      to the EVPN NLRI of the Selective Multicast A-D route received
      from that neighbor and the Originating Router's IP address set to
      the IP address of the PE (this MUST be a routable IP address).




Zhang & Li               Expires April 24, 2014                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                                              October 2013


    + The PE constructs an IP-based Route Target Extended Community by
      placing the IP address carried in the Next Hop of the received
      Selective Multicast A-D route in the Global Administrator field of
      the Community, with the Local Administrator field of this
      Community set to 0 and setting the Extended Communities attribute
      of the Leaf A-D route to that Community.

    + The Next Hop field of the MP_REACH_NLRI attribute of the route
      MUST be set to the same IP address as the one carried in the
      Originating Router's IP Address field of the route.

    + To constrain the distribution scope of this route, the route MUST
      carry the NO_ADVERTISE BGP Community [RFC1977].

    + Once the Leaf A-D route is constructed, the PE advertises this
      route into IBGP.

   In addition to the procedures specified above, the PE MUST set up its
   forwarding path to receive traffic, for each multicast stream in the
   matching snooped state, from the tunnel advertised by the Selective
   Multicast A-D route.

   When a new snooped state is created by a PE then the PE MUST first
   determine if there is a Selective Multicast route that matches the
   snooped state.  If such a Selective Multicast A-D route is found,
   then the PE MUST follow the procedures described in this section, for
   that particular Selective Multicast A-D route.  If later on the
   snooped state ages out and is deleted from the PE, the PE SHOULD
   withdraw the leaf A-D route that it had originated in response to the
   Selective Multicast A-D route, and SHOULD prune itself off the
   associated selective tree.

   The snooped state is said to "match" the Selective Multicast A-D
   route if any of the following is true:

    + The Selective Multicast A-D route carries (C-S, C-G) and the
      snooped state is for (C-S, C-G) or for (C-*, C-G), OR

    + The Selective Multicast A-D route carries (C-*, C-G) and (a) the
      snooped state is for (C-*, C-G) OR (b) the snooped state is for at
      least one multicast join with the multicast group address equal to
      C-G and there doesn't exist another Selective Multicast A-D route
      that carries (CS, C-G) where C-S is the source address of the
      snooped state.

    + The Selective Multicast A-D route carries (C-S, C-*) and (a) the
      snooped state is for at least one multicast join with the
      multicast source address equal to C-S, and (b) there doesn't exist



Zhang & Li               Expires April 24, 2014                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                                              October 2013


      another Selective Multicast A-D route that carries (C-S, C-G)
      where C-G is the group address of the snooped state.

    + The Selective Multicast A-D route carries (C-*, C-*) and there is
      no other Selective Multicast A-D route that matches the snooped
      state as per the above conditions.

5.  IANA Considerations

   This document requires IANA to assign a new route type value for
   E-VPN NLRI.

6.  Security Considerations

   There are no additional security aspects beyond those of EVPN.

7.  Reference

   [I-D.ietf-l2vpn-evpn]
              Sajassi, A., Aggarwal, R., Henderickx, W., Balus, F.,
              Isaac, A., and J. Uttaro, "BGP MPLS Based Ethernet VPN",
              draft-ietf-l2vpn-evpn-04 (work in progress), July 2013.

   [RFC1977]  Schryver, V., "PPP BSD Compression Protocol", RFC 1977,
              August 1996.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC6388]  Wijnands, IJ., Minei, I., Kompella, K., and B. Thomas,
              "Label Distribution Protocol Extensions for Point-to-
              Multipoint and Multipoint-to-Multipoint Label Switched
              Paths", RFC 6388, November 2011.

   [RFC6514]  Aggarwal, R., Rosen, E., Morin, T., and Y. Rekhter, "BGP
              Encodings and Procedures for Multicast in MPLS/BGP IP
              VPNs", RFC 6514, February 2012.

Authors' Addresses

   Junlin Zhang
   Huawei Technologies
   Huawei Bld., No.156 Beiqing Rd.
   Beijing  100095
   China

   Email: jackey.zhang@huawei.com




Zhang & Li               Expires April 24, 2014                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft                                              October 2013


   Zhenbin Li
   Huawei Technologies
   Huawei Bld., No.156 Beiqing Rd.
   Beijing  100095
   China

   Email: lizhenbin@huawei.com












































Zhang & Li               Expires April 24, 2014                [Page 10]

