 



INTERNET-DRAFT                                              Mingui Zhang
Intended Status: Proposed Standard                              Jie Dong
Expires: May 12, 2013                                             Huawei
                                                          Beichuan Zhang
                                               The University of Arizona
                                                      Bithika Khargharia
                                                        Extreme Networks
                                                        November 8, 2012

                                    
                  Use Cases for Power-Aware Networks 
                   draft-zhang-panet-use-cases-01.txt

Abstract

   Power Aware NETwork (PANET) has attracted strong interest from both
   carriers and vendors. Several use cases are investigated in this
   document to exhibit the potential usage of PANET in both backbone and
   data center networks.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as
   Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html


Copyright and License Notice

   Copyright (c) 2012 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors. All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
 


Mingui Zhang              Expires May 12, 2013                  [Page 1]

INTERNET-DRAFT     Use Cases for Power-Aware Networks   November 8, 2012


   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document. Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document. Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1. Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.1. Conventions used in this document . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.2. Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2. Power Awareness in Backbone Networks  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     2.1. Use Case 1: Sleeping Links  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     2.2. Use Case 2: Composite Links . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   3. Power Aware in Data Center Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     3.1. Use Case 3: Server Consolidation  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.2. Use Case 4: Load Scheduling Among Multiple Sites  . . . . .  6
     3.3. Use Case 5: Elastic Network Infrastructure  . . . . . . . .  7
   6. Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   7. IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   8. References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     8.1. Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     8.2. Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   Author's Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9




















 


Mingui Zhang              Expires May 12, 2013                  [Page 2]

INTERNET-DRAFT     Use Cases for Power-Aware Networks   November 8, 2012


1. Introduction

   Networks are usually provisioned for peak hours and potential network
   failures and network devices are powered on all the time without
   consideration on energy efficient. In practice, however, the traffic
   load of a network is low most of the time and redundant network
   equipments are used for failure recovery occasionally.

   In the past years, vendors had paid a great effort on improving the
   network energy efficiency at the device level: when the traffic load
   is low, a network equipment should accordingly operate with less
   power draw. However, network equipments have never become fully power
   proportional. Even few or no traffic is carried, a powered-on network
   device draws a considerable amount of power, which means energy is
   being wasted. There is an explicit gap for idle network devices to be
   shut down or put into sleeping state to save more energy. In order to
   fill this gap, the network control plane and management system should
   become power aware (i.e., Power Aware NETwork, PANET) to coordinate
   network devices therefore the sleeping or off network devices do not
   bring disruption to the network. 

   The design space and problem areas of PANET is outlined in [PANET-
   problem]. The requirements for PANET is given in [PANET-
   requirements]. This documents investigated use cases on PANET which
   include both backbone networks and data center networks. As for the
   energy efficiency of backbone networks, only intra-domain use cases
   are considered. Trying to be energy efficient in the inter-domain
   scale seems technically feasible. But currently, energy efficient
   solutions can easily end up lack of business motivation. This
   document leaves them for future study. 

1.1. Conventions used in this document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].

1.2. Terminology

   PANET: Power Aware NETwork

2. Power Awareness in Backbone Networks

   The IETF Energy Management (eman) Working Group works on the
   management of power-aware network devices. Basically, the power
   states of power-aware network devices are reported and recorded in
   MIB. However, there is a gap on how to make use of this kind of data
   to achieve energy efficient networks. With energy aware control plane
 


Mingui Zhang              Expires May 12, 2013                  [Page 3]

INTERNET-DRAFT     Use Cases for Power-Aware Networks   November 8, 2012


   [power-control], it becomes possible to make use of these
   measurements and power control ability to achieve the energy
   efficiency of a whole network. This section lists several use cases
   for backbone networks.

   Take a router system as an example, the start-up of it may take
   several minutes and the stabilization of it may takes much longer
   time. It is unrealistic to switch off and on a whole node in backbone
   networks frequently to achieve energy efficient, so this document
   only investigates the cases in which links (i.e., links' attached
   components) are shut-down or put into sleeping state for energy
   conservation.

2.1. Use Case 1: Sleeping Links 

              +----------------+        +----------------+
              |Router          |        |          Router|
              |                |        |                |
              |                |        |                |
              |      +---------+        +---------+      |
              |      |Line-card|        |Line-card|      |
              |      |         |        |         |      |
              |      |     +---+  Link  +---+     |      |
              |      |     |NPU+--------+NPU|     |      |
              +------+-----+---+        +---+-----+------+

                   Figure 2.1: Power Aware Line-cards

   The power draw on line-cards occupies a great portion in the total
   power consumption of a whole routing system. For high-end routers,
   this portion may be higher than 50%.

   Network devices and their processing capacity are provisioned for
   worst cases such as traffic burst and busy hours. Most of the time,
   the network is lightly loaded. Unfortunately, the power consumption
   of network devices is not proportional to the traffic load on them.
   An extreme case is that even there is no load on them, there is still
   a considerable base power consumption. Unlike personal PCs which can
   be shut down or enter power saving modes (such as sleeping), network
   devices are powered on and running even there is no load on them.
   This reality means that the network is wasting lots of power.

   The conception that "a link is put into sleep state" is frequently
   mentioned. In this document, this conception is formalized as
   follows. The coupled end-points (such as interfaces, NPU or whole
   line-cards) attached to a idle link (as shown in Figure 2.1) enter
   the sleeping mode to save energy. 

 


Mingui Zhang              Expires May 12, 2013                  [Page 4]

INTERNET-DRAFT     Use Cases for Power-Aware Networks   November 8, 2012


   Traffic aggregation are used to create the opportunity for more links
   to become idle. This process can be automated through the control
   plane [power-control]. Traffic Engineering technique is qualified to
   achieve the this kind of traffic aggregation [GreenTE].

   The essentials of this use case:

   o  Devices to be Power Aware: Routers and their line-cards.

   o  What actions to take: NMS measures the traffic load and power
      profile of each link [eman]; Routers execute the green TE
      algorithm; Routers send out signals to trigger the sleeping/wake-
      up of a NPU on a line card. 

2.2. Use Case 2: Composite Links

   A composite link is a logical link composed of multiple physical [I-
   D.ietf-rtgwg-cl-requirement] links. The composite link attached end-
   points are responsible to map traffic onto the component links and
   maintain the state of the composite link. Power awareness can be
   applied to composite links as well. When the traffic volume on a
   composite link is low, some component links can be shut down to
   conserve energy consumption. When the traffic volume becomes high,
   the sleeping component links can be waken up to absorb the traffic
   load.

   Compared to use case 1, the advantage of executing energy saving for
   composite link is that the connectivity of the composite link does
   not suffer unless all the component links are sleeping. In this way,
   the control plane of the component link is not disrupted. When the
   end points of the composite link execute the energy conservation
   action, they can do it in a distributed way and decisions are made
   locally.

   The essentials of this use case:

   o  Devices to be Power Aware: Composite links attached end-points.

   o  What actions to take: NMS measures the traffic load and power
      profile of component links; Attached end-points adaptively put
      component links into sleeping state or wake them up according to
      the traffic load on the composite link. 

   Use case 1 and use case 2 may be combined in a real network to
   achieve more energy saving.

3. Power Aware in Data Center Networks

 


Mingui Zhang              Expires May 12, 2013                  [Page 5]

INTERNET-DRAFT     Use Cases for Power-Aware Networks   November 8, 2012


   Servers and network devices (ICT equipments) are intensively placed
   in Data Centers. In comparison with ISP backbone networks, the
   operating of Data Center Networks are more power hungry. The growing
   amount of energy consumed by a Data Center has led to high operating
   costs. The work load of a data center varies due to the effect of
   "follow-the-sun". There is a significant opportunity to conserve the
   energy consumption through right-sizing the ICT infrastructure when
   the work load is low.

   Although non-ICT equipments, such as lighting and air conditioners,
   in a Data Center consumes a notable large amount of energy as well,
   this section concentrate on talking about right-sizing the ICT
   infrastructure for energy conservation. Energy conservation of non-
   ICT equipments are out of the scope of this document.

3.1. Use Case 3: Server Consolidation 

   With virtualization technology, Virtual Machines (VMs) can be
   consolidated to fewer physical servers while idled servers can be put
   into power saving mode or turned off to achieve energy conservation
   of the whole Data Center. Virtualization technology allows the
   administration of a Data Center Network respond rapidly to the
   fluctuating capacity requirements.

   Through monitoring of the work load and power profile, the Data
   Center Network Management System (Orchestrator) can judge in which
   hours workload is high and in which hours workload is low. For
   example, nights are generally off-peak hours in which workload is at
   low level. Virtual machines can be moved to fewer servers therefore
   idle servers can powered off or put into sleep to save energy. Before
   peak hours (e.g., in the morning), sleeping or powered off servers
   should be waken up to accommodate more active virtual machines
   (VMs).

   The essentials of this use case:

   o  Devices to be Power Aware: All servers in a data center.

   o  What actions to take: NMS measures the work load and power profile
      of servers; The orchestrator of a Data Center Network adaptively
      triggers the actions of VM migration, the power-off and power-on
      of servers according to the workload.

3.2. Use Case 4: Load Scheduling Among Multiple Sites

   An enterprise may have multiple data centers which spread out in
   different geographic locations. Generally, the ICT resources in these
   data centers are well replicated and a job can be directed to any of
 


Mingui Zhang              Expires May 12, 2013                  [Page 6]

INTERNET-DRAFT     Use Cases for Power-Aware Networks   November 8, 2012


   them for execution. These data centers form a large distributed
   Internet scale systems and the price of power supply for them varies
   between two different locations. The operating cost of such a system
   highly depends on the load scheduling scheme. Being power aware, the
   system can map requests to locations where energy price is cheaper.  

   This use case makes use of the difference of the prices of power draw
   in different locations. The orchestrator of data centers (the NMS) is
   responsible for monitoring the power profile and work load of the ICT
   devices located in different data centers. 

   The essentials of this use case:

   o  Devices to be Power Aware: All ICT-equipments in a data center.

   o  What actions to take: ICT devices report their work load and power
      consumption profile to NMS. The orchestrator (NMS) of the Data
      Center Networks adaptively map the request onto sites in
      consideration of reducing the overall power bill of the system.

3.3. Use Case 5: Elastic Network Infrastructure

   Traffic load of a data center is generated by the work load on
   servers and applied on the network infrastructure. The changing work
   load determines that the traffic load varies as time goes on.
   However, network devices are always powered on even though the
   traffic load fluctuates, which wastes energy inevitably when the
   traffic load is low. 

   Ideally, the network infrastructure is elastic and can fit the
   traffic pattern with minimum subset to minimize the energy
   consumption of the network infrastructure. For now, Data Center
   Networks generally work at layer 2. So this use case should be
   realized through manipulating switching paths, in comparison with the
   power aware routing at layer 3. Openflow switches may be utilized to
   achieve this goal [ElasticTree]. 

   The essentials of this use case:

   o  Devices to be Power Aware: All network equipments in a data
      center.

   o  What actions to take: Network devices report their traffic load
      and power consumption profile to the NMS. The orchestrator (NMS)
      of a Data Center Network adaptively build the switching paths upon
      the network infrastructure. The idled links are put into power
      saving mode (e.g., sleeping), so that the network infrastructure
      becomes energy efficient.
 


Mingui Zhang              Expires May 12, 2013                  [Page 7]

INTERNET-DRAFT     Use Cases for Power-Aware Networks   November 8, 2012


6. Security Considerations

   This document raises no new security issues.

7. IANA Considerations

   No new registry is requested to be assigned by IANA. RFC Editor:
   please remove this section before publication.

8. References 

8.1. Normative References

   [PANET-problem] B. Zhang, J. Shi, J. Dong and M. Zhang, "draft-zhang-
             panet-problem-statement-01.txt", work in progress.

   [PANET-requirements] J. Dong, M. Zhang and B. Zhang, "draft-dong-
             panet-requirement-00.txt", work in progress.

   [power-control] A. Retana, R. White,  M. Paul, "A Framework and
             Requirements for Energy Aware Control Planes", draft-
             retana-rtgwg-eacp-00.txt, work in progress.

   [eman] IETF, "Energy Management Working Group Charter", 2012,
             <http://datatracker.ietf.org/wg/eman/charter/>.

   [I-D.ietf-rtgwg-cl-requirement] Villamizar, C., McDysan, D., Ning,
             S., Malis, A., and L. Yong, "Requirements for MPLS Over a
             Composite Link", draft-ietf-rtgwg-cl-requirement-07 (work
             in progress), June 2012.

8.2. Informative References

   [GreenTE] Zhang, M. and et al. , "GreenTE: Power-Aware Traffic
             Engineering", ICNP 2010.

   [Rate-Adaptation] S. Nedevschi, L. Popa, G. Iannaccone, S. Ratnasamy,
             and D. Wetherall, "Reducing Network Energy Consumption via
             Sleeping and Rate-Adaptation," in Proceedings of USENIX
             NSDI, 2008.

   [ElasticTree] B. Heller, S. Seetharaman, P. Mahadevan, Y. Yiakoumis,
             P. Sharma, S. Banerjee, and N. McKeown, "ElasticTree:
             Saving Energy in Data Center Networks," in Proceedings of
             USENIX NSDI, 2010.



 


Mingui Zhang              Expires May 12, 2013                  [Page 8]

INTERNET-DRAFT     Use Cases for Power-Aware Networks   November 8, 2012


Author's Addresses


   Mingui Zhang
   Huawei Technologies Co.,Ltd
   Huawei Building, No.156 Beiqing Rd.
   Beijing 100095 P.R. China
   	
   Email: zhangmingui@huawei.com

   Jie Dong
   Huawei Technologies Co.,Ltd
   Huawei Building, No.156 Beiqing Rd.
   Beijing 100095 P.R. China
   	
   Email: jie.dong@huawei.com

   Beichuan Zhang
   The University of Arizona

   Email: bzhang@cs.arizona.edu

   Bithika Khargharia 
   Extreme Networks

   bithika@gmail.com

























Mingui Zhang              Expires May 12, 2013                  [Page 9]
