Network Working Group                                       Fatai Zhang 
Internet-Draft                                               Xian Zhang 
Intended status: Informational                                Young Lee 
                                                                 Huawei 
                                                         Ramon Casellas 
                                                                   CTTC 
                                                 Oscar Gonzalez de Dios 
                                                         Telefonica I+D 
                                                     
                                                                  
Expires: April 17, 2013                                October 18, 2012 
                                      


                                    
        Applicability of Stateful Path Computation Element (PCE)  
                                      
                  draft-zhang-pce-stateful-pce-app-02.txt 


Status of this Memo 

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with   
   the provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79. 

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering   
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that   
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-   
   Drafts. 

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other 
   documents at any   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts 
   as reference   material or to cite them other than as "work in 
   progress." 

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at   
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt. 

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at   
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 17, 2013. 

    

Abstract 

 
 
 
Zhang                   Expires January 2013                  [Page 1] 

draft-zhang-pce-stateful-pce-app-02.txt                    October 2012 
    

    

   The Path Computation Element (PCE) provides a solution for Traffic 
   Engineering (TE) based path calculation in large, multi-domain, 
   multi-region, or multi-layer networks. Depending on whether a PCE 
   keeps information about LSPs and reserved resource usage in the 
   network or not, it can be categorized as either stateful or 
   stateless. 

   This memo describes general considerations for stateful PCE(s) and 
   examines its applicability through a number of typical scenarios. It 
   shows how stateful PCE(s) can be applied to facilitate these 
   applications. PCEP extensions required for stateful PCE usage are 
   covered in separate document(s). 

Conventions used in this document 

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [RFC2119]. 

Table of Contents 

    
   Table of Contents .............................................. 2 
   1. Introduction ................................................ 3 
   2. General Considerations....................................... 5 
      2.1. Architectural Considerations............................ 5 
      2.2. LSP State Synchronization............................... 5 
         2.2.1. Single Domain...................................... 6 
         2.2.2. Multi-domain....................................... 6 
         2.2.3. Multi-layer........................................ 8 
      2.3. PCE Survivability/Reliability........................... 8 
      2.4. Delegation and Policy................................... 9 
         2.4.1. Use of Under-construction LSPs Information......... 9 
   3. Application Scenarios....................................... 11 
      3.1. Impairment-Aware Routing and Wavelength Assignment (IA-RWA)
       ........................................................... 11 
      3.2. Defragmentation in Flexible Grid Networks ..............12 
      3.3. Recovery .............................................. 13 
         3.3.1. Protection........................................ 13 
         3.3.2. Restoration....................................... 14 
      3.4. SRLG Diversity ........................................ 15 
      3.5. Maintenance of Virtual Network Topology (VNT).......... 15 
      3.6. Global Concurrent Optimization (GCO)................... 16 
      3.7. Point-to-Multipoint (P2MP) Application................. 16 
      3.8. Time-based Scheduling.................................. 17 
   4. Manageability Considerations................................ 17 
 
 
Zhang                    Expires April 2013                   [Page 2] 

draft-zhang-pce-stateful-pce-app-02.txt                    October 2012 
    

      4.1. Information and Data Models............................ 18 
   5. Security Considerations..................................... 18 
   6. References ................................................. 18 
      6.1. Normative References................................... 18 
      6.2. Informative References................................. 18 
   7. Contributors' Address....................................... 20 
   Authors' Addresses ............................................ 21 
    
    

1. Introduction 

   [RFC 4655] defines the architecture for a Path Computation Element 
   (PCE)-based model for the computation of Multiprotocol Label 
   Switching (MPLS) and Generalized MPLS (GMPLS) Traffic Engineering 
   Label Switched Paths (TE LSPs). To perform such a constrained 
   computation, a PCE stores the network topology (i.e., TE links and 
   nodes) and resource information (i.e., TE attributes) in its TE 
   Database (TED). To request path computation services to a PCE, [RFC 
   5440] defines the PCE Communication Protocol (PCEP) for 
   communications between a Path Computation Client (PCC) and a PCE, or 
   between two PCEs. A PCC can initiate a path computation request to a 
   PCE through a Path Computation Request (PCReq) message, and then the 
   PCE will return the computed path to the requesting PCC in response 
   to a previously received PCReq message through a PCEP Path 
   Computation Reply (PCRep) message.  

   As per [RFC 4655], a PCE can be either stateful or stateless. 
   Compared to a stateless PCE, a stateful PCE stores not only the 
   network states, but also the set of computed paths and reserved 
   resources in use in the network. In other words, the ''state'' in a 
   stateful PCE is determined not only by the TED but also by the set 
   of active LSPs and their corresponding reserved resources. 
   Furthermore, a stateful PCE might also retain the information of 
   LSPs under construction in order to reduce resource contention. Such 
   augmented state allows the PCE to compute constrained paths while 
   considering individual LSPs and their interaction. Note that 
   [RFC4655] further specifies that the TED contains link state and 
   bandwidth availability as distributed by the IGPs or collected via 
   other methods. Even if such information can provide increased 
   granularity and more detail, it is not state information in the PCE 
   context and so a model that uses it is still described as a 
   stateless PCE.  

   PCE capability is specified for both MPLS and GMPLS networks 
   [RFC4655]. Although initial efforts only covers MPLS in [RFC5440], 
   [RFc5441] PCEP extension in support of GMPLS is currently being 
   standardized [PCEP-GMPLS]. Therefore, stateful extension of PCE 
 
 
Zhang                    Expires April 2013                   [Page 3] 

draft-zhang-pce-stateful-pce-app-02.txt                    October 2012 
    

   should also cover both types of networks. For example, transport 
   networks, such as SDH, OTN and WDM, should be able to take advantage 
   of stateful PCE ability for a variety of purposes, such as traffic 
   optimization. 

   As described in section 6.8 of [RFC 4655], there are many 
   applications which can benefit from stateful PCE(s), e.g.: 

   o Minimum perturbation: stateful PCE(s) can minimize the number of 
   existing TE LSPs that are affected and preempted by a higher-
   priority TE LSP request in a crowded network. 

   o Virtual Network Topology (VNT) maintenance: the information of 
   existing LSPs in the higher layer is used as an input for setting 
   up/tearing down the LSPs in the lower layer (i.e., VNT modification). 

   Besides these scenarios, there are some additional scenarios that 
   should be investigated further, especially for GMPLS networks. For 
   instance, in impairment-aware Wavelength Switched Optical Networks 
   (WSON) [WSON-Impairment], stateful PCEs could be used to perform 
   Impairment-Aware Routing and Wavelength Assignment (IA-RWA) 
   procedures. In this case, PCE(s) need to know the detailed 
   information of the existing LSPs so that the new LSP(s) will not 
   impact them. Such PCE(s) would maintain the existing LSPs states 
   (e.g., route, wavelength and speed) to perform impairment aware RWA 
   procedures simpler and with less protocol overhead.  

   [RFC 4655] also discusses potential scalability and synchronization 
   issues in order to implement stateful PCE(s). The main problem 
   pointed out by [RFC 4655] is that a PCE would be constrained if the 
   states of all the TE LSPs in a network are to be maintained by a PCE. 
   Moreover, such state, when there are multiple PCEs, needs to be 
   properly synchronized. These issues are especially relevant in 
   packet networks, such as MPLS-TE networks, given a potentially large 
   number of LSPs. Nonetheless, it is expected that in transport 
   networks, such as OTN networks, the number of the LSPs will be much 
   smaller, which makes stateful PCEs more applicable. Finally, with 
   the increasing power and memory of the hardware platforms that a PCE 
   may run, the number of LSPs that can be managed by a PCE is 
   significantly large. Hence, there is lesser scaling issue for a PCE 
   to store all the LSPs' states, especially for a transport network.  

   This document presents general considerations for stateful PCE(s) 
   and several examples of its application scenarios. It exhibits the 
   utility of stateful PCE(s) in effective support of these 
   applications to obtain better performance. Protocol specific 
   extensions are covered in separate documents [stateful-PCEP-mpls], 
   [stateful-PCE-gmpls].  
 
 
Zhang                    Expires April 2013                   [Page 4] 

draft-zhang-pce-stateful-pce-app-02.txt                    October 2012 
    

2. General Considerations 

2.1. Architectural Considerations 

   Several PCE architectures are described in Section 5 of [RFC4655]. A 
   stateful PCE needs to maintain a large amount of data and 
   potentially incur in a very high amount of control plane overhead. 
   Moreover, there might be high computational demands on stateful PCE 
   entities to effectively support the applications listed in Section 3. 
   Therefore, the composite PCE architecture is NOT RECOMMENDED to 
   support stateful PCEs. It does not exclude the possibility that 
   multiple PCEs with different capabilities are included in the 
   network. For example, both stateless and stateful PCEs can co-exist 
   to be in charge of path computation of different types. In all cases, 
   the stateful capability of PCE should be made known within the 
   domain. 

2.2. LSP State Synchronization 

   As suggested by the definition, a stateful PCE maintains two 
   databases for path computation. The first one is the Traffic 
   Engineering Database (TED) which includes the topology and resource 
   in the network. TED can be obtained through participating in routing 
   distribution of TE information or other means as explained in 
   Section 6.7 of [RFC4655].  

   The other database is the LSP state Database (LSP-DB), in which a 
   PCE stores attributes of all existing LSPs in the network, such as 
   payload signal, switching types and bandwidth/resource usage etc.  

   In order for PCE to support GMPLS control plane, [RFC5440] needs 
   extensions with regard to the features of GMPLS networks. Similarly, 
   for LSP state synchronization, the attributes of LSP pertaining to 
   GMPLS should be captured in PCECP extensions.  

   A stateful PCE should gather the LSP information either from the 
   network management system (NMS) or from the nodes in the network. 
   For a NMS-based PCE, if the PCE is not co-located with the NMS, a 
   standard communication protocol is needed for LSP state 
   synchronization; otherwise, proprietary APIs can be used. If a PCE 
   relies on network nodes for state synchronization, the strategies 
   may vary depending on the network scenarios in which the PCE is 
   applied to (i.e., single domain, multiple domain or multi-layer 
   networks.) as well as the adoption of PCE computation model.  




 
 
Zhang                    Expires April 2013                   [Page 5] 

draft-zhang-pce-stateful-pce-app-02.txt                    October 2012 
    

2.2.1. Single Domain 

   In a single domain network, LSP state information is maintained 
   locally by the nodes initiating LSP(s). Therefore, PCE(s) should 
   gather the LSP state information either passively or actively from 
   the nodes in the network they have visibility. With a centralized 
   stateful PCE computation model, it is straightforward that all nodes 
   in the domain could communicate with the PCE for its LSP-DB 
   synchronization. As for distributed stateful PCE computation model 
   (i.e., there are multiple stateful PCEs in the network), there are 
   several alternatives for synchronization: 

   o Every node can update the PCE LSP-DBs by sending the LSP state 
   information to each of the PCEs in the network separately.  

   o Another feasible strategy is to choose one of the PCEs (i.e., a 
   designated PCE) for synchronization with all the nodes in the 
   network and the designated PCE also updates the LSP-DBs of all the 
   other PCE(s).  

   o A mixed of these two methods listed above can also be considered in 
   which more than one PCEs (e.g., two PCEs) are chosen to interact 
   directly with nodes in the network for state synchronization while 
   other PCEs are updated via these PCEs. 

2.2.2. Multi-domain 

   In a multi-domain network with a centralized PCE model, the LSP 
   state synchronization is similar to that of a single domain scenario. 
   If there is a stateful PCE responsible for performing path 
   computation within each domain, the LSPs (segments) traversing the 
   domain/layer should be synchronized to the PCE.  















 
 
Zhang                    Expires April 2013                   [Page 6] 

draft-zhang-pce-stateful-pce-app-02.txt                    October 2012 
    

   As described in [RFC4726], there are four methods to set up a LSP 
   traversing multiple domains: LSP nesting, contiguous LSP, LSP 
   stitching and hybrid methods, respectively. Hence, the ingress nodes 
   of a LSP traversing a domain may exist in another domain (e.g., a 
   contiguous LSP spanning across multiple domains). In this case, the 
   border node of a domain (i.e., an intermediate node of a LSP), could 
   be responsible for synchronizing the LSP segment in the domain to 
   the PCE.  
           +---------------------+---------------------+ 
           |      +----+         |       +----+        | 
           |      |PCE1|         |       |PCE2|        | 
           |      +----+         |       +----+        | 
           |      Domain 1       |       Domain 2      | 
           |  +--+   +--+   +--+ | +--+   +--+   +--+  | 
           |  |N1+---+N2+---+N3+---+N7+---+N8+---+N9|  | 
           |  +-++   +--+   +-++ | +-++   +--+   +-++  | 
           |    |             |  |   |             |   | 
           |    |             |  |   |             |   | 
           |  +-++   +--+   +-++ | +-+-+        +--++  | 
           |  |N4+---+N5+---+N6+---+N10+--------+N11|  | 
           |  +--+   +--+   +--+ | +---+        +---+  | 
           +---------------------+---------------------+ 
                                      
                      Figure 1: Multi-domain Scenario  
                                      
   Figure 1 shows an example of multi-domain scenario. Suppose a 
   contiguous LSP traverses N1-N2-N3-N7-N8-N9. Then in domain 1, the 
   ingress node of the LSP (i.e., N1) SHOULD synchronize the state of 
   the LSP segment N1-N2-N3 to PCE1. In domain 2, the border node (i.e., 
   N7) SHOULD synchronize the state of the LSP segment N7-N8-N9 to PCE2. 

   This approach requires that N7 has a PCEP adjacency with its PCE 
   (PCE2), i.e. setting up a PCEP session, for LSP state 
   synchronization purpose even if no path computation expansions are 
   required. N7 needs to check whether its RSVP-TE upstream node 
   belongs to another domain and notify the PCE when the LSP is 
   released. Note that synchronization may require detailed information 
   of the LSP (e.g., a full record route, the actual reserved resources) 
   which may only be available during Resv message processing. 

   Alternatively, inter-PCE communication strategy can be adopted for 
   LSP-DB synchronization. For instance, in Figure 1, upon the 
   notification of the setup of LSP N1-N2-N3-N7-N8-N9, PCE1 can 
   establish a PCEP adjacency to inform PCE2 to update its LSP-DB. This 
   method SHOULD be preferred only when PCE1 has sufficient and valid 
   information of the across-domain LSP, such as explicit LSP 
   information. Otherwise, the method in which the border node(s) are 
   in charge of LSP state update is more appropriate. For example, 
 
 
Zhang                    Expires April 2013                   [Page 7] 

draft-zhang-pce-stateful-pce-app-02.txt                    October 2012 
    

   Backward Recursive Path Computation (BRPC) [RFC5441] in conjunction 
   with path-key-based mechanism [RFC5520] can be adopted for inter-
   domain path computation. If this is the case with the example in 
   Figure 1, PCE1 only acquires a loose LSP path (e.g., N1-N2-N3-N7-
   KEY1, where KEY1 can be interpreted only by PCE2). Since it depends 
   on the local policy that how long a Path-Key should be stored, KEY1 
   might not be valid anymore when it is used by PCE1 for PCE2 LSP-DB 
   update notification. In this case, N7 will need to request PCE2 to 
   unlock the Path-Key in order to complete the signaling process. 
   Therefore, it is possible to use N7 instead for updating PCE2 LSP-DB. 

   Note that a timely synchronization of PCEs and these two databases 
   is a prerequisite to maintaining a good performance of a stateful 
   PCE.  

   To benefit from stateful PCE, during inter-domain path computation 
   procedure, PCC and cooperating PCEs should try to select stateful 
   PCE when multiple PCEs (stateful and stateless) are available in the 
   domain. This will enable correct end-to-end path computation using 
   of TED and LDP-DB in all domains. In case of unavailability of 
   stateful PCE, stateless PCE can still be used to provide the inter-
   domain path computation.  

   The inter-domain LSP synchronization as explained in this section is 
   still applicable if some domain does not have stateful PCE support. 
   All the domains with a stateful PCE present should synchronize their 
   segment at the least.  

2.2.3. Multi-layer 

   In multi-layer scenarios, one node/domain may have multiple 
   switching capabilities. For instance, Optical Transport Network (OTN) 
   nodes may have both of electrical (e.g., ODU1, ODU2, ODU3) and 
   optical switch capabilities. ODU LSPs and wavelength LSPs may be 
   established in an OTN network.  

   In such networks, a PCE may have the capability of performing single 
   layer path computation or multi-layer path computation. If a 
   stateful PCE has single layer path computation capability, the nodes 
   should be aware of information pertaining to which layer should be 
   synchronized to a specific PCE. Otherwise, the state of the LSPs in 
   all layers should be synchronized to the single stateful PCE.  

2.3. PCE Survivability/Reliability  

   Since a PCE supports a centralized path computation model, its 
   survivability should be carefully considered to ensure its proper 
   operation. If a multiple stateful PCE model is used and these PCEs 
 
 
Zhang                    Expires April 2013                   [Page 8] 

draft-zhang-pce-stateful-pce-app-02.txt                    October 2012 
    

   have a consistent view of the network, they can act as a hot backup 
   for each other. Otherwise, other backup strategies SHOULD be present 
   if only one PCE is deployed in the network to avoid a single point 
   of failure.  

2.4. Impact on Existing PCEP Operations 

   For a stateful PCE, LSP state information is readily available. Thus, 
   it is possible to allow a lighter information exchange of PCC and 
   PCE for path computation, as compared to that of a stateless PCE. 
   For instance, instead of detailed LSP information (such as route, 
   bandwidth information etc.), only an global unique identifier is 
   required for a stateful PCE to process the request. Therefore, due 
   to this simplification, modification of the operations specified in 
   [RFC5440] should be captured. This is specified in protocol-specific 
   extension document [stateful-PCEP-gmpls]. 

2.5. Delegation and Policy  

   Stateful PCE(s) are still subject to policies when performing path 
   computation based on TED and LSP-DB as well as in what concerns LSP-
   DB organization and maintenance.  

   For LSP-DB maintenance, a basic function of stateful PCEs that 
   SHOULD be supported is the ability to keep LSP state information in 
   the network within which they have visibility. This is termed as a 
   passive stateful PCE in [stateful-PCEP-mpls]. OPTIONALLY, a stateful 
   PCE can also extend its ability to support modification of LSP state 
   information. This can be realized by obtaining the temporal LSP 
   state control through negotiation with LSRs (i.e., LSP delegation). 
   This is termed as an active stateful PCE in [stateful-PCEP-mpls]. 
   Please note that LSP state delegation should comply with the policy 
   imposed by LSP state owner (i.e., LSRs) as well as the policy 
   imposed upon PCE(s). 

2.5.1. Use of Under-construction LSPs Information 

   The TED and/or LSP-DB information retained by a stateful PCE might 
   be out-of-syn. If this is the case, it might cause resource 
   contention when the PCE computes paths based of the out-of-date 
   information. Some sources of the potential TED/LSP-DB inaccuracy are: 

      o Control plane link latencies. Such latencies may be increased 
   due to several factors such as:  

         a) The time required for a PCC to obtain the paths after a 
         successful computation, requiring several Round-Trip-Times 
         (RTT) as per TCP; 
 
 
Zhang                    Expires April 2013                   [Page 9] 

draft-zhang-pce-stateful-pce-app-02.txt                    October 2012 
    

         b) The setup delay;  

         c) The time it takes for the PCE to update the local TED given 
         IGP update times; 

      o The routing and topology dissemination protocol (i.e. OSPF-TE), 
   which may operate with timers for LSA updates, to avoid excessive 
   control plane overhead. 

      o Concurrent requests that arrive during the time window, between 
   a response is sent and the LSP is setup and the topology changes are 
   flooded. Even for very fast networks with low latency, there may be 
   a batched of requests: several path computation requests within a 
   PCReq message or, in dynamic restoration without pre-planning, 
   several LSPs that need to be rerouted so as to avoid a failed link. 

      o Local PCE contention, where the PCE needs to concurrently serve      
   path computation requests and update the LSA (e.g. parsing OSPF-TE      
   LSA updates). A PCE implementation may need to find a trade-off,      
   when synchronizing access to the local TED: favor OSPF-TE parsing      
   which means that some path computations are slightly delayed to 
   allow an 'update' to be processed, or give strict priority to      
   computation requests. 

      In consequence, a PCE may assign the same (or a subset of the 
   same) resources to several requests. Thus, it may result in   
   contention and degraded network performance since it might cause 
   path setup failure and excessive crank-backs. 

      Therefore, information of the LSPs that are under construction 
   can be used together with the TED and LSP-DB by a stateful PCE to 
   reduce the path blocking and crank-backs issues. For example, the 
   PCE can retain some context from paths it has recently computed so 
   that it avoids suggesting the use of the same resources for other TE 
   LSPs, using heuristics / statistic or forecasting for improved 
   resource (i.e. wavelength) allocation.  In other words, a given PCE   
   implementation may decide to perform additional book-keeping and   
   management of resources strategies using the information of under 
   construction LSPs, deploying policies that prevent sub-optimal   
   allocations.  For instance, a PCE may compute the mean time used to   
   update the TED based on the previous calculated TE-LSPs and TED   
   updates.  Those kinds of mechanisms may reduce the TED inaccuracy 
   but in all cases they cannot infer the PCC use of the TE-path. 

 

 

 
 
Zhang                    Expires April 2013                  [Page 10] 

draft-zhang-pce-stateful-pce-app-02.txt                    October 2012 
    

3. Application Scenarios 

   In this section, several examples exploiting the capabilities of 
   stateful PCE(s) are presented, although the application of stateful 
   PCE(s) is not limited to them. In general, stateful PCE(s) can be 
   deployed for applications where LSP state as well as traffic 
   engineering information in the network are necessary inputs to 
   achieve one or multiple of the following goals: 

   o  Improving the performance such as reducing network blocking 
      probability, achieving load balancing, improve network resources 
      utilization or increasing the route computation success rate; 

   o  Reducing the complexity of the relevant procedure(s) associated 
      with the application(s); 

   o  Lowering resource consumption; 

   As discussed in [PSU-WSON] and [LCA-Stateless], some of the 
   objectives can be achieved through limited LSP awareness in 
   stateless PCE by exploiting objects defined in existing protocols, 
   such as the SVEC object defined in [RFC5440] and/or XRO object 
   defined in [RFC5521]. These methods are considered as transitional 
   solutions because of two reasons. Firstly, these methods only have 
   local/partial/temporal LSP related information and thus have limited 
   utility in terms of achieving the goals, particularly for objectives 
   set at a network level. Secondly, it might incur a substantial 
   amount of overhead since it requires frequent message exchanges 
   among PCC and PCE entities. 

3.1. Impairment-Aware Routing and Wavelength Assignment (IA-RWA) 

   In WSON networks [RFC6163], a wavelength-switched LSP traverses one 
   or multiple fiber links. The bit rates of the client signals carried 
   by the wavelength LSPs may be the same or different. Hence, a fiber 
   link may transmit a number of wavelength LSPs with equal or mixed 
   bit rate signals. For example, a fiber link may multiplex the 
   wavelengths with only 10G signals, mixed 10G and 40G signals, or 
   mixed 40G and 100G signals.  

   IA-RWA in WSONs refers to the RWA process (i.e., lightpath 
   computation) that takes into account the optical layer/transmission 
   imperfections by considering as additional (i.e., physical layer) 
   constraints. To be more specific, linear and non-linear effects 
   associated with the optical network elements should be incorporated 
   into the route and wavelength assignment procedure. For example, the 
   physical imperfection can result in the interference of two adjacent 
   lightpaths. Thus, a guard band should be reserved between them to 
 
 
Zhang                    Expires April 2013                  [Page 11] 

draft-zhang-pce-stateful-pce-app-02.txt                    October 2012 
    

   alleviate these effects. The width of the guard band between two 
   adjacent wavelengths depends on their characteristics, such as 
   modulation formats and bit rates. Two adjacent wavelengths with 
   different characteristics (e.g., different bit rates) may need a 
   wider guard band and with same characteristics may need a narrower 
   guard band. For example, 50GHz spacing may be acceptable for two 
   adjacent wavelengths with 40G signals. But for two adjacent 
   wavelengths with different bit rates (e.g., 10G and 40G), a larger 
   spacing such as 300GHz spacing may be needed. Hence, the 
   characteristics (states) of the existing wavelength LSPs SHOULD be 
   considered for a new RWA request in WSON.  

   In summary, when stateful PCE(s) are used to perform the IA-RWA 
   procedure, it needs to know the characteristics of the existing 
   wavelength LSPs. The impairment information relating to existing and 
   to-be-established LSPs can be obtained by nodes in WSON networks via 
   external configuration or other means such as monitoring or 
   estimation based on a vendor-specific impair model. However, WSON 
   related routing protocols, i.e., [GEN-OSPF] and [WSON-OSPF], only 
   advertise limited information (i.e., availability) of the existing 
   wavelengths, without defining the supported client bit rates. It 
   will incur substantial amount of control plane overhead if routing 
   protocols are extended to support dissemination of the new 
   information relevant for the IA-RWA process. In this scenario, 
   stateful PCE(s) would be a more appropriate mechanism to solve this 
   problem. Stateful PCE(s) can exploit impairment information of LSPs 
   stored in LSP-DB to provide accurate RWA calculation.  

3.2. Defragmentation in Flexible Grid Networks 

   Traditionally, in Dense Wavelength Division Multiplexing (DWDM) 
   networks, the frequency and channel spacing for a single wavelength 
   allocated to an optical connection is fixed, in terms of a fixed 
   channel spacing grid. With the development of mixed-rate 
   transmission and the increase in the speed of optical signal, the 
   issue of poor optical spectrum usage needs to be addressed. Flexible 
   grid is proposed to solve this problem [G.FLEXIGRID]. In Flexible 
   grid networks, LSPs with different slot widths (such as 12.5G, 25G 
   etc.) can co-exist so as to accommodate the services with different 
   bandwidth requests.  

   Yet another problem arises in this type of DWDM networks. Since in 
   flexible grid networks LSPs are dynamically allocated and released 
   over time, the optical spectrum resource becomes fragmented. The 
   overall available spectrum resource on a link might be sufficient 
   for a new LSP request. But if the available spectra are not 
   continuous, the request would be rejected. In order to perform 
   frequency defragmentation procedure, stateful PCE(s) COULD be used, 
 
 
Zhang                    Expires April 2013                  [Page 12] 

draft-zhang-pce-stateful-pce-app-02.txt                    October 2012 
    

   since existing TE LSPs information (i.e., slot width and spectrum 
   location information associated with TE LSPs) is required to 
   accurately assess spectrum resources on the LSPs, and perform de-
   fragmentation while ensuring a minimal disruption of the network, 
   e.g., based on active LSP priorities.  

   [Editor's note: it is not suggested to start PCEP extensions on this 
   application until the data plane technology and the corresponding 
   GMPLS control is mature.] 

3.3. Recovery 

3.3.1. Protection 

   For protection purposes, a PCC may send a request to a PCE for 
   computing a set of paths for a given LSP. Alternatively, the PCC can 
   send multiple requests to the PCE, asking for working and backup 
   LSPs separately. In either way, the resources bound to backup paths 
   can be shared by different LSPs to improve the overall network 
   efficiency. If resource sharing is supported for LSP protection, the 
   information relating to existing LSPs is required to avoid 
   allocation of shared protection resources to two LSPs that might 
   fail together and cause protection contention issues. If such 
   information is required on each network node, extensions to existing 
   signaling or routing protocols are needed in order to carry the 
   necessary information for avoiding allocating shared protection 
   resources for two non-disjoint working LSPs. However, stateful PCE(s) 
   can easily accommodate this need using the information stored in its 
   LSP-DB, without requiring extensions to existing routing protocols. 

                 +----+   
                 |PCE |   
                 +----+   
                  
            +------+          +------+          +------+ 
            |  N1  +----------+  N2  +----------+  N3  | 
            +--+---+          +---+--+          +---+--+ 
               |                  |                 | 
               |        +---------+                 | 
               |        |                           | 
               |     +--+---+          +------+     | 
               +-----+  N5  +----------+  N4  +-----+ 
                     +------+          +------+ 
                                      
                         Figure 2: Example Network  
    


 
 
Zhang                    Expires April 2013                  [Page 13] 

draft-zhang-pce-stateful-pce-app-02.txt                    October 2012 
    

   For example, in the network depicted in Figure 2, suppose there 
   exists LSP1 (N1->N5) with backup route following N1->N2->N5. A 
   request arrives asking for a working and backup path pair to be 
   computed for a request from N2 to N5. If the PCE decides N2->N1->N5 
   to be the best working route, then the backup path should not use 
   the same protection resource with LSP1 since the new LSP shares part 
   of its resource with LSP1 (i.e., these two LSPs are in the same 
   shared risk group). Alternatively, there is no such constraint if 
   N2->N3->N4->N5 is chosen to be the right candidate for undertaking 
   the request. 

3.3.2. Restoration 

   In case of a link failure, such as fiber cut, multiple LSPs may fail 
   at the same time. Thus, the source nodes of the affected LSPs will 
   be informed of the failure by the nodes detecting the failure. These 
   source nodes will send requests to a PCE for rerouting. In order to 
   reuse the resource taken by an existing LSP, the source node can 
   send a PCReq message including the XRO object with F bit set, 
   together with RRO object, as specified in [RFC5521].  

   If a stateless PCE is exploited, it might respond to the rerouting 
   requests separately if they arrive at different times. Thus, it 
   might result in sub-optimal resource usage. Even worse, it might 
   unnecessarily block some of the rerouting requests due to 
   insufficient resources for later-arrived rerouting messages. If a 
   stateful PCE is used to fulfill this task, it can re-compute the 
   affected LSPs concurrently while reusing part of the existing LSPs 
   resources when it is informed of the failed link identifier provided 
   by the first request. This is made possible since the stateful PCE 
   can check what other LSPs are affected by the failed link and their 
   route information by inspecting its LSP-DB. As a result, a better 
   performance, such as better resource usage, minimal probability of 
   blocking upcoming new rerouting requests sent as a result of the 
   link failure, can be achieved.  

   In order to further reduce the amount of LSP rerouting messages flow 
   in the network, the notification can be performed at the node(s) 
   which detect the link failure. For example, suppose there are two 
   LSPs in the network as shown in Figure 2: (i) LSP1: N1->N5->N4->N3; 
   (ii) LSP2:  N2->N5->N4. They traverse the failed link between N5-N4. 
   When N4 detects the failure, it can send a notification message to a 
   stateful PCE. Note that the stateful PCE stores the path information 
   of the LSPs that are affected by the link failure, so it does not 
   need to acquire this information from N4. Moreover, it can make use 
   of the bandwidth resources occupied by the affected LSPs when 
   performing path recalculation. After N4 receives the new paths from 
   the PCE, it notifies the ingress nodes of the LSPs, i.e., N1 and N2, 
 
 
Zhang                    Expires April 2013                  [Page 14] 

draft-zhang-pce-stateful-pce-app-02.txt                    October 2012 
    

   and specifies the new paths which should be used as the rerouting 
   paths. To support this, it would require extensions to existing 
   signaling protocol. 

   Alternatively, if the target is to avoid resource contention within 
   the time-window of high LSP requests, a stateful PCE can retain the 
   under-construction LSP resource usage information for a given time 
   and exclude it from being used for forthcoming LSPs' request. In 
   this way, it can ensure that the resource will not be double-booked 
   and thus the issue of resource contention and computation crank-
   backs can be resolved.   

    

3.4. SRLG Diversity 

   A common requirement is to maintain SRLG disjointness between LSPs. 
   This can be achieved at provisioning time, if the routes of all the 
   LSPs are requested together, using a synchronized computation of the 
   different LSPs with SRLG disjointness constraint. If the LSPs need 
   to be provisioned at different times, (more general, the routes are 
   requested at different times, e.g. in the case of a restoration), 
   the PCC can specify, as constraints to the path computation a set of 
   Shared Risk Link Groups (SRLGs) using the Explicit route Object [RFC 
   5521]. However, for the latter to be effective, it is needed that 
   the entity that requests the route to the PCE maintains updated SRLG 
   information of all the LSPs to which it must maintain the 
   disjointness. 

   Using a stateful PCE allows the maintenance of the updated SRLG 
   information of the established LSPs in a centralized manner. Having 
   such information in the PCE facilitates the PCC to specify, as 
   constraint to the path computation, the SRLG disjointess of a set of 
   already established LSPs by only providing LSPs' identifiers. 

3.5. Maintenance of Virtual Network Topology (VNT) 

   In Multi-Layer Networks (MLN), a Virtual Network Topology (VNT) 
   [RFC5212] consists of a set of one or more TE LSPs in the lower 
   layer to provide TE links to the upper layer. In [RFC5623], the PCE-
   based architecture is proposed to support path computation in MLN 
   networks in order to achieve inter-layer TE.  

   The establishment/teardown of a TE link in VNT needs to take into 
   consideration the state of existing LSPs and/or new LSP request(s) 
   in the higher layer. Traditionally, a VNT manager (VNTM) is in 
   charge of the topology in the upper layer by connections in the 
   lower layer. Hence, when a stateless PCE is requested to compute a 
 
 
Zhang                    Expires April 2013                  [Page 15] 

draft-zhang-pce-stateful-pce-app-02.txt                    October 2012 
    

   new TE link, it will need interaction with VNTM for detailed TE link 
   information. To be more specific, without detailed LSP information, 
   this process would be inefficient or even infeasible for stateless 
   PCE(s), unless with cooperation with VNTM. On the other hand, a 
   stateful PCE seems more suitable to make the decision of when and 
   how to modify the VNT either to accommodate new LSP requests or to 
   re-optimize resource use across layers irrespective of PCE models. 
   As described in Section 2.2, path computation for a VNT change can 
   be performed by the PCE if a single PCE model is adopted. On the 
   other hand, if a per-layer PCE model is more appropriate, 
   coordination between PCEs is required. 

3.6. Global Concurrent Optimization (GCO)  

   GCO is introduced in [RFC5557] to calculate multiple paths 
   concurrently so as to improve network resource efficiency. By taking 
   into consideration the network topology as well as existing TE LSPs 
   information, GCO can (re)optimize the entire network simultaneously. 
   Alternatively, GCO can be applied to (re)optimize one or a subset of 
   existing TE LSPs or plan for forthcoming LSP(s) with specific 
   objectives. GCO can also support off-line one-time optimization 
   (i.e., planning) given a traffic matrix and network topology. Due to 
   its complexity and potentially high computational demand, it is 
   recommended to be performed in a centralized way (e.g., based on a 
   management-based PCE).  

   In case of a stateless PCE, in order to optimize network resource 
   usage dynamically through online planning, PCC (e.g., NMS) should 
   send a request to PCE together with detailed path/bandwidth 
   information of the LSPs that need to be concurrently optimized. This 
   would require a PCC (e.g., NMS) to determine when and which LSPs 
   should be optimized. Given all of the existing LSP state information 
   kept at a stateful PCE, it allows automation of this process without 
   the PCC (e.g. NMS) to supply the existing LSP state information. 
   Moreover, since a stateful PCE can maintain the information 
   regarding to all LSPs that are currently under signaling, it makes 
   the optimization procedures be performed more intelligently and 
   effectively. 

3.7. Point-to-Multipoint (P2MP) Application  

   Route computation for P2MP application involves selection of 
   branching points together with calculating multiple sub-LSPs with 
   certain objective(s) such as minimizing the overall cost of the P2MP 
   tree. Moreover, egress nodes addition and removal in a P2MP tree 
   necessitates (re)optimization. Besides these, there are also some 
   constraints and policies that make the P2MP tree computation hard, 

 
 
Zhang                    Expires April 2013                  [Page 16] 

draft-zhang-pce-stateful-pce-app-02.txt                    October 2012 
    

   requiring high computation power. Therefore, PCE is proposed to 
   support P2MP application [RFC5671]. 

   If a stateless PCE is used for P2MP calculation or optimization 
   under constraints such as load balancing or path disjointedness, 
   then a large amount of sub-LSP information might need to be 
   exchanged between the PCE and the requesting entities. Moreover, if 
   the requesting entity cannot provide complete information of sub-
   LSPs pertaining to the P2MP tree, then the performance of stateless 
   PCE will be sub-optimal. On the contrary, a stateful PCE can support 
   the P2MP tree computation/optimization with reduced overhead and 
   improved efficiency. 

3.8. Time-based Scheduling 

   Time-based scheduling allows network operators to reserve resources 
   in advance upon request from the customers to transmit large bulk of 
   data with specified starting time and duration, such as in support 
   of scheduled data transmission between data centers.  

   Traditionally, this can be supported by NMS operation through path 
   pre-establishment and activation on the agreed starting time. 
   However, this does not provide efficient network usage since the 
   established paths exclude the possibility of being used by other 
   services even when they are not used for undertaking any service. It 
   can also be accomplished through GMPLS protocol extensions by 
   carrying the related request information (e.g., starting time and 
   duration) across the network. Nevertheless, this method inevitably 
   increases the complexity of signaling and routing process. 

   A stateful PCE can support this application with better efficiency 
   since it can alleviate the burden of processing on network elements 
   as well as enable the flexibility of resources usage by only 
   excluding the time slot(s) reserved for time-based scheduling 
   requests. In order to support this application, a stateful PCE 
   should also maintain a database that stores all the reserved 
   information with time reference. This can be achieved either by 
   maintaining a separate database or incorporated into LSP-DB. The 
   details of organizing time-based scheduling related information as 
   well as its impact on LSP-DB is subject to network provider's policy 
   and administrative consideration and thus outside of the scope of 
   this document. 

4. Manageability Considerations 

   The description and functionality specifications presented related 
   to stateful PCE(s) should also comply with the manageability 
   specifications covered in Section 8 of [RFC4655]. Furthermore, a 
 
 
Zhang                    Expires April 2013                  [Page 17] 

draft-zhang-pce-stateful-pce-app-02.txt                    October 2012 
    

   further list of manageability issues presented in [Stateful-PCEP-
   mpls] may also be considered. Information and Data Models 

   A Management Information Base (MIB) module for management of the 
   PCEP is being specified in a separate document [PCEP-MIB].  That MIB 
   module allows examination of individual PCEP messages, in particular 
   requests, responses and errors.  The MIB module MUST be extended to 
   include the ability to view stateful PCE PCEP extensions defined in 
   relevant documents. 

5. Security Considerations 

   The security issues presented in [RFC5440] still applies to this 
   document. In addition, the security concerns raised by [Stateful-
   PCEP-mpls] may also be considered.  

6. References 

6.1. Normative References 

   [RFC2119] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to indicate 
             requirements levels", RFC 2119, March 1997.  

   [RFC4655] Farrel, A., Vasseur, J.-P., and Ash, J., "A Path 
             Computation Element (PCE)-Based Architecture", RFC 4655, 
             August 2006. 

   [RFC5440] Vasseur, J.-P., and Le Roux, JL., "Path Computation 
             Element (PCE) Communication Protocol (PCEP)", RFC 5440, 
             March 2009. 

   [RFC6163] Lee, Y., Bernstein, G., "Framework for GMPLS and Path 
             Computation Element (PCE) Control of Wavelength Switched 
             Optical Networks (WSONs)", RFC 6163, April, 2011. 

   [RFC5521] Oki, E., Farrel, A., "Extensions to the Path Computation 
             Element Communication Protocol (PCEP) for Route 
             Exclusions", RFC5521, April 2009. 

    

6.2. Informative References 

   [WSON-Impairment] Lee, Y., Bernstein, G., Li, D., Martinelli, G., "A 
             Framework for the Control of Wavelength Switched Optical 
             Network (WSON) with Impairments", draft-ietf-ccamp-wson-
             impairments, work in progress. 

 
 
Zhang                    Expires April 2013                  [Page 18] 

draft-zhang-pce-stateful-pce-app-02.txt                    October 2012 
    

   [RFC4726] Farrel, A., Vasseur, J.-P., Ayyangar, A., "A Framework for 
             Inter-Domain Multiprotocol Label Switching Traffic 
             Engineering", RFC 4726, November 2006. 

   [RFC5520] Bradford, R., Vasseur, JP., Farrel, A., "Preserving 
             Topology Confidentiality in Inter-Domain Path Computation 
             Using a Path-Key-Based Mechanism", RFC 5520, April 2009. 

   [RFC5441] Vasseur, J.-P., Zhang, R., Bitar, N., Le Roux, JL., "A 
             Backward-Recursive PCE-Based Computation (BRPC) Procedure 
             to Compute Shortest Constrained Inter-Domain Traffic 
             Engineering Label Switched Paths", RFC 5441, April 2009.  

   [PSU-WSON] Giorgetti, A, Cugini, G, et al, "Path state-based update 
             of PCE traffic engineering database in wavelength switched 
             optical networks", IEEE Com. Let., June 2010. 

   [LCA-Stateless] Gonzalez de Dios, O., et al, "Benefits of limited 
             context awareness in stateless PCE", Optical Fiber 
             Communication Conference, March 2011. 

   [WSON-OSPF] Lee, Y., Bernstein, G., "GMPLS OSPF Enhancement for 
             Signal and Network Element Compatibility for Wavelength 
             Switched Optical Networks", draft-ietf-ccamp-wson-signal-
             compatibility-ospf-07, October 2011. 

   [GEN-OSPF] Zhang, Fatai, Lee, Y., Han, Jianrui, Bernstein, G., Xu, 
             Yunbin, "OSPF-TE Extensions for General Network Element 
             Constraints", draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-general-constraints-
             ospf-te-02, September 2011. 

   [G.FLEXIGRID] Draft revised G.694.1 version 1.3, Unpublished ITU-T 
             Study Group 15, Question 6. 

   [RFC5212] Shiomoto, K., Papadimitriou, D., Le Roux, JL., Vigoureux, 
             M., Brungard, D., "Requirements for GMPLS-Based Multi-
             Region and Multi-Layer Networks (MRN/MLN)", RFC 5212, July 
             2008. 

   [RFC5557] Lee, Y., Le Roux, JL., King, D., Oki E., "Path Computation 
             Element Communication Protocol (PCEP) Requirements and 
             Protocol Extensions in Support of Global Concurrent 
             Optimization", RFC 5557, July, 2009. 

   [RFC5671] Yasukawa, S., Farrel, A., "Applicability of the Path 
             Computation Element (PCE) to Point-to-Multipoint (P2MP) 
             MPLS and GMPLS Traffic Engineering (TE)", October, 2009. 

 
 
Zhang                    Expires April 2013                  [Page 19] 

draft-zhang-pce-stateful-pce-app-02.txt                    October 2012 
    

   [RFC5623] Oki, E., Takeda, T., Le Roux, JL., Farrel, A., "Framework 
             for PCE-Based Inter-Layer MPLS and GMPLS Traffic 
             Engineering", RFC5623, September 2009.  

   [stateful-PCEP-mpls] Crabbe, E., Medved, J., Varga, R., Minei, I., 
             ''PCEP Extensions for Stateful PCE'', draft-ietf-pce-
             stateful-pce, work in progress. 

   [stateful-PCEP-gmpls] Zhang, X., Lee, Y., Casellas, R., Gonzalez de 
             Dios, O., '' Path Computation Element (PCE) Protocol 
             Extension for Stateful PCE Usage in GMPLS Networks'', 
             draft-zhang-pce-pcep-stateful-pce-gmpls, work in progress 

   [PCEP-MIB] Kiran Koushik, A S., Stephan, E., Zhao, Q., King, D., 
             "PCE communication protocol (PCEP) Management Information 
             Base", draft-ietf-pce-pcep-mib, work in progress  

   [PCEP-GMPLS] C. Margaria O. Gonzalez de Dios F. Zhang  ''PCEP 
             extensions for GMPLS''  draft-ietf-pce-gmpls-pcep-
             extensions-06  work in progress.  

   Contributors' Address 

























 
 
Zhang                    Expires April 2013                  [Page 20] 

draft-zhang-pce-stateful-pce-app-02.txt                    October 2012 
    

   Dhruv Dhody 
   Huawei Technology 
   Leela Palace 
   Bangalore, Karnataka 560008 
   INDIA 
    
   EMail: dhruvd@huawei.com
    
    
   Xiaobing Zi 
   Huawei Technologies 
   F3-5-B R&D Center, Huawei Base 
   Bantian, Longgang District 
   Shenzhen 518129 P.R.China 
    
   Phone: +86-755-28973229 
   Email: zixiaobing@huawei.com
    
    
    
    
Authors' Addresses 

   Fatai Zhang 
   Huawei Technologies 
   F3-5-B R&D Center, Huawei Base 
   Bantian, Longgang District 
   Shenzhen 518129 P.R.China 
    
   Phone: +86-755-28972912 
   Email: zhangfatai@huawei.com
    
    
   Xian Zhang 
   Huawei Technologies 
   F3-5-B R&D Center, Huawei Base 
   Bantian, Longgang District 
   Shenzhen 518129 P.R.China 
    
   Phone: +86-755-28972913 
   Email: zhang.xian@huawei.com
    
    
   Young Lee 
   Huawei 
   1700 Alma Drive, Suite 100 
   Plano, TX  75075 
   US 
 
 
Zhang                    Expires April 2013                  [Page 21] 

draft-zhang-pce-stateful-pce-app-02.txt                    October 2012 
    

    
   Phone: +1 972 509 5599 x2240 
   Fax:   +1 469 229 5397 
   EMail: ylee@huawei.com
    
    
   Ramon Casellas 
   CTTC - Centre Tecnologic de Telecomunicacions de Catalunya 
   Av. Carl Friedrich Gauss n7 
   Castelldefels, Barcelona 08860 
   Spain 
    
   Phone: 
   Email: ramon.casellas@cttc.es
    
    
   Oscar Gonzalez de Dios  
   Telefonica Investigacion y Desarrollo 
   Emilio Vargas 6 
   Madrid,   28045 
   Spain 
    
   Phone: +34 913374013 
   Email: ogondio@tid.es
 
    
Intellectual Property 
    

   The IETF Trust takes no position regarding the validity or scope of   
   any Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be   
   claimed to pertain to the implementation or use of the technology   
   described in any IETF Document or the extent to which any license   
   under such rights might or might not be available; nor does it   
   represent that it has made any independent effort to identify any   
   such rights. 

   Copies of Intellectual Property disclosures made to the IETF   
   Secretariat and any assurances of licenses to be made available, or   
   the result of an attempt made to obtain a general license or   
   permission for the use of such proprietary rights by implementers or   
   users of this specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line 
   IPR   repository at http://www.ietf.org/ipr 

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any   
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary   
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement   

 
 
Zhang                    Expires April 2013                  [Page 22] 

draft-zhang-pce-stateful-pce-app-02.txt                    October 2012 
    

   any standard or specification contained in an IETF Document. Please   
   address the information to the IETF at ietf-ipr@ietf.org. 

   The definitive version of an IETF Document is that published by, or   
   under the auspices of, the IETF. Versions of IETF Documents that are   
   published by third parties, including those that are translated into   
   other languages, should not be considered to be definitive versions   
   of IETF Documents. The definitive version of these Legal Provisions   
   is that published by, or under the auspices of, the IETF. Versions 
   of   these Legal Provisions that are published by third parties, 
   including   those that are translated into other languages, should 
   not be   considered to be definitive versions of these Legal 
   Provisions. 

   For the avoidance of doubt, each Contributor to the IETF Standards   
   Process licenses each Contribution that he or she makes as part of   
   the IETF Standards Process to the IETF Trust pursuant to the   
   provisions of RFC 5378. No language to the contrary, or terms,   
   conditions or rights that differ from or are inconsistent with the   
   rights and licenses granted under RFC 5378, shall have any effect 
   and   shall be null and void, whether published or posted by such   
   Contributor, or included with or in such Contribution. 

    

Disclaimer of Validity 
 
   All IETF Documents and the information contained therein are 
   provided   on an "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION 
   HE/SHE   REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET 
   SOCIETY, THE   IETF TRUST AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE 
   DISCLAIM ALL   WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT 
   LIMITED TO ANY   WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION THEREIN 
   WILL NOT INFRINGE   ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF 
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS   FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 

 
Full Copyright Statement 
 
   Copyright (c) 2012 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the   
   document authors.  All rights reserved. 

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal 
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents 
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of 
   publication of this document. Please review these documents 
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with 

 
 
Zhang                    Expires April 2013                  [Page 23] 

draft-zhang-pce-stateful-pce-app-02.txt                    October 2012 
    

   respect to this document.  Code Components extracted from this 
   document must include Simplified BSD License text as described in 
   Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without 
   warranty as described in the Simplified BSD License. 











































 
 
Zhang                    Expires April 2013                  [Page 24] 

