







    PIM Working Group                                         Hong-Ke Zhang 
    Internet Draft                                                Shuai Gao 
    Intended status: Standards Track            Beijing Jiaotong University 
    Expires: September 10, 2013                                 T C.Schmidt 
                                                                HAW Hamburg 
                                                                Bo-hao Feng 
                                                                 Li-Li Wang 
                                                Beijing Jiaotong University 
                                                             March 11, 2013 
     
                                          
                     Multi-Upstream Interfaces IGMP/MLD Proxy 
                           draft-zhang-pim-muiimp-00.txt 


        


    Abstract 

       In this document, followed by the idea mentioned in [4] and 
       subsequent update in [5], an IGMP/MLD proxy with multiple upstream 
       interfaces called MUIIMP is proposed and analyzed. The MUIIMP 
       inherits the basic rule of the IGMP/MLD proxy but extends with 
       multiple  upstream  interfaces.  To  avoid  data  redundancy,  each 
       upstream interface of an MUIIMP device MUST NOT send or subscribe 
       the same data simultaneously. 

     

    Requirements Language 

       The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
       "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
       document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119]. 

    Status of this Memo 

       This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with 
       the provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79. 

       Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
       Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
       other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
       Drafts. 

       Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
       months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents 
       at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as 
       reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress". 
     
     
     
    Zhang et al.           Expires September,2013                 [Page 1] 
     
     Internet-Draft  Multi-Upstream Interfaces IGMP/MLD Proxy     March 2013 
     

       The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
       http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 

       The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
       http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html 

       This Internet-Draft will expire on September, 2013. 

    Copyright Notice 

       Copyright (c) 2012 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the 
       document authors.  All rights reserved.  

       This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal 
       Provisions Relating to IETF Documents 
       (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of 
       publication of this document.  Please review these documents 
       carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with 
       respect to this document.  Code Components extracted from this 
       document must include Simplified BSD License text as described in 
       Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without 
       warranty as described in the Simplified BSD License. 

    Table of Contents 

       1. Introduction..................................................3 
       2. Terminology...................................................3 
       3. MUIIMP Behavior...............................................4 
        3.1. The selection of default upstream interface................5 
        3.2. Report of downstream subscriptions to upstream interfaces..5 
        3.3. Handover of the upstream interface.........................6 
       4. Security Considerations.......................................6 
       5. References....................................................6 
       Acknowledgment...................................................8 
        











     
     
    Zhang et al.           Expires September,2013                 [Page 2] 
        
     Internet-Draft  Multi-Upstream Interfaces IGMP/MLD Proxy     March 2013 
     

      1. Introduction 

       RFC 4605 [1] specifies an IGMP/MLD proxy mechanism for forwarding 
       based solely upon IGMP/MLD membership information in scenarios where 
       multicast routing is not available. According to [1], an IGMP/MLD 
       Proxy performs the router portion of the IGMP/MLD protocol on its 
       downstream interfaces, and the host portion of the IGMP/MLD protocol 
       on its single upstream interface.  

       The IGMP/MLD proxy mechanism can effectively extend the multicast 
       scope and greatly simplify the implementation of edge devices. 
       However,  the  IGMP/MLD  proxy  may  exhibit  inefficiency  in  some 
       specific  scenarios  due  to  the  limitation  of  single  upstream 
       interface. For example, in PMIPv6 multicast environment, multiple 
       IGMP/MLD proxy instances need to be deployed at the MAG in [6], 
       which may result in tunnel convergence problem. In addition, there 
       are also requirements to extend the IGMP/MLD proxy to support 
       multiple upstream interfaces as the emergence of multi-homing.  

       One thing to note is the idea about multiple upstream interfaces for 
       IGMP/MLD proxy was firstly proposed in the draft [4] to improve the 
       performance of mobile multicast source. The Multimob working group 
       draft [5] includes the related latest descriptions. Considering the 
       multiple upstream interfaces extension is not only required for 
       mobile multicast sources scenarios, this document is presented here.  

       In  this  document,  an  IGMP/MLD  proxy  with  multiple  upstream 
       interfaces called MUIIMP is proposed and described. The MUIIMP 
       inherits the basic rule of the IGMP/MLD proxy but extends with 
       multiple  upstream  interfaces.  To  avoid  data  redundancy,  each 
       upstream interfaces of an MUIIMP device MUST NOT send or subscribe 
       the same data simultaneously. The MUIIMP is designed to support 
       local multicast listeners and senders.  

      2. Terminology 

       Upstream Interface: A proxy device's interface in the direction of 
       the root of the tree. 

       Downstream Interface: Each of a proxy device's interfaces that is 
       not in the direction of the root of the multicast tree.   

       Default upstream interface: An upstream interface which is by 
       default associated with each downstream node subscribing or sending 
       specific channel (group address prefix) or special multicast state. 

        
     
     
    Zhang et al.           Expires September,2013                 [Page 3] 
        
     Internet-Draft  Multi-Upstream Interfaces IGMP/MLD Proxy     March 2013 
     

      3. MUIIMP Behavior 

       The MUIIMP inherits the basic rule of the IGMP/MLD proxy but extends 
       with multiple upstream interfaces. A MUIIMP device has one or more 
       upstream as well as downstream interfaces, which may be any type 
       interfaces, including physical or logical interfaces.  

       The MUIIMP performs the router portion of the IGMP/MLD protocol on 
       its downstream interfaces, and the host portion of IGMP/MLD on its 
       upstream interfaces.  The MUIIMP device MUST NOT perform the router 
       portion of IGMP/MLD on its upstream interfaces. 

       The MUIIMP device maintains a database for multicast listeners 
       consisting of the merger of all subscriptions on any downstream 
       interface. In order to avoid the redundant multicast traffic, the 
       proxy device should initiate unique traffic subscriptions. Besides, 
       a policy list that records the default upstream interface for the 
       downstream nodes is held for the selection of upstream interface. 

       In the following, the MUIIMP device behavior will be discussed 
       according the role of the downstream nodes.  

       1) Multicast listener on the downstream interface 

       Multicast listener reports are group-wise aggregated by the MLD 
       proxy. The aggregated report is issued to the upstream interface 
       based on the subscriptions as well as the policy list. When 
       receiving the IGMP/MLD subscriptions on the downstream interface, 
       the MUIIMP checks the membership database to make a decision whether 
       sends IGMP/MLD membership reports on the corresponding default 
       upstream interface or not. Refer to Section 3.2 for the details 
       about membership subscriptions lookup and report decisions.  

       When receiving packets on its upstream interfaces, the MUIIMP 
       forwards the traffic to all the downstream interfaces based upon the 
       downstream interfaces' subscriptions. 

       2) Multicast source on the downstream interface 

       When receiving packets on its downstream interface, the MUIIMP 
       forwards the traffic to the corresponding default upstream interface, 
       as well as all the downstream interfaces other than the incoming 
       interface based upon the downstream interfaces' subscriptions. 

       The (first) multicast router(s) operating multicast routing protocol 
       like PIM-SM[7]connected to the outside multicast domain should be 
       configured to treat the multicast source inside the MUIIMP domain 
     
     
    Zhang et al.           Expires September,2013                 [Page 4] 
        
     Internet-Draft  Multi-Upstream Interfaces IGMP/MLD Proxy     March 2013 
     

       being directly connected. Otherwise, it will discard the data due to 
       the failure of the direct connection check. 

       3.1. The selection of default upstream interface 

       Typically, the choice of the default upstream interface is based on 
       the policy list which is maintained at the MUIIMP.  

       The expression of the policy list is like below: 

       (node prefix, multicast group address/multicast state, upstream 
       interface) 

       Here node prefix represents the address prefix of the node on the 
       downstream interface that may be a multicast listener or multicast 
       source. And the multicast group address indicates the channel that 
       the multicast listener is subscribing or the multicast source is 
       publishing while the multicast state is only valid for listeners 
       indicating the state about both multicast source and multicast group 
       they are subscribing.   

       In other word, in the MUIIMP, the multicast group address/multicast 
       state and the node prefix will act as rules to select the default 
       upstream interface. Alternate configurations (e.g., the MAG-LMA 
       tunnel interface in PMIPv6 environment) MAY be applied. 

       3.2. Report of downstream subscriptions to upstream interfaces 

       To avoid the redundant multicast traffic, the proxy device MUST NOT 
       send the same multicast subscription record on different upstream 
       interfaces simultaneously. In detail, we recommend the following 
       rules when receiving an IGMP/MLD subscription on the downstream 
       interface. 

       1) If the received IGMP/MLD subscription is new and has not been 
          subscribed by other downstream multicast listeners, the proxy 
          device  SHOULD  initiate  the  IGMP/MLD  subscription  on  the 
          corresponding default upstream interface.  

       2) If there exists the same IGMP/MLD subscription which has already 
          been subscribed by other downstream multicast listener, the proxy 
          device SHOULD not initiate extra IGMP/MLD subscription. 

       3) If  there  exists  IGMP/MLD  subscriptions  which  have  already 
          included the received IGMP/MLD subscription, the proxy device 
          SHOULD not initiate extra IGMP/MLD subscription. 

     
     
    Zhang et al.           Expires September,2013                 [Page 5] 
        
     Internet-Draft  Multi-Upstream Interfaces IGMP/MLD Proxy     March 2013 
     

       4) If there exists overlapping subsets between the received IGMP/MLD 
          subscription and current IGMP/MLD subscriptions, the proxy device 
          SHOULD initiate the IGMP/MLD subscription on the corresponding 
          default upstream interface excluding the overlapping subsets that 
          have been subscribed before. 

       All subscriptions sent on the same upstream interface SHOULD be 
       merged according the merging rule in RFC 4605. In addition, the 
       local multicast source should be excluded in the final subscriptions 
       to avoid replicated multicast traffic from outside.  

       3.3. Handover of the upstream interface  

       If an upstream interface fails for some reason such as the deletion 
       of the tunnel interface in mobile environment, the handover of the 
       upstream interface is performed. Generally, all the subscriptions 
       sent on the previous invalid upstream interface are transferred to 
       the new valid upstream interfaces which are chosen among the default 
       upstream interfaces of the corresponding downstream nodes. The 
       choice may be made based on the predefined policy (e.g., the 
       interface priority, the number of listeners, the lowest IP address). 
       An alternative may be applied by the MUIIMP device itself according 
       to the traffic monitored or some strategies configured by the 
       operator. 

        

      4. Security Considerations 

       To be done. 

        

      5. References 

       [1]  B. Fenner, H. He, B. Haberman and H. Sandick. "Internet Group 
             Management Protocol (IGMP) / Multicast Listener Discovery 
             (MLD)-Based Multicast Forwarding ("IGMP/MLD Proxying")", RFC 
             4605, August 2006. 

       [2]  Cain, B., Deering, S., Kouvelas, I., Fenner, B. and A. 
             Thyagarajan, "Internet Group Management Protocol, Version3", 
             RFC 3376, October 2002. 

       [3]  Vida, R. and L. Costa, "Multicast Listener DiscoveryVersion 2 
             (MLDv2) for IPv6", RFC 3810, June 2004. 

     
     
    Zhang et al.           Expires September,2013                 [Page 6] 
        
     Internet-Draft  Multi-Upstream Interfaces IGMP/MLD Proxy     March 2013 
     

       [4]  Hong-Ke Zhang, Zhi-Wei Yan, Shuai Gao, etal.,"Multicast Source 
             Mobility Support in PMIPv6 Network", draft-zhang-multimob-msm-
             03, July 2011. 

       [5]  T C. Schmidt, S. Gao, H. Zhang, M. Waehlisch,"Mobile Multicast 
             Sender Support in Proxy Mobile IPv6 (PMIPv6) Domains", draft-
             ietf-multimob-pmipv6-source-02, October2012. 

       [6]  T. Schmidt, M. Waehlisch and S. Krishnan. "Base Deployment 
             forMulticast Listener Support in Proxy Mobile IPv6 (PMIPv6) 
             Domains", RFC 6224, April 2011. 

       [7]  Fenner, B., Handley, M., Holbrook, H., and I. Kouvelas, 
             "Protocol  Independent  Multicast  -  Sparse  Mode  (PIM-SM): 
             Protocol Specification (Revised)", RFC 4601, August 2000. 































     
     
    Zhang et al.           Expires September,2013                 [Page 7] 
        
     Internet-Draft  Multi-Upstream Interfaces IGMP/MLD Proxy     March 2013 
     

    Authors' Addresses 

       Hong-Ke Zhang, Shuai-Gao, Bo-Hao Feng, Li-Li Wang 
       National Engineering Lab for NGI Interconnection Devices 
       Beijing Jiaotong University, China 
          
       Phone: +861051684274 
       Email:hkzhang@bjtu.edu.cn 
             shgao@bjtu.edu.cn 
             11111021@bjtu.edu.cn 
             liliwang@bjtu.edu.cn 
        
       Thomas C. Schmidt 
       HAW Hamburg 
       Berliner Tor 7 
       Hamburg  20099 
       Germany 
        
       Email: schmidt@informatik.haw-hamburg.de 
       URI:   http://inet.cpt.haw-hamburg.de/members/schmidt 
        

     

    Acknowledgment 

       Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the 
       Internet Society. 

     
















     
     
    Zhang et al.           Expires September,2013                 [Page 8] 
        
