A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3459

        Title:      Critical Content Multi-purpose Internet Mail
                    Extensions (MIME) Parameter
        Author(s):  E. Burger
        Status:     Standards Track
        Date:       January 2003
        Mailbox:    e.burger@ieee.org
        Pages:      24
        Characters: 54282
        Updates:    3204

        I-D Tag:    draft-ietf-vpim-cc-08.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3459.txt


This document describes the use of a mechanism for identifying body
parts that a sender deems critical in a multi-part Internet mail
message.  The mechanism described is a parameter to
Content-Disposition, as described by RFC 3204.

By knowing what parts of a message the sender deems critical, a
content gateway can intelligently handle multi-part messages when
providing gateway services to systems of lesser
capability.  Critical content can help a content gateway to decide
what parts to forward.  It can indicate how hard a gateway should try
to deliver a body part.  It can help the gateway to pick body parts
that are safe to silently delete when a system of lesser
capability receives a message.  In addition, critical content can
help the gateway chose the notification strategy for the receiving
system.  Likewise, if the sender expects the destination to do
some processing on a body part, critical content allows the sender
to mark body parts that the receiver must process.

This document is a product of the Voice Profile for Internet Mail
Working Group of the IETF.

This is now a Proposed Standard Protocol.

This document specifies an Internet standards track protocol for
the Internet community, and requests discussion and suggestions
for improvements.  Please refer to the current edition of the
"Internet Official Protocol Standards" (STD 1) for the
standardization state and status of this protocol.  Distribution
of this memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.


