


DIME                                                         A. B. Roach
Internet-Draft                                                   Mozilla
Intended status: Standards Track                              E. McMurry
Expires: November 18, 2013                                       Tekelec
                                                            May 17, 2013


               A Mechanism for Diameter Overload Control
                   draft-roach-dime-overload-ctrl-03

Abstract

   When a Diameter server or agent becomes overloaded, it needs to be
   able to gracefully reduce its load, typically by informing clients to
   reduce or stop sending traffic for some period of time.  Otherwise,
   it must continue to expend resources parsing and responding to
   Diameter messages.

   This document proposes a concrete, application-independent mechanism
   to address the challenge of communicating load and overload state
   among Diameter peers, and specifies an algorithm for load abatement
   to address such overload conditions as they occur.  The load
   abatement algorithm is extensible, allowing for future documents to
   define additional load abatement approaches.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on November 18, 2013.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal



Roach & McMurry         Expires November 18, 2013               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft          Diameter Overload Control               May 2013


   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     1.1.  Mechanism Properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     1.2.  Overview of Operation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     1.3.  Documentation Conventions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   2.  Overload Scopes  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     2.1.  Scope Descriptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     2.2.  Combining Scopes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   3.  Diameter Node Behavior . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     3.1.  Connection Establishment Procedures  . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     3.2.  Diameter Client and Diameter Server Behavior . . . . . . . 11
       3.2.1.  Sending a Request to a Compliant Peer  . . . . . . . . 12
       3.2.2.  Receiving a Request  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
       3.2.3.  Sending an Answer to a Compliant Peer  . . . . . . . . 14
       3.2.4.  Receiving an Answer from a Compliant Peer  . . . . . . 15
     3.3.  Diameter Agent Behavior  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
       3.3.1.  Proxying a Request . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
       3.3.2.  Proxying an Answer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
     3.4.  Proactive Load and Overload Communication  . . . . . . . . 17
     3.5.  Load Processing  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
       3.5.1.  Sending Load Information . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
       3.5.2.  Receiving Load Information . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
     3.6.  Session Establishment for Session Groups . . . . . . . . . 20
       3.6.1.  Session Group Concepts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
       3.6.2.  Session Group Procedures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
   4.  Loss-Based Overload Control Algorithm  . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
     4.1.  Overload-Metric values for the 'Loss' Algorithm  . . . . . 23
     4.2.  Example Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
   5.  Diameter AVPs for Overload . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
     5.1.  Load-Info AVP  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
     5.2.  Supported-Scopes AVP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
     5.3.  Overload-Algorithm AVP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
     5.4.  Overload-Info-Scope AVP  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
       5.4.1.  Realm Scope  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
       5.4.2.  Application-ID Scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
       5.4.3.  Host Scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
       5.4.4.  Session Scope  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31



Roach & McMurry         Expires November 18, 2013               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft          Diameter Overload Control               May 2013


       5.4.5.  Connection Scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
       5.4.6.  Session Group Scope  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
     5.5.  Overload-Metric AVP  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
     5.6.  Period-Of-Validity AVP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
     5.7.  Session-Group AVP  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
     5.8.  Load AVP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
   6.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
   7.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
     7.1.  New Diameter AVPs  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
     7.2.  New Diameter Disconnect-Cause  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
     7.3.  New Diameter Response Code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
     7.4.  New Command Flag . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
     7.5.  Overload Algorithm Registry  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
     7.6.  Overload Scope Registry  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
   8.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
     8.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
     8.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
   Appendix A.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
   Appendix B.  Requirements Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
   Appendix C.  Extending the Overload Mechanism  . . . . . . . . . . 45
     C.1.  New Algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
     C.2.  New Scopes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
   Appendix D.  Design Rationale  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
     D.1.  Piggybacking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
     D.2.  Load AVP in All Packets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
     D.3.  Graceful Failure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
























Roach & McMurry         Expires November 18, 2013               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft          Diameter Overload Control               May 2013


1.  Introduction

   When a Diameter [RFC6733] server or agent becomes overloaded, it
   needs to be able to gracefully reduce its load, typically by
   informing clients to reduce or stop sending traffic for some period
   of time.  Otherwise, it must continue to expend resources parsing and
   responding to Diameter messages.

   This document defines a mechanism for communicating the load and
   overload information among Diameter nodes.  It also defines a base
   algorithm for shedding traffic under overload circumstances.  The
   design of the mechanism described in this document allows for the
   definition of alternate load abatement algorithms as well.

   The mechanism proposed in this document is heavily influenced by the
   work performed in the IETF Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) Overload
   Control Working Group, and draws on the conclusions reached by that
   working group after extensive network modeling.

   The solution described in this document is intended to satisfy the
   requirements described in [I-D.ietf-dime-overload-reqs], with the
   exception of REQ 34.  As discussed in that document, the intention of
   a Diameter overload mechanism is to handle overload of the actual
   message processing portions of Diameter servers.  This is in contrast
   to congestion, which is the inability of the underlying switching and
   routing fabric of the network to carry the volume of traffic at the
   volume that IP hosts wish to send it.  Handling of congestion is
   relegated to the underlying transport protocol (TCP or SCTP), and
   will not be discussed.

   Philosophically, the approach in designing this mechanism is based on
   the prospect that building a base-level, fully compliant
   implementation should be a very simple and straightforward exercise.
   However, the protocol includes many additional features that may be
   implemented to allow Diameter nodes to apply increasingly
   sophisticated behaviors.  This approach gives implementors the
   freedom to implement as sophisticated a scheme as they desire, while
   freeing them from the burden of unnecessary complexity.  By doing so,
   the mechanism allows for the rapid development and deployment of the
   mechanism followed by a period of steady and gradual improvements as
   implementations become more capable.

1.1.  Mechanism Properties

   The core Diameter overload mechanism described in this document is
   fundamentally hop-by-hop.  The rationale for using a hop-by-hop
   approach is the same as is described in section 5.1 of [RFC6357].
   However, due to the fact that Diameter networks frequently have



Roach & McMurry         Expires November 18, 2013               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft          Diameter Overload Control               May 2013


   traffic that is easily grouped into a few well-defined categories, we
   have added some concepts that allow Diameter agents to push back on
   subsets of traffic that correspond to certain well-defined and
   client-visible constructs (such as Destination-Host, Destination-
   Realm, and Application-ID).  These constructs are termed "Scopes" in
   this document.  A more complete discussion of Scopes is found in
   Section 2.

   The key information transmitted between Diameter peers is the current
   server load (to allow for better balancing of traffic, so as to
   preempt overload in the first place) as well as an indication of
   overload state and severity (overload information).  The actual load
   and overload information is conveyed as a new compound AVP, added to
   any Diameter messages that allow for extensibility.  As discussed in
   section 3.2 of [RFC6733], all CCFs are encouraged to include AVP-
   level extensibility by inclusion of a "* [ AVP ]" construct in their
   syntax definition.  The document author has conducted an extensive
   (although admittedly not exhaustive) audit of existing applications,
   and found none lacking this property.  The inclusion of load and
   overload information in existing messages has the property that the
   frequency with which information can be exchanged increases as load
   on the system goes up.

   For the purpose of grouping the several different parts of load
   information together, this mechanism makes use of a Grouped AVP,
   called "Load-Info".  The Load-Info AVP may appear one or more times
   in any extensible command, with the restriction that each instance of
   the Load-Info AVP must contain different Scopes.

   Load and overload information can be conveyed during times of inter-
   node quiescence through the use of DWR/DWA exchanges.  These
   exchanges can also be used to proactively change the overload or load
   level of a server when no other transaction is ready to be sent.
   Finally, in the unlikely event that an application is defined that
   precludes the inclusion of new AVPs in its commands, DWR/DWA
   exchanges can be sent at any rate acceptable to the server in order
   to convey load and overload information.

      In [RFC3588], the DWR and DWA message syntax did not allow for the
      addition of new AVPs in the DWR and DWA messages.  This oversight
      was fixed in [RFC6733].  To allow for transmission of load
      information on quiescent links, implementations of the mechanism
      described in this document are expected to correctly handle
      extension AVPs in DWR and DWA messages, even if such
      implementations have not otherwise been upgraded to support
      [RFC6733].





Roach & McMurry         Expires November 18, 2013               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft          Diameter Overload Control               May 2013


1.2.  Overview of Operation

   During the capabilities exchange phase of connection establishment,
   peers determine whether the connection will make use of the overload
   control mechanism; and, if so, which optional behaviors are to be
   employed.

   The information sent between adjacent nodes includes two key metrics:
   Load (which, roughly speaking, provides a linear metric of how busy
   the node is), and Overload-Metric (which is input to the negotiated
   load abatement algorithm).

   Message originators (whether originating a request or an answer)
   include one or more Load-Info AVPs in messages when they form them.
   These Load-Info AVPs reflect the originators' own load and overload
   state.

   Because information is being used on a hop-by-hop basis, it is
   exchanged only between adjacent nodes.  This means that any Diameter
   agent that forwards a message (request or answer) is required to
   remove any information received from the previous hop, and act upon
   it as necessary.  Agents also add their own load and overload
   information (which may, at implementors' preference, take previous-
   hop information into account) into a new Load-Info AVP before sending
   the request or answer along.

      Because the mechanism requires affirmative indication of support
      in the capabilities exchange phase of connection establishment,
      load and overload information will never be sent to intermediaries
      that do not support the overload mechanism.  Therefore, no special
      provisions need to be made for removal of information at such
      intermediaries -- it will simply not be sent to them.

   Message recipients are responsible for reading and acting upon load
   and overload information that they receive in such messages.

1.3.  Documentation Conventions

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].


2.  Overload Scopes

   In normal operation, a Diameter node may be overloaded for some but
   not all possible requests.  For example, an agent that supports two
   realms (realm A and realm B in this example) may route traffic to one



Roach & McMurry         Expires November 18, 2013               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft          Diameter Overload Control               May 2013


   set of servers for realm A, and another set of servers for realm B.
   If the realm A servers are overloaded but realm B servers are not,
   then the agent is effectively overloaded for realm A but not for
   realm B.

   Despite the fact that Diameter agents can report on scopes that
   semantically map to constructs elsewhere in the network, it is
   important to keep in mind that overload state is still reported on a
   hop-by-hop basis.  In other words, the overload state reported for
   realm A in the example above represents the aggregate of the agent's
   overload state along with the overload state being reported by
   applicable upstream servers (those serving realm A).

   Even without the use of Diameter agents, similar situations may arise
   in servers that need to make use of external resources for certain
   applications but not for others.  For example, if a single server is
   handling two applications, one of which uses an external database
   while the other does not, it may become overloaded for the
   application that uses the external database when the database
   response latency increases.

   The indication of scopes for overload information (using the
   Overload-Info-Scope AVP; see Section 5.4) allows a node to indicate a
   subset of requests to which overload information is to be applied.
   This document defines seven scopes; only "Connection" scope is
   mandatory to implement.  The use of the optional scopes, along with
   the use of any additional scopes defined in other documents, is
   negotiated at connection establishment time; see Section 3.1.

2.1.  Scope Descriptions

   Destination-Realm:  This scope, which nodes MUST implement, pertains
         to all transactions that have a Destination-Realm AVP matching
         the indicated value.

   Application-ID:  This scope, which nodes MUST implement, pertains to
         all transactions that contain an Application-ID field matching
         the indicated value.

   Destination-Host:  This scope, which nodes SHOULD implement, pertains
         to all transactions that have a Destination-Host AVP matching
         the indicated value.

   Host: This scope, which nodes SHOULD implement, pertains to all
         transactions sent directly to the host matching the indicated
         value.





Roach & McMurry         Expires November 18, 2013               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft          Diameter Overload Control               May 2013


   Connection:  This scope, which nodes MUST implement, pertains to all
         transactions sent on the same TCP connection or SCTP
         association.  This scope has no details indicating which
         connection or association it applies to; instead, the recipient
         of an indication of "Connection" scope is to use the connection
         or association on which the message was received as the
         indicated connection or association.  In other words, any use
         of Connection scope applies to "this connection."

   Session-Group:  This scope, which nodes MAY implement, pertains to
         all transactions in a session that has been assigned to the
         indicated group.  For more information on assigning sessions to
         groups, see Section 3.6.

   Session:  This scope, which nodes MAY implement, pertains to all
         transactions in the indicated session.


   Some applications do not have long-running sessions containing
   multiple transactions.  For such applications, the use of "Session-
   Group" and "Session" scopes do not make sense.  Such applications
   will instead make use of the most applicable of the remaining scopes
   (plus any negotiated extension scopes) to achieve overload control.

   OPEN ISSUE: Is there value to including a stream-level scope for
   SCTP?  We haven't been able to come up with a use case for doing so
   yet, but it wouldn't necessarily be unreasonable.

2.2.  Combining Scopes

   To allow for the expression of more complicated scopes than the
   primitives defined above, multiple Overload-Info-Scope AVPs may be
   included in a single Load-Info AVP.  Semantically, these scopes are
   included in the following way:

   o  Attributes of the different kinds are logically and-ed together
      (e.g., if both "Destination-Realm" and "Application-ID" are
      present, the information applies to requests sent that match both
      the realm and the application).

   o  Attributes of the same kind are logically or-ed together (e.g., if
      two "Destination-Realm"s are present, the information applies to
      requests sent to either realm).

   o  If a transaction falls within more than one scope, the "most
      overloaded" scope is used for traffic shaping.





Roach & McMurry         Expires November 18, 2013               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft          Diameter Overload Control               May 2013


   To prevent the complexity of implementing arbitrary scope combination
   rules, only the following combinations of scopes are allowed (OPEN
   ISSUE -- we need to figure out what makes most sense for expressing
   these combinations.  Formal grammar?  Prose?  A table of some kind?
   For now, they're expressed as a pseudo-ABNF):

   o  1*(Destination-Realm) 0*1(Application-ID)
   o  1*(Application-ID) 0*1(Destination-Realm)
   o  1*(Application-ID) 0*1(Destination-Host)
   o  1*(Application-ID) 0*1(Host)
   o  1*(Application-ID) 0*1(Connection)
   o  1*(Destination-Host)
   o  1*1(Host)
   o  1*1(Connection)
   o  1*(Session-Group) 0*1(Host | Connection)
   o  1*(Session) 0*1(Host | Connection)


      OPEN ISSUE: Is this the right set of scope combinations?  Is there
      a need for more?  Are any of these unnecessary?  Ideally, this
      should be the smallest set of combinations that lets nodes report
      what they realistically need to report.

   Any document that creates additional scopes MUST define how they may
   be combined with all scopes registered with IANA at the time of their
   publication.


3.  Diameter Node Behavior

   The following sections outline the behavior expected of Diameter
   clients, servers, and agents that implement the overload control
   mechanism.

   OPEN ISSUE: SIP Overload Control includes a sequence parameter to
   ensure that out-of-order messages do not cause the receiver to act on
   state that is no longer accurate.  Is message reordering a concern in
   Diameter?  That is, do we need to include sequence numbers in the
   messages to ensure that the receiver does not act on stale state
   information?  Because Diameter uses only reliable, in-order
   transports, it seems that this isn't likely to be an issue.  Is there
   room for a race when multiple connections are in use?

3.1.  Connection Establishment Procedures

   Negotiation for support of this mechanism is performed during
   Diameter capabilities exchange.  Optional protocol features and
   extensions to this mechanism are also negotiated at this time.  No



Roach & McMurry         Expires November 18, 2013               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft          Diameter Overload Control               May 2013


   provision is provided for renegotiation of mechanism use or
   extensions during the course of a connection.  If peers wish to make
   changes to the mechanism, they must create a new connection to do so.

   The connection initiator includes a Load-Info AVP in the CER
   (Capabilities-Exchange-Request) message that it sends after
   establishing the connection.  This Load-Info AVP MUST contain a
   Supported-Scopes AVP and an Overload-Algorithm AVP.  The Supported-
   Scopes AVP includes a comprehensive list of scopes supported that the
   connection initiator can receive and understand.  See Section 5.2 for
   information on the format of the Supported-Scopes AVP.

   The Load-Info AVP in a CER message also MAY contain one or more
   Overload-Algorithm AVPs.  If present, these AVPs indicate every
   Overload-Algorithm the connection initiator is willing to support for
   the connection that is being established.  If the connection
   initiator supports only the "Loss" algorithm, it MAY indicate this
   fact by omitting the Overload-Algorithm altogether.

   The Load-Info AVP in a CER message MAY also contain additional AVPs,
   as defined in other documents, for the purpose of negotiation
   extensions to the Overload mechanism.

   The Diameter node that receives a CER message first examines it for
   the presence of a Load-Info AVP.  If no such AVP is present, the node
   concludes that the overload control mechanism is not supported for
   this connection, and no further overload-related negotiation is
   performed.  If the received CER contains a Load-Info AVP, the
   recipient of that message stores that information locally in the
   context of the connection being established.  It then examines the
   Overload-Algorithm AVPs, if present, and selects a single algorithm
   from that list.  If no Overload-Algorithm is indicated, then the base
   "Loss" algorithm is used for the connection.  In either case, the
   recipient of the CER stores this algorithm in the context of the
   connection.

   When a node conformant to this specification sends a Capabilities-
   Exchange-Answer (CEA) message in answer to a CER that contained a
   Load-Info AVP, the CEA MUST contain a Load-Info AVP.  This Load-Info
   AVP MUST contain a Supported-Scopes AVP that includes a comprehensive
   list of scopes supported that the connection initiator can receive
   and understand.  The CEA also contains zero or one Overload-Algorithm
   AVPs.  If present, this Overload-Algorithm MUST match one of the
   Overload-Algorithm AVPs sent in the CER, and it indicates the
   overload control algorithm that will be used for the connection.  If
   the CEA contains no Overload-Algorithm, the connection will use the
   "Loss" algorithm.




Roach & McMurry         Expires November 18, 2013              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft          Diameter Overload Control               May 2013


   When a node receives a CEA message, it examines it for the presence
   of a Load-Info AVP.  If no such AVP is present, the node concludes
   that the overload mechanism is not supported for this connection.  If
   the received CEA contains a Load-Info AVP, then the recipient
   extracts the Supported-Scopes information, and stores them locally in
   the context of the connection being established.  It then checks for
   the presence of an Overload-Algorithm AVP.  If present, this AVP
   indicates the overload control algorithm that will be used for the
   connection.  If absent, then the connection will use the "Loss"
   algorithm.

   If a node receives a CEA message that indicates support for a scope
   that it did not indicate in its CER or which selects an overload
   control algorithm that it did not advertise in its CER, then it MUST
   terminate the connection by sending a DPR with a Disconnect-Cause of
   NEGOTIATION_FAILURE, (128 [actual value TBD]) indicating that the CEA
   sender has failed to properly follow the negotiation process
   described above.

   Note that the Supported-Scopes announcement during capabilities
   exchange is a set of mutual advertisements of which scopes the two
   nodes are willing to receive information about.  It is not a
   negotiation.  It is perfectly acceptable for a node to send
   information for scopes it did not include in the Supported-Scopes AVP
   it sent, as long as the recipient indicated support for receiving
   such a scope.  For example, a Diameter agent, during connection
   establishment with a client, may indicate support for receiving only
   "Connection" and "Host" scope; however, if the client indicated
   support for "Application" scope, then the agent is free to send Load-
   Info AVPs that make use of "Application" scope to the client.

3.2.  Diameter Client and Diameter Server Behavior

   The following sections describe the behavior that Diameter clients
   and Diameter servers implement for the overload control mechanism.
   Behavior at Diameter Agents is described in Section 3.3.

   To implement overload control, Diameter nodes need to keep track of
   three important metrics for each of the scopes for which information
   has been received: the overload metric for the scope, the period of
   validity for that overload metric, and the load within that scope.
   Conceptually, these are data records indexed by the scope to which
   they apply.  In the following sections, we refer to these data
   records with the term "scope entry."  Further, when it is necessary
   to distinguish between those scope entries referring to the load
   information received from other nodes and those referring to the load
   information sent to other nodes, we use the term "remote scope entry"
   to refer to the information received from other nodes, and "local



Roach & McMurry         Expires November 18, 2013              [Page 11]

Internet-Draft          Diameter Overload Control               May 2013


   scope entry" to refer to that information that is being maintained to
   send to other nodes.

   In order to allow recipients of overload information to perform
   certain performance optimizations, we also define a new command flag,
   called 'O'verload.  This bit, when set, indicates that the message
   contains at least one Load-Info AVP with a non-zero Overload-Metric
   -- in other words, the sending node is overloaded for at least one
   context.  See Section 7.4 for the definition of the 'O'verload bit.

      OPEN ISSUE: Is there anything we can do to make this 'O'verload
      bit even more useful?  Perhaps setting it only when the overload
      value has changed, or changed by a certain amount?

3.2.1.  Sending a Request to a Compliant Peer

   This section applies only to those requests sent to peers who
   negotiated use of the overload control mechanism during capabilities
   exchange.  Requests sent over other connections are handled the same
   as they would in the absence of the overload control mechanism.

   Before sending a request, a Diameter node must first determine which
   scope applies.  It does this as follows: first, a next hop host and
   connection are determined, according to normal Diameter procedures
   (potentially modified as described in Section 3.5.2).  The sending
   node then searches through its list of remote scope entries (ignoring
   any whose Period-of-Validity has expired) to determine which ones
   match the combination of the fields in the current request, the next-
   hop host, and the selected connection.  If none of the matching scope
   entries are in overload, then the message is handled normally, and no
   additional processing is required.

   As an optimization, a sending node MAY choose to track whether any of
   its peers are in overload, and to skip the preceding step if it knows
   that no scopes are in overload.

   If one or more matching scope entries are in overload, then the
   sending node determines which scope is most overloaded.  The sending
   node then sends, drops, or otherwise modifies handling of the request
   according to the negotiated overload control algorithm, using the
   Overload-Metric from the selected scope entry as input to the
   algorithm.

   When determining which requests are impacted by the overload control
   algorithm, request senders MAY take into account the type of message
   being sent and its contents.  For example, messages within an
   existing session may be prioritized over those that create a new
   session.  The exact rules for such prioritization will likely vary



Roach & McMurry         Expires November 18, 2013              [Page 12]

Internet-Draft          Diameter Overload Control               May 2013


   from application to application.  The authors expect that
   specifications that define or specify the use of specific Diameter
   Applications may choose to formally define a set of rules for such
   prioritization on a per-Application basis.

   The foregoing notwithstanding, senders MUST NOT use the content or
   type of request to exempt that request from overload handling.  For
   example, if a peer requests a 50% decrease in sent traffic using the
   "Loss" algorithm (see Section 4), but the traffic that the sending
   node wishes to send consists 65% of traffic that the sender considers
   critical, then the sender is nonetheless obliged to drop some portion
   of that critical traffic (e.g., it may elect to drop all non-critical
   traffic and 23% of the critical traffic, resulting in an overall 50%
   reduction).

   The sending node then inserts one or more Load-Info AVPs (see
   Section 5.1) into the request.  If the sender inserts more than one
   Load-Info AVP, then each Load-Info AVP MUST contain a unique scope,
   as specified by the Overload-Scope AVP(s) inside the Load-Info AVP.

   Each Load-Info AVP in the request MUST contain an Overload-Metric
   (see Section 5.5), indicating whether (and to what degree) the sender
   is overloaded for the indicated scope.  If this metric is not zero,
   then the Load-Info AVP MUST also contain a Period-Of-Validity AVP
   (see Section 5.6), indicating the maximum period the recipient should
   consider the Overload-Metric to be valid.  Any message containing a
   non-zero Overload-Metric also MUST set the 'O'verload bit in the
   Command Flags field to indicate to the recipient that the message
   contains an overload indication.  See Section 7.4 for the definition
   of the 'O'verload bit.

   Each Load-Info AVP MUST also contain a Load AVP, indicating the
   server's load level within the context of the indicated scope.  See
   Section 3.5.1 for details on generating this load metric.  Note that
   a server's load may frequently be identical for all the scopes for
   which it sends information.

3.2.2.  Receiving a Request

3.2.2.1.  Receiving a Request from a Compliant Peer

   A node that receives a request from a peer that has negotiated
   support for the overload control mechanism will extract the Load-Info
   AVPs from the request and use each of them to update its remote scope
   entries.  First, the node attempts to locate an existing scope entry
   that corresponds to the Overload-Scope indicated in the Load-Info
   AVP.  If one does not exist, it is created.  The scope entry is then
   populated with the overload metric, period of validity, and load



Roach & McMurry         Expires November 18, 2013              [Page 13]

Internet-Draft          Diameter Overload Control               May 2013


   information.  The message is then processed as normal.

   In some circumstances, request recipients can become sufficiently
   overloaded that even those messages received from complaint clients
   can overwhelm its processing capabilities.  Under such circumstances,
   nodes MAY begin treating a subset of such requests as if they were
   received from noncompliant peers (as explained in the following
   section).

3.2.2.2.  Receiving a Request from a Noncompliant Peer

   An important aspect of the overload control mechanism is that
   Diameter nodes that do not implement the mechanism cannot have an
   advantage over those that do.  In other words, it is necessary to
   prevent the situation that a network in overload will cease servicing
   those transactions from overload-compliant nodes in favor of those
   sent by those nodes that do not implement the overload control
   mechanism.  To achieve this goal, message recipients need to track
   the overload control metric on behalf of those sending nodes that do
   not implement overload, and to reject messages from those nodes that
   would have been dropped if the sender had implemented the overload
   mechanism.

   A node that receives a request from a peer that has not negotiated
   support for the overload control mechanism searches through its list
   of local scope entries to determine which ones match the combination
   of the fields in the received request.  (These are the entries that
   indicate the Overload-Metric that the node would have sent to the
   peer if the peer had supported the overload mechanism).  If none of
   the matching scope entries are in overload, then the message is sent
   normally, and no additional processing is required.

   If one or more matching local scope entries are in overload, then the
   node determines which scope is most overloaded.  The node then
   executes the "Loss" overload control algorithm (see Section 4) using
   the overload metric in that most overloaded scope.  If the result of
   running that algorithm determines that a sender who had implemented
   the overload control mechanism would have dropped the message, then
   the recipient MUST reply to the request with a
   DIAMETER_PEER_IN_OVERLOAD response (see Section 7.3).

3.2.3.  Sending an Answer to a Compliant Peer

   This section applies only to those answers sent to peers who
   negotiated use of the overload control mechanism during capabilities
   exchange.

   When sending an answer, a Diameter node inserts one or more Load-Info



Roach & McMurry         Expires November 18, 2013              [Page 14]

Internet-Draft          Diameter Overload Control               May 2013


   AVPs (see Section 5.1) into the answer.  If the sender inserts more
   than one Load-Info AVP, then each Load-Info AVP MUST contain a unique
   scope, as specified by the Overload-Scope AVP(s) inside the Load-Info
   AVP.

   Each Load-Info AVP in the answer MUST contain an Overload-Metric (see
   Section 5.5), indicating whether (and to what degree) the server is
   overloaded for the indicated scope.  If this metric is not zero, then
   the Load-Info AVP MUST also contain a Period-Of-Validity AVP (see
   Section 5.6), indicating the maximum period the recipient should
   consider the Overload-Metric to be valid.  Any message containing a
   non-zero Overload-Metric also MUST set the 'O'verload bit in the
   Command Flags field to indicate to the recipient that the message
   contains an overload indication.  See Section 7.4 for the definition
   of the 'O'verload bit.

   It is important to note that using this mechanism creates a closed
   feedback loop, with some amount of lag introduced by overload
   processing and the network.  As such, implementers must be aware of
   the potential for such a system to produce oscillations in the
   overload level.  Without proper control, it is also possible for
   these oscillations to diverge, resulting in undesirable behavior.
   There are several ways to address this issue, and it is left to
   implementors to determine the best way for their particular
   situation.  However, at a minimum senders of overload control
   information SHOULD apply hysteresis to the Overload-Metric, and
   signal easing of overload more slowly than signaling increases.

   Each Load-Info AVP MUST also contain a Load AVP, indicating the
   server's load level within the context of the indicated scope.  See
   Section 3.5.1 for details on generating this load metric.  Note that
   a server's load may frequently be identical for all the scopes for
   which it sends information.

3.2.4.  Receiving an Answer from a Compliant Peer

   A node that receives an answer from a peer that has negotiated
   support for the overload control mechanism will extract the Load-Info
   AVPs from the answer and use each of them to update its remote scope
   entries.  First, the node attempts to locate an existing scope entry
   that corresponds to the Overload-Scope indicated in the Load-Info
   AVP.  If one does not exist, it is created.  The scope entry is then
   populated with the overload metric, period of validity, and load
   information.  The message is then processed as normal.







Roach & McMurry         Expires November 18, 2013              [Page 15]

Internet-Draft          Diameter Overload Control               May 2013


3.3.  Diameter Agent Behavior

   This section discusses the behavior of a Diameter Agent acting as a
   Proxy or Relay.  Diameter Agents that provide redirect or translation
   services behave the same as Diameter Servers for the purpose of
   overload control, and follow the procedures defined in Section 3.2.

   Whenever sending a request or an answer, Agents MUST include a Load-
   Info AVP reflecting the Agent's overload and load information.  In
   formulating this information, the Agent may choose to use only that
   information relating to its own local resources.  However, better
   network behavior can be achieved if agents incorporate information
   received from their peers when generating overload information.  The
   exact means for incorporating such information is left to local
   policy at the agent.

   For example: consider an agent that distributes sessions and
   transactions among three Diameter servers, each hosting a different
   Diameter application.  While it would be compliant for the Agent to
   only report its own overload state (i.e., at "Host" scope), overall
   network behavior would be improved if it chose to also report
   overload state for up to three additional scopes (i.e. at
   "Application-ID" scope), incorporating the Overload information
   received from each server in these scopes.

3.3.1.  Proxying a Request

   Upon receiving a request, a Diameter Proxy or Relay performs the
   steps detailed in Section 3.2.2.

   The agent then MUST remove all Load-Info AVPs from the request: Load-
   Info is never passed through a Proxy or Relay transparently.

   When the Diameter Agent proxies or relays a request, it follows the
   process outlined in Section 3.2.1.

3.3.2.  Proxying an Answer

   Upon receiving an answer, a Diameter Agent follows the process
   described in Section 3.2.4 to update its remote scope entries.

   The Agent then MUST remove all Load-Info AVPs from the answer: Load-
   Info is never passed through a Proxy or Relay transparently.

   When the Diameter Agent proxies or relays a response, it follows the
   process outlined in Section 3.2.3.





Roach & McMurry         Expires November 18, 2013              [Page 16]

Internet-Draft          Diameter Overload Control               May 2013


3.4.  Proactive Load and Overload Communication

   Because not all Diameter links will have constant traffic, it may be
   occasionally necessary to send overload and/or load information over
   links that would otherwise be quiescent.  To proactively send such
   information to peers, the Diameter node with information to convey
   may choose to send a Diameter Watchdog Request (DWR) message to its
   peers.  The procedure described in Section 3.2.1 applies to these
   requests, which provides the means to send load and overload
   information.

   In order to prevent unnecessarily diminished throughput between
   peers, a Diameter node SHOULD proactively send a DWR to all its peers
   whenever it leaves an overload state.  Similarly, in order to provide
   peers the proper data for load distribution, nodes SHOULD send DWR
   messages to a peer if the load information most recently sent to that
   peer has changed by more than 20% and is more than 5 seconds old.

3.5.  Load Processing

   While the remainder of the mechanism described in this document is
   aimed at handling overload situations once they occur, it is far
   better for a system if overload can be avoided altogether.  In order
   to facilitate overload avoidance, the overload mechanism includes the
   ability to convey node load information.

   Semantically, the Load information sent by a Diameter node indicates
   the current utilization of its most constrained resource.  It is a
   linear scale from 0 (least loaded) to 65535 (most loaded).

   It is critical to distinguish between the value conveyed in the Load
   AVP and the value conveyed in the Overload-Metric AVP.  The Load AVP
   is computed and used independent of the Overload-Algorithm selected
   for a connection, while the Overload-Metric is meaningful only in the
   context of the selected algorithm.  Most importantly, the Load
   information never has any impact on the behavior specified in the
   overload algorithm.  If a node reports a Load of 65535, but the
   Overload-Metric does not indicate any need to apply the selected
   overload control algorithm, then the sender MUST NOT apply the
   selected overload control algorithm.  Conversely, if a node is
   reporting an Overload-Metric that requires the recipient to take
   action to reduce traffic, those actions MUST be taken, even if the
   node is simultaneously reporting a Load value of 0.

3.5.1.  Sending Load Information

   Diameter nodes implementing the overload mechanism described in this
   document MUST include a Load AVP (inside a Load-Info AVP) in every



Roach & McMurry         Expires November 18, 2013              [Page 17]

Internet-Draft          Diameter Overload Control               May 2013


   Diameter message (request and answer) they send over a connection
   that has been negotiated to use the overload control mechanism.  Note
   that this requirement does not necessitate calculation of the Load
   metric each time a message is sent; the Load value may be calculated
   periodically (e.g., every 100 ms), and used for every message sent
   until it is recalculated.

   The algorithm for generation of the load metric is a matter of local
   policy at the Diameter node, and may vary widely based on the
   internal software architecture of that node.

   For advanced calculations of Load, anticipated inputs to the
   computation include CPU utilization, network utilization, processor
   interrupts, I/O throughput, and internal message queue depths.

   To free implementors from the potential complexity of determining an
   optimal calculation for load, we define a very simple, baseline load
   calculation that MAY be used for the purpose of populating the Load
   AVP.  Implementations using this simplified calculation will use a
   configured, hard-coded, or Service Level Agreement (SLA)-defined
   maximum number of transactions per second (TPS) which a node is known
   to be able to support without issue.  These implementations simply
   report their load as a linear representation of how much of this
   known capacity is currently in use:

         Load = MIN(Current_TPS * 65535 / Maximum_TPS, 65535)

   To prevent rapid fluctuations in the load metric, nodes SHOULD report
   a rolling average of the calculated load rather than the actual
   instantaneous load at any given moment.

   Load information is scoped to the level indicated by the Overload-
   Info-Scope AVP present in the Load-Info AVP in which the Load AVP
   appears.

3.5.2.  Receiving Load Information

   While sending load information is mandatory, the actual processing of
   load information at a recipient is completely optional.  Ideally,
   recipients will use the load information as input to a decision
   regarding which of multiple equivalent servers to use when initiating
   a new connection.  Recipients may choose to update load information
   on receipt of every message; alternately, they may periodically
   "sample" messages from a host to determine the load it is currently
   reporting.






Roach & McMurry         Expires November 18, 2013              [Page 18]

Internet-Draft          Diameter Overload Control               May 2013


3.5.2.1.  Example Load Handling

   This section describes a non-normative example of how recipients can
   use Load information received from other Diameter nodes.  At a high
   level, the concept is that received load metrics are used to scale
   the distribution algorithm that the node uses for selection of a
   server from a group of equivalent servers.

   Consider a client that uses DNS to resolve a host name into IP
   addresses.  In this example, the client is attempting to reach the
   server for the realm example.com.  It performs a NAPTR query for the
   "AAA+D2T" record for that domain, and receives a result pointing to
   the SRV record "_diameter._tcp.example.com".  Querying for this SRV
   record, in turn, results in three entries, with the same priorities:

                   +------------+----------------------+
                   | SRV Weight | Server Name          |
                   +------------+----------------------+
                   | 20         | server-a.example.com |
                   | 20         | server-b.example.com |
                   | 60         | server-c.example.com |
                   +------------+----------------------+

   The client then examines the currently reported loads for each of the
   three servers.  In this example, we are asserting that the reported
   load metrics are as follows:

                  +-------------+----------------------+
                  | Load        | Server Name          |
                  +-------------+----------------------+
                  | 13107 (20%) | server-a.example.com |
                  | 26214 (60%) | server-b.example.com |
                  | 52428 (80%) | server-c.example.com |
                  +-------------+----------------------+

   Based on this load information, the client scales the SRV weights
   proportional to each server's reported load; the general formula is:

         new_weight = original_weight * (65535 - load) / 65535

   The node then calculates a new set of weights for the destination
   hosts:

   o  server-a: new_weight = 20 * (65535 - 13107) / 65535 = 16
   o  server-b: new_weight = 20 * (65535 - 26214) / 65535 = 12
   o  server-c: new_weight = 60 * (65535 - 52428) / 65535 = 12

   These three new weights (16, 12, and 12) are then used as input to



Roach & McMurry         Expires November 18, 2013              [Page 19]

Internet-Draft          Diameter Overload Control               May 2013


   the random selection process traditionally used when selecting among
   several SRV records.

   Note that this example is provided in the context of DNS SRV
   processing; however, it works equally well in the case that server
   processing weights are provisioned or made available through an
   alternate resolution process.

3.6.  Session Establishment for Session Groups

   The procedure in this section applies to any Diameter operation that
   may result in the creation of a new Diameter session.  Note that
   these operations are performed in addition to any normal message
   processing, and in addition to the operations described in the
   following sections.

3.6.1.  Session Group Concepts

   At the time a session is established, the server and/or the client
   may choose to assign the newly created session to a Session Group
   that they can use to refer to the session (and other sessions in the
   same group) in later overload-related messages.  This grouping is
   intended to be used by servers that have visibility into resources
   that may be independently overloaded, but which do not correspond to
   an existing Diameter construct (such as Application, Realm, or
   Destination Server).

   One example of a server having visibility into resources that don't
   have a corresponding Diameter construct is a Diameter Agent servicing
   a mixed community of users -- say, one authenticated by a "Business"
   server, and another authenticated by a "Residential" server.  The
   client in this network does not know which group any given session
   belongs in; the routing of sessions is based on information available
   only to the agent.

















Roach & McMurry         Expires November 18, 2013              [Page 20]

Internet-Draft          Diameter Overload Control               May 2013


                        +-------------+   +-------------+
                        |             |   |             |
                        |  Server A   |   |  Server B   |
                        | (Business)  |   |(Residential)|
                        |             |   |             |
                        +-------------+   +-------------+
                                `.             ,'
                                  `.         ,'
                                    `.     ,'
                                +-----+---+-----+
                                |               |
                                |     Agent     |
                                |               |
                                +---------------+
                                        ^
                                        |
                                +-------+-------+
                                |               |
                                |    Client     |
                                |               |
                                +---------------+

   In this case, the Agent may wish to assign sessions to two client-
   visible Session Groups when the session is established.  By doing so,
   the Agent gains the ability to report Load and Overload metrics to
   the Client independently for the two classes of users.  This can be
   extremely helpful, for example, in allowing the Agent to ask the
   Client to throttle traffic for the Residential server when it becomes
   overload, without impacting sessions pertaining to the Business
   server.

   Similar situations can arise even without the presence of Diameter
   Agents in the network: a server may have a class of sessions that
   require access to an off-board database (which can, itself, become
   overloaded), while also servicing a class of sessions that is handled
   entirely by a local authentication table.  The server can use Session
   Groups to assign these two classes of sessions to different groups,
   and report overload on the class using the (overloaded) off-board
   database without impacting the other sessions.

   In some applications, it is possible to have the session established
   by one peer (e.g., in the upstream direction), while some subsequent
   in-session transactions are initiated by the other peer (e.g., in the
   downstream direction).  Because of this possibility, the overload
   mechanism allows both peers to establish a Session Group at the time
   the session is set up.  The session identifiers are scoped to the
   node that sends them.  In other words, if a server assigns a session
   to a group called "Residential", this group is not related to a



Roach & McMurry         Expires November 18, 2013              [Page 21]

Internet-Draft          Diameter Overload Control               May 2013


   client group (if any) by the same name.  For clarity, this document
   will refer to the session group assigned by the server performing the
   processing as a "local session group," and the session group assigned
   by the remote node as a "remote session group."

   Nodes that send a session-creating request follow normal Diameter
   procedures, along with the additional behavior described in
   Section 3.2.1 and Section 3.3.1, as appropriate.  Such nodes may also
   assign the session to a Session Group, as long as the peer to which
   they are communicating indicated support for the "Session-Group"
   scope during capabilities exchange.  Whether to do so and what group
   to assign a session to is done according to local policy.  To perform
   such assignment, the node will include a Session-Group AVP (see
   Section 5.7 in the Load-Info AVP for the session creating request.
   These nodes also store the assigned name as the session's local
   session group.

3.6.2.  Session Group Procedures

   The procedures in this section only apply on connections for which
   support for the "Session-Group" scope has been negotiated during
   capabilities exchange.  See Section 3.1.

   When a node receives a session creating request, it MUST check that
   request for the presence for a Session-Group AVP in its Load-Info
   AVP.  If one is present, it stores that session group name as the
   remote session group name for that server.  This allows clients to
   assign the session to a group, allowing it to indicate overload for
   server-initiated transactions in the resulting session.

   When a node replies to a session creating request, it can choose to
   assign the newly-established session to a session group.  Whether it
   chooses to do so is independent of whether the remote node assigned
   the session to a session group.  To perform such an assignment, the
   node includes a Session-Group AVP in the Load-Info AVP sent in answer
   to the session-creating request.  These nodes also store the assigned
   name as the session's local session group.

   Finally, when a node that has sent a session-creating request
   receives a corresponding answer message, it MUST check that answer
   for the presence of a Session-Group AVP in its Load-Info AVP.  If one
   is present, it stores that session group name as the remote session
   group name for that server.


4.  Loss-Based Overload Control Algorithm

   This section describes a baseline, mandatory-to-implement overload



Roach & McMurry         Expires November 18, 2013              [Page 22]

Internet-Draft          Diameter Overload Control               May 2013


   control algorithm, identified by the indicator "Loss".  This
   algorithm allows a Diameter peer to ask its peers to reduce the
   number of requests they would ordinarily send by a specified
   percentage.  For example, if a peer requests of another peer that it
   reduce the traffic it is sending by 10%, then that peer will
   redirect, reject, or treat as failed, 10% of the traffic that would
   have otherwise been sent to this Diameter node.

4.1.  Overload-Metric values for the 'Loss' Algorithm

   A Diameter node entering the overload state for any of the scopes
   that it uses with its peers will calculate a value for its Overload
   Metric, in the range of 0 to 100 (inclusive).  This value indicates
   the percentage traffic reduction the Diameter node wishes its peers
   to implement.  The computation of the exact value for this parameter
   is left as an implementation choice at the sending node.  It is
   acceptable for implementations to request different levels of traffic
   reduction to different peers according to local policy at the
   Diameter node.  These Overload Metrics are then communicated to peers
   using the Overload-Metric AVP in requests and answers sent by this
   node.

   Recipients of Overload-Metric AVPs on connections for which the
   "Loss" algorithm has been specified MUST reduce the number of
   requests sent in the corresponding scope by that percentage, either
   by redirecting them to an alternate destination, or by failing the
   request.  For a Diameter Agent, these failures are indicated to the
   peer who originated the request by sending a
   DIAMETER_PEER_IN_OVERLOAD response (see Section 7.3).  For diameter
   clients, these failures cause the client to behave as if they
   received a transient error in response to the request.

   It is acceptable, when implementing the "Loss" algorithm, for the
   reduction in transactions to make use of a statistical loss function
   (e.g., random assignment of transactions into "success" and "failure"
   categories based on the indicated percentage).  In such a case, the
   actual traffic reduction might vary slightly from the percentage
   indicated, albeit in an insignificant amount.

   The selection of which messages to withhold from sending does not
   need to be arbitrary.  For example, implementations are allowed to
   distinguish between higher-priority and lower-priority messages, and
   drop the lower-priority messages in favor of dropping the higher
   priority messages, as long as the total reduction in traffic conforms
   to the Overload-Metric in effect at the time.  The selection of which
   messages to prioritize over others will likely vary from application
   to application (and may even be subject to standardization as part of
   the application definition).  One example of such a prioritization



Roach & McMurry         Expires November 18, 2013              [Page 23]

Internet-Draft          Diameter Overload Control               May 2013


   scheme would be to treat those messages that result in the creation
   of a new session as lower priority then those messages sent in the
   context of an established session.

4.2.  Example Implementation

   The exact means a client uses to implement the requirement that it
   reduce traffic by a requested percentage is left to the discretion of
   the implementor.  However, to aid in understanding the nature of such
   an implementation, we present an example of a valid implementation in
   pseudo-code.

   In this example, we consider that the sending node maintains two
   classes of request.  The first category are considered of lower
   priority than the second category.  If a reduction in traffic is
   required, then these lower priority requests will be dropped before
   any of the higher priority requests are dropped.

   The sending Diameter node determines the mix of requests falling into
   the first category, and those falling into the second category.  For
   example, 40% of the requests may be in the lower-priority category,
   while 60% are in the higher-priority category.

   When a node receives an overload indication from one of its peers, it
   converts the Overload-Metric value to a value that applies to the
   first category of requests.  For example, if the Overload-Metric for
   the applicable context is "10", and 40% of the requests are in the
   lower-priority category, then:

         10 / 40 * 100 = 25

   Or 25% of the requests in the first category can be dropped, with an
   overall reduction in sent traffic of 10%.  The sender then drops 25%
   of all category 1 requests.  This can be done stochastically, by
   selecting a random number for each sent packet between 1 to 100
   (inclusive), and dropping any packet for which the resulting
   percentage is equal to or less than 25.  In this set of
   circumstances, messages in the second category do not require any
   reduction to meet the requirement of 25% traffic reduction.

   A reference algorithm is shown below, using pseudo-code.

   cat1 := 80.0         // Category 1 --- subject to reduction
   cat2 := 100.0 - cat1 // Category 2 --- Under normal operations
   // only subject to reduction after category 1 is exhausted.
   // Note that the above ratio is simply a reasonable default.
   // The actual values will change through periodic sampling
   // as the traffic mix changes over time.



Roach & McMurry         Expires November 18, 2013              [Page 24]

Internet-Draft          Diameter Overload Control               May 2013


   while (true) {
     // We're modeling message processing as a single work queue
     // that contains both incoming and outgoing messages.
     msg := get_next_message_from_work_queue()

     update_mix(cat1, cat2)  // See Note below

     switch (msg.type) {

       case outbound request:
         destination := get_next_hop(msg)
         oc_context := get_oc_scope(destination,msg)

         if (we are in overload) {
           add_overload_avps(msg)
         }

         if (oc_context == null)  {
             send_to_network(msg) // Process it normally by sending the
             // request to the next hop since this particular
             // destination is not subject to overload
         }
         else  {
            // Determine if server wants to enter in overload or is in
            // overload
            in_oc := extract_in_oc(oc_context)

            oc_value := extract_oc(oc_context)
            oc_validity := extract_oc_validity(oc_context)

            if (in_oc == false or oc_validity is not in effect)  {
               send_to_network(msg) // Process it normally by sending
               // the request to the next hop since this particular
               // destination is not subject to overload.  Optionally,
               // clear the oc context for this server (not shown).
            }
            else  {  // Begin perform overload control
               r := random()
               drop_msg := false

               if (cat1 >= cat2) {
                   category := assign_msg_to_category(msg)
                   pct_to_reduce_cat2 := 0
                   pct_to_reduce_cat1 := oc_value / cat1 * 100
                   if (pct_to_reduce_cat1 > 100)  {
                      // Get remaining messages from category 2
                      pct_to_reduce_cat2 := 100 - pct_to_reduce_cat1
                      pct_to_reduce_cat1 := 100



Roach & McMurry         Expires November 18, 2013              [Page 25]

Internet-Draft          Diameter Overload Control               May 2013


                   }

                   if (category == cat1)  {
                      if (r <= pct_to_reduce_cat1)  {
                         drop_msg := true
                      }
                   }
                   else {  // Message from category 2
                      if (r <= pct_to_reduce_cat2)  {
                         drop_msg := true
                      }
                   }
               }
               else  { // More category 2 messages than category 1;
                       // indicative of an emergency situation.  Since
                       // there are more category 2 messages, don't
                       // bother distinguishing between category 1 or
                       // 2 --- treat them equal (for simplicity).
                   if (r <= oc_value)
                      drop_msg := true
               }

               if (drop_msg == false) {
                   send_to_network(msg) // Process it normally by
                  // sending the request to the next hop
               }
               else  {
                  // Do not send request downstream, handle locally by
                  // generating response (if a proxy) or treating as
                  // an error (if a user agent).
               }
            }  // End perform overload control
         }

       end case // outbound request

       case outbound answer:
         if (we are in overload) {
           add_overload_avps(msg)
         }
         send_to_network(msg)

       end case // outbound answer

       case inbound answer:
          create_or_update_oc_scope()  // For the specific server
          // that sent the answer, create or update the oc scope;
          // i.e., extract the values of the overload AVPs



Roach & McMurry         Expires November 18, 2013              [Page 26]

Internet-Draft          Diameter Overload Control               May 2013


          // and store them in the proper scopes for later use.
          process_msg(msg)

       end case // inbound answer
       case inbound request:
          create_or_update_oc_scope()

         if (we are not in overload)  {
            process_msg(msg)
         }
         else {  // We are in overload
            if ( connection supports overload)
               process_msg(msg)
            }
            else {  // Sender does not support oc
               if (local_policy(msg) says process message)  {
                  process_msg(msg)
               }
               else  {
                  send_answer(msg, DIAMETER_PEER_IN_OVERLOAD)
               }
            }
         }
       end case // inbound request
     }
   }



   A simple way to sample the traffic mix for category 1 and category 2
   is to associate a counter with each category of message.
   Periodically (every 5-10s), get the value of the counters and
   calculate the ratio of category 1 messages to category 2 messages
   since the last calculation.

   Example: In the last 5 seconds, a total of 500 requests were
   scheduled to be sent.  Assume that 450 out of 500 were messages
   subject to reduction and 50 out of 500 were classified as requests
   not subject to reduction.  Based on this ratio, cat1 := 90 and cat2
   := 10, or a 90/10 mix will be used in overload calculations.

   Of course, this scheme can be generalized to include an arbitrary
   number of priorities, depending on how many different classes of
   messages make sense for the given application.







Roach & McMurry         Expires November 18, 2013              [Page 27]

Internet-Draft          Diameter Overload Control               May 2013


5.  Diameter AVPs for Overload

   NOTE: THE AVP NUMBERS IN THIS SECTION ARE USED FOR EXAMPLE PURPOSES
   ONLY.  THE FINAL AVP CODES TO BE USED WILL BE ASSIGNED BY IANA DURING
   THE PUBLICATION PROCESS, WHEN AND IF THIS DOCUMENT IS PUBLISHED AS AN
   RFC.

   +---------------------+-------+-------+-------------+------+--------+
   | Attribute Name      | AVP   | Sec.  | Data Type   | MUST | MUST   |
   |                     | Code  | Def.  |             |      | NOT    |
   +---------------------+-------+-------+-------------+------+--------+
   | Load-Info           | 1600  | 5.1   | Grouped     |      | M,V    |
   | Supported-Scopes    | 1601  | 5.2   | Unsigned64  |      | M,V    |
   | Overload-Algorithm  | 1602  | 5.3   | Enumerated  |      | M,V    |
   | Overload-Info-Scope | 1603  | 5.4   | OctetString |      | M,V    |
   | Overload-Metric     | 1604  | 5.5   | Unsigned32  |      | M,V    |
   | Period-Of-Validity  | 1605  | 5.6   | Unsigned32  |      | M,V    |
   | Session-Group       | 1606  | 5.7   | UTF8String  |      | M,V    |
   | Load                | 1607  | 5.8   | Unsigned32  |      | M,V    |
   +---------------------+-------+-------+-------------+------+--------+

5.1.  Load-Info AVP

   The Load-Info AVP (AVP code 1600) is of type Grouped, and is used as
   a top-level container to group together all information pertaining to
   load and overload information.  Every Load-Info AVP MUST contain one
   Overload-Information-Scope AVP, and one Overload-Metric AVP.

   The Grouped Data field of the Load-Info AVP has the following CCF
   grammar:

           < Load-Info > ::= < AVP Header: 1600 >
                             < Overload-Metric >
                           * { Overload-Info-Scope }
                             [ Supported-Scopes ]
                           * [ Overload-Algorithm ]
                             [ Period-Of-Validity ]
                             [ Session-Group ]
                             [ Load ]
                           * [ AVP ]

5.2.  Supported-Scopes AVP

   The Supported-Scopes AVP (AVP code 1601) is of type Uint64, and is
   used during capabilities exchange to indicate the scopes that a given
   node can receive on the connection.  Nodes that support the mechanism
   defined in this document MUST include a Supported-Scopes AVP in all
   CER messages.  It also MUST appear in any CEA messages sent in answer



Roach & McMurry         Expires November 18, 2013              [Page 28]

Internet-Draft          Diameter Overload Control               May 2013


   to a CER message containing a Load-Info AVP.  The Supported-Scopes
   AVP MUST NOT appear in any other message types.  See Section 5.4 for
   an initial list of scopes.

   The Supported-Scopes AVP contains a bitmap that indicates the scopes
   supported by the sender.  Within the bitmap, the least significant
   bit indicates support for scope 1 (Destination-Realm), while the next
   least significant bit indicates support for scope 2 (Application-ID),
   and so on.  In general, if we consider the bits to be numbered from 0
   (LSB) to 63 (MSB), then any bit n corresponds to the scope type
   numbered n+1.  This scheme allows for up to 64 total scopes to be
   supported.  More formally, the bitmask used to indicate support for
   any specific context is calculated as follows (where the symbol "<<"
   indicates a bit shift left):

         bitmask = 1 << (n - 1)

   For additional clarity, the bitmasks for the scopes defined in this
   document are as follows:

            +-------+--------------------+-------------------+
            | Scope | Bitmask            | Scope             |
            +-------+--------------------+-------------------+
            | 1     | 0x0000000000000001 | Destination-Realm |
            | 2     | 0x0000000000000002 | Application-ID    |
            | 3     | 0x0000000000000004 | Destination-Host  |
            | 4     | 0x0000000000000008 | Host              |
            | 5     | 0x0000000000000010 | Connection        |
            | 6     | 0x0000000000000020 | Session-Group     |
            | 7     | 0x0000000000000040 | Session           |
            +-------+--------------------+-------------------+

   The advertisement process that makes use of the Supported-Scopes AVP
   is described in Section 3.1.

5.3.  Overload-Algorithm AVP

   The Overload-Algorithm AVP (AVP code 1602) is of type Enumerated, and
   is used to negotiate the algorithm that will be used for load
   abatement.  The Overload-Algorithm AVP MAY appear in CER and CEA
   messages, and MUST NOT appear in any other message types.  If absent,
   an Overload Algorithm of type 1 (Loss) is indicated.  Additional
   values can be registered by other documents; see Appendix C.1.
   Initial values for the enumeration are as follows:







Roach & McMurry         Expires November 18, 2013              [Page 29]

Internet-Draft          Diameter Overload Control               May 2013


               +------------+----------------+------------+
               | AVP Values | Attribute Name | Reference  |
               +------------+----------------+------------+
               | 0          | Reserved       | -          |
               | 1          | Loss           | [RFC xxxx] |
               +------------+----------------+------------+

5.4.  Overload-Info-Scope AVP

   The Overload-Info-Scope AVP (AVP code 1603) is of type OctetString,
   and is used to indicate to which scope the Overload-Metric applies.

   See Section 2 for a definition of the different scope types and a
   formal description of how they are applied.  Other documents may
   define additional scopes; see Appendix C.2 for details.

        0                   1                   2                   3
        0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
       +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
       |    Scope      |                                               |
       +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+          Details                              |
       |                                                               |
       +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+

                +-------+-------------------+------------+
                | Scope | Attribute Name    | Reference  |
                +-------+-------------------+------------+
                | 0     | Reserved          | [RFC xxxx] |
                | 1     | Destination-Realm | [RFC xxxx] |
                | 2     | Application-ID    | [RFC xxxx] |
                | 3     | Destination-Host  | [RFC xxxx] |
                | 4     | Host              | [RFC xxxx] |
                | 5     | Connection        | [RFC xxxx] |
                | 6     | Session-Group     | [RFC xxxx] |
                | 7     | Session           | [RFC xxxx] |
                +-------+-------------------+------------+

   Each Overload-Info-Scope has a different encoding, according to the
   identifier used to designate the corresponding scope.  The formats
   for the seven scopes defined in this document are given in the
   following section.










Roach & McMurry         Expires November 18, 2013              [Page 30]

Internet-Draft          Diameter Overload Control               May 2013


5.4.1.  Realm Scope

        0                   1                   2                   3
        0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
       +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
       |       1       |                                               |
       +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+        Realm (DiameterIdentity)               |
       |                                                               |
       +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+

5.4.2.  Application-ID Scope

        0                   1                   2                   3
        0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
       +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
       |       2       |           Reserved (set to zeros)             |
       +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
       |                  Application-ID (Unsigned32)                  |
       +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+

5.4.3.  Host Scope

        0                   1                   2                   3
        0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
       +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
       |       3       |                                               |
       +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+        Host (DiameterIdentity)                |
       |                                                               |
       +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+

5.4.4.  Session Scope

        0                   1                   2                   3
        0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
       +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
       |       4       |                                               |
       +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+        Session-ID (UTF8String)                |
       |                                                               |
       +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+

5.4.5.  Connection Scope

        0                   1                   2                   3
        0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
       +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
       |       5       |           Reserved (set to zeros)             |
       +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+




Roach & McMurry         Expires November 18, 2013              [Page 31]

Internet-Draft          Diameter Overload Control               May 2013


5.4.6.  Session Group Scope

        0                   1                   2                   3
        0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
       +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
       |       6       |                                               |
       +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+        Group Name (UTF8String)                |
       |                                                               |
       +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+

5.5.  Overload-Metric AVP

   The Overload-Metric AVP (AVP code 1604) is of type Unsigned32, and is
   used as input to the load mitigation algorithm.  Its definition and
   interpretation is left up to each individual algorithm, with the
   exception that an Overload-Metric of "0" always indicates that the
   node is not in overload (that is, no load abatement procedures are in
   effect) for the indicated scope.

5.6.  Period-Of-Validity AVP

   The Period-Of-Validity AVP (AVP code 1605) is of type Unsigned32, and
   is used to indicate the length of time, in seconds, the Overload-
   Metric is to be considered valid (unless overridden by a subsequent
   Overload-Metric in the same scope).  It MUST NOT be present if the
   Overload-Metric is '0', and MUST be present otherwise.

5.7.  Session-Group AVP

   The Session-Group AVP (AVP code 1606) is of type UTF8String, and is
   used to assign a new session to the session group that it names.  The
   Session-Group AVP MAY appear once in the answer to a session-creating
   request, and MUST NOT appear in any other message types.

5.8.  Load AVP

   The Load AVP (AVP code 1607) is of type Unsigned32, and is used to
   indicate the load level of the scope in which it appears.  See
   Section 3.5 for additional information.


6.  Security Considerations

   A key concern for recipients of overload metrics and load information
   is whether the peer from which the information has been received is
   authorized to speak for the indicated scope.  For scopes such as
   "Host" and "Connection", such authorization is obvious.  For other
   scopes, such as "Application-ID" and "Realm", the potential for a



Roach & McMurry         Expires November 18, 2013              [Page 32]

Internet-Draft          Diameter Overload Control               May 2013


   peer to maliciously or accidentally reduce traffic to a third party
   is evident.  Implementations may choose to ignore indications from
   hosts which do not clearly have authority over the indicated scope;
   alternately, they may wish to further restrict the scope to apply
   only to the host from which the information has been received.

   On the other hand, multiple nodes that are under the same
   administrative control (or a tightly controlled confederation of
   control) may be implicitly trusted to speak for all scopes within
   that domain of control.  Implementations are encouraged to allow
   configuration of inherently trusted servers to which the foregoing
   restrictions are not applied.

   Open Issue: There are almost certainly other security issues to take
   into consideration here.  For example, we might need to include
   guidance around who gets to see our own load information, and
   potentially changing the granularity of information presented based
   on trust relationships.


7.  IANA Considerations

   This document defines new entries in several existing IANA tables.
   It also creates two new tables.

7.1.  New Diameter AVPs

   The following entries are added to the "AVP Codes" table under the
   "aaa-parameters" registry.

              +----------+---------------------+-----------+
              | AVP Code | Attribute Name      | Reference |
              +----------+---------------------+-----------+
              | 1600     | Load-Info           | RFC xxxx  |
              | 1601     | Supported-Scopes    | RFC xxxx  |
              | 1602     | Overload-Algorithm  | RFC xxxx  |
              | 1603     | Overload-Info-Scope | RFC xxxx  |
              | 1604     | Overload-Metric     | RFC xxxx  |
              | 1605     | Period-Of-Validity  | RFC xxxx  |
              | 1606     | Session-Group       | RFC xxxx  |
              | 1607     | Load                | RFC xxxx  |
              +----------+---------------------+-----------+

7.2.  New Diameter Disconnect-Cause

   The following entry is added to the "Disconnect-Cause AVP Values
   (code 273)" table in the "aaa-parameters" registry:




Roach & McMurry         Expires November 18, 2013              [Page 33]

Internet-Draft          Diameter Overload Control               May 2013


       +------------------------+---------------------+-----------+
       | AVP Values             | Attribute Name      | Reference |
       +------------------------+---------------------+-----------+
       | 128 [actual value TBD] | NEGOTIATION_FAILURE | RFC xxxx  |
       +------------------------+---------------------+-----------+

7.3.  New Diameter Response Code

   The following entry is added to the "Result-Code AVP Values (code
   268) - Transient Failures" table in the "aaa-parameters" registry:

    +-------------------------+---------------------------+-----------+
    | AVP Values              | Attribute Name            | Reference |
    +-------------------------+---------------------------+-----------+
    | 4128 [actual value TBD] | DIAMETER_PEER_IN_OVERLOAD | RFC xxxx  |
    +-------------------------+---------------------------+-----------+

7.4.  New Command Flag

   The following entry is added to the "Command Flags" table in the
   "aaa-parameters" registry:

                     +-----+------------+-----------+
                     | bit | Name       | Reference |
                     +-----+------------+-----------+
                     | 4   | 'O'verload | RFC xxxx  |
                     +-----+------------+-----------+

7.5.  Overload Algorithm Registry

   This document defines a new table, to be titled "Overload-Algorithm
   Values (code 1602)", in the "aaa-parameters" registry.  Its initial
   values are to be taken from the table in Section 5.3.

   New entries in this table follow the IANA policy of "Specification
   Required."  (Open Issue: The WG should discuss registration policy to
   ensure that we think this is the right balance).

7.6.  Overload Scope Registry

   This document defines a new table, to be titled "Overload-Info-Scope
   Values (code 1603)", in the "aaa-parameters" registry.  Its initial
   values are to be taken from the table in Section 5.4.

   New entries in this table follow the IANA policy of "Specification
   Required."  (Open Issue: The WG should discuss registration policy to
   ensure that we think this is the right balance).




Roach & McMurry         Expires November 18, 2013              [Page 34]

Internet-Draft          Diameter Overload Control               May 2013


8.  References

8.1.  Normative References

   [I-D.ietf-dime-overload-reqs]
              McMurry, E. and B. Campbell, "Diameter Overload Control
              Requirements", draft-ietf-dime-overload-reqs-06 (work in
              progress), April 2013.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC6733]  Fajardo, V., Arkko, J., Loughney, J., and G. Zorn,
              "Diameter Base Protocol", RFC 6733, October 2012.

8.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.ietf-soc-overload-control]
              Gurbani, V., Hilt, V., and H. Schulzrinne, "Session
              Initiation Protocol (SIP) Overload Control",
              draft-ietf-soc-overload-control-12 (work in progress),
              February 2013.

   [I-D.ietf-soc-overload-rate-control]
              Noel, E. and P. Williams, "Session Initiation Protocol
              (SIP) Rate Control",
              draft-ietf-soc-overload-rate-control-04 (work in
              progress), April 2013.

   [RFC3588]  Calhoun, P., Loughney, J., Guttman, E., Zorn, G., and J.
              Arkko, "Diameter Base Protocol", RFC 3588, September 2003.

   [RFC6357]  Hilt, V., Noel, E., Shen, C., and A. Abdelal, "Design
              Considerations for Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)
              Overload Control", RFC 6357, August 2011.


Appendix A.  Acknowledgements

   This work was inspired by and borrows heavily from the SIP overload
   control mechanism described in [I-D.ietf-soc-overload-control].  The
   authors of this document are deeply grateful to the editor and
   authors of that work, as well as its many contributors.

   Thanks to Ben Campbell for significant input to the initial mechanism
   design.  The author also thanks Martin Dolly, Bob Wallace, John
   Gilmore, Matt McCann, Jonathan Palmer, Kedar Karmarkar, Imtiaz
   Shaikh, Jouni Korhonen, Uri Baniel, Jianrong Wang, Brian Freeman, and



Roach & McMurry         Expires November 18, 2013              [Page 35]

Internet-Draft          Diameter Overload Control               May 2013


   Eric Noel for early feedback on the mechanism.


Appendix B.  Requirements Analysis

   This section analyzes the mechanism described in this document
   against the set of requirements detailed in
   [I-D.ietf-dime-overload-reqs].

   REQ 1:   The overload control mechanism MUST provide a communication
            method for Diameter nodes to exchange load and overload
            information.

                Compliant.  The mechanism uses new AVPs piggybacked on
                existing Diameter messages to exchange load and overload
                information.

   REQ 2:   The mechanism MUST allow Diameter nodes to support overload
            control regardless of which Diameter applications they
            support.  Diameter clients must be able to use the received
            load and overload information to support graceful behavior
            during an overload condition.  Graceful behavior under
            overload conditions is best described by REQ 3.

                Compliant.  Piggybacked AVPs conveying overload control
                information is sent on every Diameter message to
                compliant peers, without regard to its Application-ID.
                The use of the Application-ID scope allows information
                relevant to one application to be piggybacked on
                messages for other applications.

                Information sent to peers includes load and overload
                information for use by overload control algorithms,
                intended for graceful overload mitigation.  The
                mechanism is hop-by-hop and has provisions for agents to
                forward or aggregate load and overload information
                towards clients and servers so that each element can
                have appropriate information for graceful overload
                control.

   REQ 3:   The overload control mechanism MUST limit the impact of
            overload on the overall useful throughput of a Diameter
            server, even when the incoming load on the network is far in
            excess of its capacity.  The overall useful throughput under
            load is the ultimate measure of the value of an overload
            control mechanism.





Roach & McMurry         Expires November 18, 2013              [Page 36]

Internet-Draft          Diameter Overload Control               May 2013


                Compliant.  The mechanism provides information nodes use
                to affect the impacts of overload according to agreed
                upon algorithms.  By controlling or reducing traffic
                sent towards overloaded elements, using overload control
                information as described in the mechanism, the effects
                of overload can be limited.  Use of scopes provides a
                means to minimize the impact of overload mitigation,
                increasing overall useful throughput during overload
                conditions.

   REQ 4:   Diameter allows requests to be sent from either side of a
            connection and either side of a connection may have need to
            provide its overload status.  The mechanism MUST allow each
            side of a connection to independently inform the other of
            its overload status.

                Compliant.  Overload control information can be
                piggybacked on any Diameter message.  This applies for
                requests and answers sent from either side of a
                connection.

   REQ 5:   Diameter allows nodes to determine their peers via dynamic
            discovery or manual configuration.  The mechanism MUST work
            consistently without regard to how peers are determined.

                Compliant.  The mechanism makes no assumptions as to how
                peers are determined.  Discovery of supporting peers is
                accomplished as part of the normal capabilities exchange
                and does not affect how or where these exchanges occur.

   REQ 6:   The mechanism designers SHOULD seek to minimize the amount
            of new configuration required in order to work.  For
            example, it is better to allow peers to advertise or
            negotiate support for the mechanism, rather than to require
            this knowledge to be configured at each node.

                Compliant.  The mechanism adds information to the
                existing Diameter capabilities exchange mechanism for
                determining peer support and overload control
                characteristics.  Since this is accomplished dynamically
                at the start of connections, no provisioning is required
                to establish which peers support the mechanism and in
                what fashion.  Implementations are free to add
                configuration for local policy and other control of the
                mechanism, but this is not required.






Roach & McMurry         Expires November 18, 2013              [Page 37]

Internet-Draft          Diameter Overload Control               May 2013


   REQ 7:   The overload control mechanism and any associated default
            algorithm(s) MUST ensure that the system remains stable.  At
            some point after an overload condition has ended, the
            mechanism MUST enable capacity to stabilize and become equal
            to what it would be in the absence of an overload condition.
            Note that this also requires that the mechanism MUST allow
            nodes to shed load without introducing non converging
            oscillations during or after an overload condition.

                Compliant.  It is possible for an implementation using
                this to meet this requirement, and the hop-by-hop nature
                limits the impact of overload control actions.
                Additional guidance is provided for implementors on
                sending of the Overload-Metric and its implications for
                the closed loop control system created by this
                mechanism.

   REQ 8:   Supporting nodes MUST be able to distinguish current
            overload information from stale information, and SHOULD make
            decisions using the most currently available information.

                Compliant.  The mechanism provides for rapid updates of
                overload control information as well as having timeouts
                on the validity of overload information that must be
                provided by senders.

   REQ 9:   The mechanism MUST function across fully loaded as well as
            quiescent transport connections.  This is partially derived
            from the requirement for stability in REQ 7.

                Compliant.  The mechanism uses piggybacked information
                transfer, which will generally result in the ability to
                transfer information on a similar rate to loading.  It
                also provides for triggering the use of DWR with
                piggybacked information for quiescent connections.

   REQ 10:  Consumers of overload information MUST be able to determine
            when the overload condition improves or ends.

                Compliant.  The mechanism provides for rapid updates of
                overload control information, including abatement
                information, as well as mandatory timeouts on the
                validity of overload information that must be provided
                by senders (it is soft state).  Additionally, the
                mechanism provides for sending a DWR with piggybacked
                information to inform of overload abatement more
                quickly.




Roach & McMurry         Expires November 18, 2013              [Page 38]

Internet-Draft          Diameter Overload Control               May 2013


   REQ 11:  The overload control mechanism MUST be able to operate in
            networks of different sizes.

                Compliant.  The hop-by-hop nature of the mechanism
                restricts the impacts that large networks might have on
                the ability of nodes to deal with overload control
                information, as well as restricting the signaling needed
                to convey overload information.  The use of piggybacked
                information transfer limits the additional messaging
                imposed by the mechanism for large and small networks
                and has the characteristic of scaling with the amount of
                Diameter traffic on a network.  Additionally, the
                dynamic nature of the capabilities exchange reduces the
                provisioning burden that can be incurred at large
                scales.

   REQ 12:  When a single network node fails, goes into overload, or
            suffers from reduced processing capacity, the mechanism MUST
            make it possible to limit the impact of this on other nodes
            in the network.  This helps to prevent a small-scale failure
            from becoming a widespread outage.

                Compliant.  The mechanism provides for information about
                such issues to be conveyed in order for nodes to take
                appropriate action to mitigate the situation and prevent
                cascades.

   REQ 13:  The mechanism MUST NOT introduce substantial additional work
            for node in an overloaded state.  For example, a requirement
            for an overloaded node to send overload information every
            time it received a new request would introduce substantial
            work.  Existing messaging is likely to have the
            characteristic of increasing as an overload condition
            approaches, allowing for the possibility of increased
            feedback for information piggybacked on it.

                Compliant.  The mechanism requires sending load and
                overload information on all messages exchanged with
                compliant peers.  It does not, however, require that the
                information be recalculated or updated with each
                message.  The update frequency is up to the
                implementation, and each implementation can make
                decisions on balancing the update of overload
                information along with its other priorities.  It is
                expected that using a periodically updated grouped AVP
                added to all messages sent to compliant peers will not
                add substantial additional work.  Piggyback base
                transport also does not require composition, sending, or



Roach & McMurry         Expires November 18, 2013              [Page 39]

Internet-Draft          Diameter Overload Control               May 2013


                parsing of new Diameter messages for the purpose of
                conveying overload control information.

   REQ 14:  Some scenarios that result in overload involve a rapid
            increase of traffic with little time between normal levels
            and overload inducing levels.  The mechanism SHOULD provide
            for rapid feedback when traffic levels increase.

                Compliant.  The use of piggybacked information transport
                by the mechanism allows for overload control information
                to be sent at the same rate as the normal traffic.  It
                is presumed that the rate of normal traffic will go up
                as nodes approach, or enter, overload.  Additionally,
                DWR messages may be proactively triggered with
                piggybacked overload control information to provide
                overload control information transfer in an ad hoc
                fashion.

   REQ 15:  The mechanism MUST NOT interfere with the congestion control
            mechanisms of underlying transport protocols.  For example,
            a mechanism that opened additional TCP connections when the
            network is congested would reduce the effectiveness of the
            underlying congestion control mechanisms.

                Compliant.  The mechanism does not require interaction
                with any underlying congestion control.  It relies
                solely on piggybacked transport and does not request or
                recommend changes in how the underlying connections are
                performed.

   REQ 16:  The overload control mechanism is likely to be deployed
            incrementally.  The mechanism MUST support a mixed
            environment where some, but not all, nodes implement it.

                Compliant.  The mechanism specifies behavior for dealing
                with non-supporting elements.

   REQ 17:  In a mixed environment with nodes that support the overload
            control mechanism and that do not, the mechanism MUST result
            in at least as much useful throughput as would have resulted
            if the mechanism were not present.  It SHOULD result in less
            severe congestion in this environment.

                Compliant.  When dealing with supporting, and non-
                supporting nodes, the mechanism specifies behavior that
                attempts to apply relevant information to decisions on
                sending to non-compliant hosts.  This behavior should
                result in reductions in traffic that increase the



Roach & McMurry         Expires November 18, 2013              [Page 40]

Internet-Draft          Diameter Overload Control               May 2013


                likelihood of successful overload mitigation in mixed
                networks.

   REQ 18:  In a mixed environment of nodes that support the overload
            control mechanism and that do not, the mechanism MUST NOT
            preclude elements that support overload control from
            treating elements that do not support overload control in a
            equitable fashion relative to those that do.  Users and
            operators of nodes that do not support the mechanism MUST
            NOT unfairly benefit from the mechanism.  The mechanism
            specification SHOULD provide guidance to implementors for
            dealing with elements not supporting overload control.

                Compliant.  When dealing with supporting, and non-
                supporting nodes, the mechanism specifies behavior that
                attempts to apply relevant information to decisions on
                sending to non-compliant hosts.  This allows nodes to
                treat non-supporting elements in a similar, and fair,
                fashion relative to non-supporting elements.

   REQ 19:  It MUST be possible to use the mechanism between nodes in
            different realms and in different administrative domains.

                Compliant.  Scoping of overload information to realms is
                explicitly specified by the mechanism.  There are no
                requirements imposed by the mechanism that would prevent
                overload control information from crossing between
                adjacent nodes that were in separate administrative
                domains.

   REQ 20:  Any explicit overload indication MUST be clearly
            distinguishable from other errors reported via Diameter.

                Compliant.  A new grouped AVP conveys all overload
                control information, and this is transported on existing
                messages that are not related to overload control.  No
                existing Diameter error codes are used by the mechanism.
                One new transient error code is defined by the
                mechanism.

   REQ 21:  In cases where a network node fails, is so overloaded that
            it cannot process messages, or cannot communicate due to a
            network failure, it may not be able to provide explicit
            indications of the nature of the failure or its levels of
            congestion.  The mechanism MUST result in at least as much
            useful throughput as would have resulted if the overload
            control mechanism was not in place.




Roach & McMurry         Expires November 18, 2013              [Page 41]

Internet-Draft          Diameter Overload Control               May 2013


                Compliant.  Procedures are defined cases where
                supporting nodes become too overloaded to send overload
                information.  No retries or sending of additional
                messages are required during overload that would reduce
                useful throughput in these situations.

   REQ 22:  The mechanism MUST provide a way for a node to throttle the
            amount of traffic it receives from a peer node.  This
            throttling SHOULD be graded so that it can be applied
            gradually as offered load increases.  Overload is not a
            binary state; there may be degrees of overload.

                Compliant.  The mechanism provides a 32 bit overload
                severity indication.  Interpretation of the value is
                specific to the algorithm being employed.  In the case
                of the mandatory to implement loss algorithm, the values
                0-100 are used to progressively control the amount of
                traffic dropped.

   REQ 23:  The mechanism MUST provide sufficient information to enable
            a load balancing node to divert messages that are rejected
            or otherwise throttled by an overloaded upstream node to
            other upstream nodes that are the most likely to have
            sufficient capacity to process them.

                Compliant.  The mechanism provides information so that a
                load balancing node can determine that an upstream node
                is in overload.  Additionally, it provides load
                information that can be used as input for balancing
                decisions.

   REQ 24:  The mechanism MUST provide a mechanism for indicating load
            levels even when not in an overloaded condition, to assist
            nodes making decisions to prevent overload conditions from
            occurring.

                Compliant.  The mechanism provides load information in
                each message as well as guidelines for implementing the
                determination of load to be sent.

   REQ 25:  The base specification for the overload control mechanism
            SHOULD offer general guidance on which message types might
            be desirable to send or process over others during times of
            overload, based on application-specific considerations.  For
            example, it may be more beneficial to process messages for
            existing sessions ahead of new sessions.  Some networks may
            have a requirement to give priority to requests associated
            with emergency sessions.  Any normative or otherwise



Roach & McMurry         Expires November 18, 2013              [Page 42]

Internet-Draft          Diameter Overload Control               May 2013


            detailed definition of the relative priorities of message
            types during an overload condition will be the
            responsibility of the application specification.

                Compliant.  Some guidance is provided for priority
                selection and how to deal with different priority
                messages is described in an example algorithm
                implementation.

   REQ 26:  The mechanism MUST NOT prevent a node from prioritizing
            requests based on any local policy, so that certain requests
            are given preferential treatment, given additional
            retransmission, not throttled, or processed ahead of others.

                Compliant.  The mechanism does not place restrictions on
                how decisions are made to prioritize messages.

   REQ 27:  The overload control mechanism MUST NOT provide new
            vulnerabilities to malicious attack, or increase the
            severity of any existing vulnerabilities.  This includes
            vulnerabilities to DoS and DDoS attacks as well as replay
            and man-in-the middle attacks.  Note that the Diameter base
            specification [RFC6733] lacks end to end security and this
            must be considered.

                Compliant.  The hop-by-hop nature of the mechanism
                allows existing Diameter security mechanisms to be used
                for securing the connections between peers. ***Detailed
                analysis by persons with security expertise would be
                beneficial.***

   REQ 28:  The mechanism MUST NOT depend on being deployed in
            environments where all Diameter nodes are completely
            trusted.  It SHOULD operate as effectively as possible in
            environments where other nodes are malicious; this includes
            preventing malicious nodes from obtaining more than a fair
            share of service.  Note that this does not imply any
            responsibility on the mechanism to detect, or take
            countermeasures against, malicious nodes.

                Compliant.  Using a hop-by-hop mechanism limits the
                scope of potentially malicious information.  Guidance is
                provided for trust, in particular relative to scopes.
                Additional specification around trust relationships
                could be useful to clarify authorization of overload
                control information. ***Detailed analysis by persons
                with security expertise would be beneficial.***




Roach & McMurry         Expires November 18, 2013              [Page 43]

Internet-Draft          Diameter Overload Control               May 2013


   REQ 29:  It MUST be possible for a supporting node to make
            authorization decisions about what information will be sent
            to peer nodes based on the identity of those nodes.  This
            allows a domain administrator who considers the load of
            their nodes to be sensitive information to restrict access
            to that information.  Of course, in such cases, there is no
            expectation that the overload control mechanism itself will
            help prevent overload from that peer node.

                Compliant.  The mechanism provides guidance for
                authorization decisions and takes no action to restrict
                local policy when dealing with authorization.
                ***Detailed analysis by persons with security expertise
                would be beneficial.***

   REQ 30:  The mechanism MUST NOT interfere with any Diameter compliant
            method that a node may use to protect itself from overload
            from non-supporting nodes, or from denial of service
            attacks.

                Compliant.  The mechanism allows for local policy
                overrides for the bulk of its behavior.

   REQ 31:  There are multiple situations where a Diameter node may be
            overloaded for some purposes but not others.  For example,
            this can happen to an agent or server that supports multiple
            applications, or when a server depends on multiple external
            resources, some of which may become overloaded while others
            are fully available.  The mechanism MUST allow Diameter
            nodes to indicate overload with sufficient granularity to
            allow clients to take action based on the overloaded
            resources without unreasonably forcing available capacity to
            go unused.  The mechanism MUST support specification of
            overload information with granularities of at least
            "Diameter node", "realm", and "Diameter application", and
            MUST allow extensibility for others to be added in the
            future.

                Compliant.  The mechanism allows for flexible
                specification on the scope that overload control
                information applies to.  It also allows for additional
                scopes to be specified as extensions.

   REQ 32:  The mechanism MUST provide a method for extending the
            information communicated and the algorithms used for
            overload control.





Roach & McMurry         Expires November 18, 2013              [Page 44]

Internet-Draft          Diameter Overload Control               May 2013


                Compliant.  The mechanism allows for new algorithms to
                be specified as extensions.  It provides an AVP for
                communicating overload information that can be
                interpreted differently by different algorithms.  It
                also provides for extension of information transmitted.

   REQ 33:  The mechanism MUST provide a default algorithm that is
            mandatory to implement.

                Compliant.  The mechanism specifies the drop algorithm
                as mandatory to implement.

   REQ 34:  The mechanism SHOULD provide a method for exchanging
            overload and load information between elements that are
            connected by intermediaries that do not support the
            mechanism.

                Not Compliant.  Additional analysis is needed.



Appendix C.  Extending the Overload Mechanism

   This specification includes two key extension points to allow for new
   behaviors to be smoothly added to the mechanism in the future.  The
   following sections discuss the means by which future documents are
   expected to extend the mechanism.

C.1.  New Algorithms

   In order to provide the ability for different means of traffic
   abatement in the future, this specification allows for descriptions
   of new traffic reduction algorithms.  In general, documents that
   define new algorithms need to describe externally-observable node
   behavior in sufficient detail as to allow interoperation.

   At a minimum, such description needs to include:

   1.  The name and IANA-registered number for negotiating the algorithm
       (see Section 5.3).
   2.  A clear description of how the Overload-Metric AVP is to be
       interpreted, keeping in mind that "0" is reserved to indicate
       that no overload condition exists.
   3.  An example, proof-of-concept description (preferably in pseudo-
       code) of how nodes can implement the algorithm.

   New algorithms must be capable of working with all applications, not
   just a subset of applications.



Roach & McMurry         Expires November 18, 2013              [Page 45]

Internet-Draft          Diameter Overload Control               May 2013


   It is generally expected that new algorithms will make use of the
   available overload control information as specified in this document.
   However, if additional information is needed, the Load-Info AVP
   allows for additional optional AVPs to be included.  It is
   recommended that designers of any new AVPs defined for this purpose
   consider reusing existing AVPs first, and also design their AVPS so
   that they may be reused by others when possible.

C.2.  New Scopes

   Because it is impossible to foresee all the potential constructs that
   it might be useful to scope operations to for the purposes of
   overload, we allow for the registration of new scopes.

   At a minimum, such description needs to include:

   1.  The name and IANA-registered number for negotiating and
       indicating the scope (see Section 5.4).
   2.  A syntax for the "Details" field of the Overload-Info-Scope AVP,
       preferably derived from one of the base Diameter data types.
   3.  An explicit and unambiguous description of how both parties to
       the overload control mechanism can determine which transactions
       correspond to the indicated scope.
   4.  A clear and exhaustive list that extends the one in Section 2.2,
       indicating exactly which combinations of scopes are allowed with
       the new scope.  This list must take into account all of the IANA-
       registered scopes at the time of its publication.

   It is acceptable for new scopes to be specific to constructs within
   one or several applications.  In other words, it may be desirable to
   define scopes that can be applied to one kind of application while
   not making sense for another.  Extension documents should be very
   clear that such is the case, however, if they choose to do so.


Appendix D.  Design Rationale

   The current design proposed in this document takes into account
   several trade-offs and requirements that may not be immediately
   obvious.  The remainder of this appendix highlights some of the
   potentially more controversial and/or non-obvious of these, and
   attempts to explain why such decisions were made they way they were.

   That said, none of the following text is intended to represent a line
   in the sand.  All of the decisions can be revisited if necessary,
   especially if additional facts are brought into the analysis that
   change the balance of the decisions.




Roach & McMurry         Expires November 18, 2013              [Page 46]

Internet-Draft          Diameter Overload Control               May 2013


D.1.  Piggybacking

   The decision to piggyback load information on existing messages
   derives primarily from REQ 14 in [I-D.ietf-dime-overload-reqs]: "The
   mechanism SHOULD provide for increased feedback when traffic levels
   increase.  The mechanism MUST NOT do this in such a way that it
   increases the number of messages while at high loads."

   If we were to introduce new messaging -- say, by defining a new
   overload control Application -- then a node in overload would be
   required to generate more messages at high load in order to keep
   overload information in its peers up-to-date.

   If further analysis determines that other factors are ultimately more
   important than the provisions of REQ 14, several factors would need
   to be considered.

   First and foremost would be the prohibition, in the base Diameter
   specification ([RFC6733]), against adding new commands to an existing
   application.  Specifically, section 1.3.4 stipulates: "a new Diameter
   application MUST be created when one or more of the following
   criteria are met:...  A new command is used within the existing
   application either because an additional command is added, an
   existing command has been modified so that a new Command Code had to
   be registered, or a command has been deleted."  Because of this
   stipulation, the addition of new command codes to existing
   applications would require registration of entirely new application
   IDs for those applications to support overload control.  We consider
   this to be too disruptive a change to consider.

   By the author's reading, there is no provision that exempts the
   "Diameter Common Messages" Application (Application ID 0) from the
   above clauses.  This effectively prohibits the additional of new
   messages to this Application.  While it may be theoretically possible
   to specify behavior that hijacks the DWR/DWA watchdog messages for
   the purpose of overload control messaging, doing so requires a
   complete redefinition of their behavior and, fundamentally, their
   semantics.  This approach seems, at first blush, to be an
   unacceptable change to the base Application.

   The remaining approach -- defining a new application for overload
   control -- has some promise, if we decide not to fulfill REQ 14.  It
   remains to be seen whether the users of the Diameter protocol,
   including other SDOs who define applications for Diameter, are
   willing to specify the use of multiple Diameter Applications for use
   on a single reference point.





Roach & McMurry         Expires November 18, 2013              [Page 47]

Internet-Draft          Diameter Overload Control               May 2013


D.2.  Load AVP in All Packets

   Some have questioned the currently specified behavior of message
   senders including a Load AVP in every message sent.  This is being
   proposed as a potential performance enhancement, with the idea being
   that message recipients can save processing time by examining
   arbitrarily selected messages for load information, rather than
   looking for a Load AVP in every message that arrives.  Of course, to
   enable this kind of sampling, the Load AVP must be guaranteed to be
   present; otherwise, attempts to find it will occasionally fail.

   The reciprocal approach, of sending a Load AVP only when the Load has
   changed (or changed by more than a certain amount), requires the
   recipient to search through the Load-Info grouped AVP in every
   message received in order to determine whether a Load AVP is present.

   On a cursory analysis, we determined that appending a Load AVP to
   each message is fundamentally a cheaper operation than traversing the
   contents of each Load-Info AVP to determine whether a Load AVP is
   present.

   If a later decision is made to require examination of each message to
   determine whether it include a Load AVP, we may be able to obtain
   some efficiencies by requiring Load to be the first AVP in the Load-
   Info AVP.

D.3.  Graceful Failure

   Some commenters have raised the question of whether a node can reject
   an incoming connection upon recognizing that the remote node does not
   support the Diameter overload control mechanism.  One suggestion has
   been to add a response code to indicate exactly such a situation.

   So far, we have opted against doing so.  Instead, we anticipate an
   incremental deployment of the overload control mechanism, which will
   likely consist of a mixture of nodes that support and node that do
   not support the mechanism.  Were we to allow the rejection of
   connections that do not support the mechanism, we would create a
   situation that necessitates a "flag day," on which every Diameter
   node in a network is required to simultaneously, and in perfect
   synchronization, switch from not supporting the overload mechanism,
   to supporting it.

   Given the operational difficulty of the foregoing, we have decided
   that defining a response code, even if optional, that was to be used
   to reject connections merely for the lack of overload control
   support, would form an attractive nuisance for implementors.  The
   result could easily be a potential operational nightmare for network



Roach & McMurry         Expires November 18, 2013              [Page 48]

Internet-Draft          Diameter Overload Control               May 2013


   operators.


Authors' Addresses

   Adam Roach
   Mozilla
   Dallas, TX
   US

   Email: adam@nostrum.com


   Eric McMurry
   Tekelec
   Dallas, TX
   US

   Email: emcmurry@computer.org
































Roach & McMurry         Expires November 18, 2013              [Page 49]

