



Network Working Group                                        A. B. Roach
Internet-Draft                                                   Mozilla
Updates: 3264 (if approved)                             October 14, 2013
Intended status: Standards Track
Expires: April 17, 2014


    Using Partial Offers and Partial Answers in a Multimedia Session
                     draft-roach-mmusic-pof-pan-00

Abstract

   Whenever two hosts have the ability to set up and control a session
   on a peer-to-peer basis, situations can arise in which both parties
   attempt to change session parameters "at the same time," such that
   the session control messages cross on the wire.  When this happens,
   implementations need to invoke extraordinary procedures to return the
   shared state of the session to a common view between the endpoints.

   For real-time communications, these session control messages are
   typically exchanged using the session description protocol (SDP),
   using an Offer/Answer model.  This document expands the offer/answer
   model to include the ability to exchange information relating to
   discrete media streams within the session.  By reducing the amount of
   session data, the frequency of session state conflicts can be
   reduced; and, for certain types of operations, conflicts can be
   eliminated altogether.

   This document updates RFC 3264.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 17, 2014.





Roach                    Expires April 17, 2014                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft         Partial Offers and Answers           October 2013


Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   2.  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   3.  Mechanism Overview  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     3.1.  Adding a Stream . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     3.2.  Changing a Stream . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     3.3.  Removing a Stream . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   4.  Use With Other Protocols  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     4.1.  High-Level Sketch: Use With JSEP/WebRTC . . . . . . . . .   6
     4.2.  High-Level Sketch: Use With SIP . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   5.  Protocol Operation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     5.1.  Common Procedures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     5.2.  Generating a Partial Offer  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     5.3.  Processing a Partial Offer  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     5.4.  Processing a Partial Answer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
     5.5.  Updating the Shared View of Session State . . . . . . . .  11
     5.6.  Receiving a Full Offer with a Partial Offer Pending . . .  12
   6.  Examples  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
     6.1.  Adding Streams  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
     6.2.  Removing Streams  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
     6.3.  Changing a Stream . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
     6.4.  Both Sides Simultaneously Add Streams . . . . . . . . . .  13
     6.5.  Removing a Stream with Pseudo-Glare . . . . . . . . . . .  13
     6.6.  Changing a Stream with Glare  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
   7.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
   8.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
   9.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
     9.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
     9.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14





Roach                    Expires April 17, 2014                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft         Partial Offers and Answers           October 2013


1.  Introduction

   The SDP [RFC4566] offer/answer model defined in [RFC3264] briefly
   mentions "glare" as a potential issue in the use of offer/answer
   exchanges, although it relegates the problem to the "higher layer
   protocol" to resolve.  In SIP [RFC3261], resolving state after a
   glare condition is performed via a timer-based back-off mechanism.
   For WebRTC, detection of glare comes in the form of an
   "InvalidStateError" exception.  Actual resolution of glare is
   currently undefined; the present assumption is that the applications
   that make use of RTCWEB are responsible for handling glare in a
   sensible fashion.

   The penalty for glare isn't simply code complexity; it results in
   delays in updating sessions state, which can end up visible to users,
   leading to a less optimal user experience.

   Many of the emerging uses for both SIP and RTCWEB involve sessions
   with a large number of media streams, with streams being added and
   removed frequently.  This kind of session churn increases the
   incidence of glare significantly.

   To reduce the incidence of glare under these circumstances, this
   document defines a procedure via which partial offer/answer exchanges
   may take place.  These exchanges operate on one or more media
   sections at a time, rather than an entire SDP body.  These operations
   are defined in a way that can completely avoid glare for stream
   additions and removals, and which reduces the chance of glare for
   changes to active streams.  This approach requires all media sections
   to contain an "a=mid" [RFC5888] attribute.

   This document focuses on the application of this technique for use in
   RTCWEB and WebRTC.  The author anticipates that future work will
   describe its use in conjunction with SIP and SIP-derived technologies
   (such as multiparty conferencing and telepresence).

2.  Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].

3.  Mechanism Overview

   The core of this mechanism is the concept of "partial offers" and
   "partial answers."  Syntactically, these entities are SDP fragments,
   consisting of exactly one o= line; one or more media sections; and
   any i=, c=, b=, k=, and a= lines associated with the media sections.



Roach                    Expires April 17, 2014                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft         Partial Offers and Answers           October 2013


   They are formatted exactly as they would be if they were part of a
   larger SDP document, with one key exception: unlike SDP, in an SDP
   fragment, the ordering of media sections relative to each other is
   not significant.  Note that SDP fragments contain only that
   information that pertains to media.  Other than the mandatory o=
   line, they never contain any session-level information.  Within the
   o= line, only the <sess-version> field is allowed to be changed from
   its previous value.  Any changes to session-level information are
   expected to use a full offer/answer exchange rather than the partial
   offer/partial answer mechanism defined by this document.

      OPEN ISSUE: Do we need to relax this session-level prohibition?
      It makes the mechanism clean.  However, it does make it difficult
      to add a new stream while simultaneously associating it with a
      group.  On the other hand, group lines don't have unique
      identifiers, so just sending a single group line over can be
      ambiguous.  One way around this would be requiring that partial
      offers and partial answers must contain all group attributes
      associated with the session, but this still gets potentially messy
      if we have both sides trying to update group information at the
      same time.  An alternative approach might be to indicate group
      information only for *new* streams, and require full offers for
      any other group changes.  Of course, without unique group
      identifiers, we're still stuck with the challenge of unambiguously
      identifying which group we're adding a new line to.  If we
      constrain group membership so that each group can be uniquely
      identified by its type and members, then that should be
      sufficient.  Is such a constraint acceptable?

   Using this mechanism has two key prerequisites: (1) all offer/answer
   exchanges in the session prior to sending a partial offer have
   contained "a=mid" attributes for each media section, and (2) both
   sides are known to support the partial offer/answer technique (either
   because they are part of a single domain of control, or because use
   of this technique has been explicitly signaled).

   The use of an SDP fragment body will be explicitly signaled, e.g.,
   using a different MIME type for SIP, or using a different "type"
   field for the WebRTC API.

3.1.  Adding a Stream

   To add a stream glarelessly, a party creates a "partial offer"
   consisting of an o= line and one or more media sections, including
   all of the corresponding i=, c=, b=, k=, and a= lines.  Each media
   section contains an "a=mid" attribute, indicating an MID that has not
   yet been used in the session.




Roach                    Expires April 17, 2014                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft         Partial Offers and Answers           October 2013


   Upon receipt of a partial offer, an implementation processes each
   media section independently.  For each media section, the recipient
   examines the MID in it.  If the MID does not match any existing MID
   in the session, then it represents a new media stream.  Assuming the
   recipient does not have an outstanding, unanswered partial offer that
   also adds a stream, this new media section is simply appended to the
   end of the existing session description, the SDP sess-version is
   increased, and an answering media section is created.  Once all
   answering media sections have been processed, they are concatenated
   into a partial answer.  This partial answer consists of one or more
   media sections, each containing an MID matching the one from the
   partial offer.

   If the recipient of a partial offer that contains a new MID has also
   sent a partial offer adding a new stream to the session, then
   ambiguity can arise regarding the canonical ordering of media
   sections within the session description.  In this situation, both
   partial offer/answer exchanges are allowed to complete independently
   (as no fundamental data glare has occurred).  However, the order in
   which they are appended to the session description is synchronized by
   performing a lexical comparison among each media section's MID
   attribute: the media sections are appended to the session in
   lexically increasing order.

3.2.  Changing a Stream

   Partial offers may also be generated for modification of an existing
   stream.  In this case, the MID in the media section of a partial
   offer will match an existing MID in the session description.

   Upon receipt of a partial offer, an implementation examines the MID
   in it.  If the MID matches any existing MID in the session, then it
   represents a modification to that media section.  Assuming the
   recipient does not have an outstanding, unanswered partial offer that
   also modifies that exact same stream, this media section is treated
   as an independent renegotiation of that stream (only).  The SDP
   version is increased, and a partial answer is created.  This partial
   answer consists of an media section and its attributes, and has an
   MID matching the one from the partial offer.

      OPEN ISSUE: Since stream *changes* can result in glare, the
      foregoing text assumes that only one media section will be sent
      for such a change.  Is this okay?

   If the recipient of a partial offer that contains an existing MID has
   also sent a partial offer to change that exact same stream, and
   neither the received nor the sent partial offer contains an
   "a=inactive" attribute, then a legitimate glare condition has arisen.



Roach                    Expires April 17, 2014                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft         Partial Offers and Answers           October 2013


   Normal glare recovery procedures -- e.g., using a tie-breaker token
   or a back-off timer -- must be engaged to resolve the conflict.

3.3.  Removing a Stream

   To remove one or more a streams in a way that eliminates the chance
   of glare, an implementation generates a new partial offer, containing
   one or more media sections.  Each media section contains an MID
   matching the stream it wants to remove, and indicates a transport
   port of zero, indicating that the stream is being deactivated.

   If the recipient of a partial offer that contains an existing MID has
   also sent a partial offer to change that exact same stream, and
   either one of the received or the sent partial offer contains a port
   number of zero, then the stream is deactivated.  At this point, both
   partial offers are discarded, the corresponding media section in the
   session is modified by changing its port to zero, and a partial
   answer is generated representing this single change.

4.  Use With Other Protocols

   Note that this document simply defines the extensions to the SDP
   offer/answer model for dealing with partial offers and partial
   answers.  In the same way that [RFC3264] does not define specific
   SIP, JSEP, or WebRTC handling, neither does this document.  In order
   for this technique to be useful, protocol-specific mechanisms need to
   be defined.  This additional work is left to appropriate venues, such
   as the W3C WebRTC WG, the RTCWEB WG, and the SIPCORE WG.  If the
   higher-level protocol allows the use of unordered message delivery,
   it is that protocol's responsibility to ensure that the result of
   partial offer/partial answer exchanges is a shared and identical
   session state between the parties involved.

   To assist in understanding the mechanism being proposed, we describe,
   in a very high-level and non-normative way, how this mechanism might
   be applied to a couple of specific higher-level signaling systems.

4.1.  High-Level Sketch: Use With JSEP/WebRTC

   For WebRTC, we envision that such additional specification would add
   a new constraint to createOffer, requesting that a partial offer be
   generated (if possible).  The resulting RTCSessionDescription would
   contain only the media sections that have changed since the most
   recent offer/answer exchange, and would have a type of
   "partialOffer."  When createAnswer is called after receipt of a
   partialOffer, it would create a partialAnswer, containing only the
   media sections referenced in the partial offer, that can be provided
   to the remote party.



Roach                    Expires April 17, 2014                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft         Partial Offers and Answers           October 2013


4.2.  High-Level Sketch: Use With SIP

   For SIP, partial offers and partial answers will likely be provided
   in SIP UPDATE [RFC3311] or INFO [RFC6086] messages, containing a
   special "application/sdpfrag" MIME type [I-D.ivov-dispatch-sdpfrag],
   and a content-disposition that indicates that the contents are a
   partial offer (rather than, say, a trickle ice candidate).  Although
   INVITE may seem like a natural fit for this kind of behavior, its
   current definition includes strong glare resolution behaviors that
   makes it unsuitable for this purpose.  Naturally, any such mechanism
   will be paired with a SIP feature tag that allows for negotiation of
   support for partial offers and answers.

5.  Protocol Operation

   The following sections formally defines the procedures for generating
   and processing partial offers and partial answers.

   At any time during an ongoing session, either agent in the session
   MAY generate a new partial offer that updates the session, subject to
   the restrictions described in the following sections.  However, it
   MUST NOT generate a new partial offer if it has received any partial
   or full offer which it has not yet answered or rejected.

   An agent also MUST NOT generate a partial offer if it has sent a
   partial or full offer which has not yet been accepted or rejected.

      OPEN ISSUE: It seems like we might be able to have multiple
      outstanding sent partial offers at once, as long as they don't try
      to act on the same media section.  The reason it's disallowed in
      the above paragraph is that having several partial offers
      potentially outstanding in both directions makes it very, very,
      very complicated to resolve the ordering of media sections if
      these partial offers in opposite directions overlap temporally.

   In the situations described as "glare" below, the higher layer
   protocol needs to provide a means for resolving such conditions.
   This will generally be the same mechanism used to resolve the glare
   conditions described in [RFC3264].

5.1.  Common Procedures

   For all of the procedures described in the following sections,
   whenever an o= line is included in a partial offer or partial answer,
   its <username>, <sess-id>, <nettype>, <addrtype>, and <unicast-
   address> values MUST be identical to those sent in the most recent
   full offer or full answer generated by this agent for this session.
   The <sess-version> value MUST be larger than the value in all



Roach                    Expires April 17, 2014                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft         Partial Offers and Answers           October 2013


   previously sent offers, partial offers, answers, and partial offers
   generated by this agent for this session.

   Whenever the procedures in the following sections indicate that a
   media section is to be included in a partial offer or partial answer,
   that media section MUST consist of an m= line along with all i=, c=,
   b=, k=, and a= lines associated with that media section.  If a line
   is absent from a media section in a partial offer or partial answer,
   it MUST be interpreted as an explicit removal of that value from the
   media section.  Recipients of such messages MUST NOT assume that a
   previously-established but omitted value is still in effect.

5.2.  Generating a Partial Offer

   Whenever an agent wishes to change the state of the media in an
   ongoing session -- whether through addition, modification, or removal
   of a stream -- it does so through either an offer or a partial offer.
   In deciding which to use, the implementation first verifies that it
   has received positive confirmation that the remote implementation
   supports the partial offer/partial answer mechanism.  The means of
   negotiating such support is left to the higher-level protocol that
   makes use of the offer/answer model.  The implementation then
   verifies that all media sessions in the current session are
   associated with unique MID values.  Finally, the implementation
   evaluates whether the changes it needs to make can be performed
   exclusively using the values present in a media section, without any
   modifications necessary to session-level values (except for the sess-
   version value on the session-level o= line).

   If all three of the criteria described above are true, then the
   implementation MAY send a partial offer to make the changes it wants
   to request.  If any of these criteria are not true, then the
   implementation MUST use a full offer, according to the procedures
   described in [RFC3264].

   Once the agent determines that the change it wishes to make is
   eligible to use the partial offer mechanism, it forms a new SDP
   fragment by following these steps:

   1.  For each desired change to an existing media section, the agent
       creates a new partial offer consisting of one o= line and a
       single media section.  This media section MUST contain an "a=mid"
       attribute containing an MID that matches the media section that
       is being modified.  The media section also contains the
       modifications that the agent wishes to make, as described in
       section 8.3 of [RFC3264].  This partial offer is sent in
       isolation, with no other media section changes, additions, or
       removals in the same partial offer.



Roach                    Expires April 17, 2014                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft         Partial Offers and Answers           October 2013


   2.  If the desired change involves one or more media section
       additions or removals, the agent creates a new partial offer
       consisting of one o=line and any media section described in the
       following two steps.

   3.  For each new media section to be added, the agent creates a new
       media section to be added to the aforementioned partial offer.
       This media section MUST contain an "a=mid" attribute, and the MID
       present in this attribute MUST contain at least 32 characters
       chosen randomly from full set of 79 characters allowed in a
       token.  The remainder of the media section contains the various
       values that the agent wishes to have associated with the
       corresponding media, and is created according to the procedures
       described in section 5.1 or 5.2 of [RFC3264], as appropriate.

   4.  For each existing media section to be removed, the agent creates
       a new media section to be added to the aforementioned partial
       offer.  This media section MUST contain an "a=mid" attribute
       containing an MID that matches the media section that is being
       removed, and MUST contain a <port> value of 0 (zero).  Except for
       the required "a=mid" attribute, this media section MAY omit any
       or all i=, c=, b=, k=, and a= lines, and MAY list only one m=
       line <fmt> value.

   Once the preceding steps have been followed to create one or more
   partial offers, the agent makes use of the high-level signaling
   protocol to convey the offers to the remote agent, one at a time.

5.3.  Processing a Partial Offer

   Upon receipt of a partial offer, an agent first determines whether it
   has sent any full offers for the corresponding session.  If it has,
   then the partial offer represents a glare condition that is resolved
   via the higher-level protocol.  It then verifies whether it has
   received any partial or full offers to which it has not yet sent an
   answer or a rejection.  If so, then it rejects the partial offer as
   invalid behavior.

   The agent then examines the o= line in the received partial offer.
   If If the <sess-version> value is less than the most recently
   received full (non-partial) offer or answer, then the partial offer
   is stale and MUST be rejected.  The means for rejecting the partial
   offer are left to the higher-level protocol.

   After such validation takes place, the agent iterates through each
   media section and performs the following steps:





Roach                    Expires April 17, 2014                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft         Partial Offers and Answers           October 2013


   1.  If the MID present in the received media section matches a media
       section already present in the ongoing session and has a non-zero
       port number, it represents a change to an existing media stream.

       *  If the partial offer contains more than one media section,
          then the recipient MUST reject the partial offer as invalid
          behavior.

       *  If the MID matches the MID of a media section in a partial
          offer that the agent has sent, AND the sent media section
          contains a port number of zero, then the incoming partial
          offer is rejected, as any such changes have been "overtaken by
          events:" the stream will be deactivated momentarily.

       *  The recipient verifies that the MID does not match the MID of
          any media section in any partial offers that it has sent but
          has not yet received a partial answer or rejection for, unless
          the media section in the sent partial offer has a port number
          of zero.  If this verification fails, then the received
          partial offer represents a glare condition that is resolved
          via the higher-level protocol.

       *  After the preceding verifications have succeeded, the agent
          creates media section to include in the partial answer.  To
          reject the media section in the partial offer, the agent
          generates a media section with a port number set to zero;
          otherwise, the agent forms the media section by following the
          procedures described in section 6.1 or 6.2 of [RFC3264], as
          appropriate.

   2.  If the MID present in the received media section matches a media
       section already present in the ongoing session and has a port
       number of zero, then it represents the removal of an existing
       media stream.  The agent creates a media section to include in
       the partial answer.  With the exception of the "a=mid" attribute,
       this media section MAY omit any or all i=, c=, b=, k=, and a=
       lines, and MAY indicate a single payload type.

   3.  If the MID present in the received media section does not match
       any media section already present in the ongoing session, then it
       represents a new media stream.

       *  If the received media section contains a port number of zero,
          then the recipient MUST reject the partial offer as invalid
          behavior: this mechanism does not support the atomic addition
          and removal of the same stream.





Roach                    Expires April 17, 2014                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft         Partial Offers and Answers           October 2013


       *  If the above validation succeeds, the agent creates a media
          section to include in the partial answer.  To reject the media
          section in the partial offer, the agent generates a media
          section with a port number set to zero; otherwise, the agent
          forms the media section by following the procedures described
          in section 6.1 or 6.2 of [RFC3264], as appropriate.

   All media sections that are formed in the foregoing steps MUST
   contain an "a=mid" attribute matching the MID that was present in the
   corresponding media section from the partial offer.

   If the preceding steps have been performed for each media section
   without resulting in a rejection, then the agent forms a partial
   answer consisting of a single o= line, and all of the media sections
   that were generated as part of the preceding steps.  Note that this
   processing will always yield the same number of media sections in a
   partial answer as were present in the partial offer.  Unlike normal
   SDP processing, however, the order of the media sections in a partial
   answer is not significant.  This partial answer is then sent to the
   remote agent using the high-level protocol.

   If the above processing results in a successful partial answer, then
   the agent's view of the session is updated as described in
   Section 5.5.

5.4.  Processing a Partial Answer

   When a partial answer is received, the offerer matches each media
   section in the partial answer to its corresponding media section
   according to its MID.  The agent MUST NOT assume that the order of
   the sections in the received partial answer matches the order of the
   sections it sent in the partial offer.  However, it can expect that
   each section in the partial offer has a corresponding section in the
   receive partial answer.

   For each media section, the agent then updates its local view of
   session state as described in Section 5.5, and follows the process
   described in section 7 of [RFC3264].

5.5.  Updating the Shared View of Session State

   Whenever a partial offer or partial answer is processed, the agent
   performs the following steps to ensure that a common view of session
   state is maintained:

   1.  The remote session's <sess-version> value is updated according to
       the value received in the o= line of the sdpfrag.




Roach                    Expires April 17, 2014                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft         Partial Offers and Answers           October 2013


   2.  Any changed or removed media sections are modified in-place.
       Their position in the overall session description remains the
       same as it was before.

   3.  Any added media sections are appended to the existing session.
       The order in which they are appended is determined by lexically
       sorting them according to their MID values.  This is not
       necessarily the same order in which they appear in the sdpfrag.
       If the recipient of a partial offer had a sent a partial offer to
       which it had not yet received a response when the partial offer
       was received, then it must take additional steps to ensure a
       common view of the media section ordering: the media sections for
       the sent partial offer and the received partial answer are
       treated as a single list, sorted lexically according to their
       respective MID values, and appended to the session in that order.
       When that agent receives the corresponding partial answer, the
       media section ordering remains the same as was established by the
       partial offer.

   4.

             Note that this requires the ability to re-index media
             sections in the case that the remote party rejects the
             outstanding partial offer that we sent them (I don't mean
             declining the line by setting the port to zero; I mean that
             the higher-level protocol actually rejected the offer, like
             getting an unrecoverable 400- or 500-class error in SIP).
             OPEN ISSUE: This is kinda ugly.  Is there maybe some better
             way to handle the issue?

5.6.  Receiving a Full Offer with a Partial Offer Pending

   For completeness, this document notes that an agent that receives a
   full offer with a sent partial offer pending is in a glare condition;
   this is resolved via the higher-level protocol.

6.  Examples

6.1.  Adding Streams

   TBD

6.2.  Removing Streams

   TBD

6.3.  Changing a Stream




Roach                    Expires April 17, 2014                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft         Partial Offers and Answers           October 2013


   TBD

6.4.  Both Sides Simultaneously Add Streams

   TBD

6.5.  Removing a Stream with Pseudo-Glare

   TBD (by "pseudo-glare", I mean that one side tries to change a stream
   at the same time as the other one tries to remove it)

6.6.  Changing a Stream with Glare

   TBD

7.  Security Considerations

   TBD

8.  IANA Considerations

   TBD -- I don't think we actually need any for this mechanism.

9.  References

9.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC3261]  Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., Camarillo, G., Johnston,
              A., Peterson, J., Sparks, R., Handley, M., and E.
              Schooler, "SIP: Session Initiation Protocol", RFC 3261,
              June 2002.

   [RFC3264]  Rosenberg, J. and H. Schulzrinne, "An Offer/Answer Model
              with Session Description Protocol (SDP)", RFC 3264, June
              2002.

   [RFC4566]  Handley, M., Jacobson, V., and C. Perkins, "SDP: Session
              Description Protocol", RFC 4566, July 2006.

   [RFC5888]  Camarillo, G. and H. Schulzrinne, "The Session Description
              Protocol (SDP) Grouping Framework", RFC 5888, June 2010.

9.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.ivov-dispatch-sdpfrag]



Roach                    Expires April 17, 2014                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft         Partial Offers and Answers           October 2013


              Ivov, E. and A. Roach, "A Session Initiation Protocol
              (SIP) usage for Trickle ICE", draft-ivov-dispatch-
              sdpfrag-02 (work in progress), October 2013.

   [RFC3311]  Rosenberg, J., "The Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)
              UPDATE Method", RFC 3311, October 2002.

   [RFC6086]  Holmberg, C., Burger, E., and H. Kaplan, "Session
              Initiation Protocol (SIP) INFO Method and Package
              Framework", RFC 6086, January 2011.

Author's Address

   Adam Roach
   Mozilla
   Dallas, TX
   US

   Phone: +1 650 903 0800 x863
   Email: adam@nostrum.com






























Roach                    Expires April 17, 2014                [Page 14]
