

 
 
CCAMP                                                           Bai Bo
Internet Draft                               Xi'an Jiaotong University
Intended status: Informational                             Zhao Jihong
Expires: February 2013                       Xi'an Jiaotong University
                                                        August 2, 2012
                                   
 
                                      
      A Mechanism for Maintaining the Survivability of Streaming Media 
                                 Services 
                      draft-bai-ccamp-mmssms-00.txt 


Status of this Memo 

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the 
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79. This document may not be modified, 
   and derivative works of it may not be created, and it may not be 
   published except as an Internet-Draft. 

   This document may contain material from IETF Documents or IETF 
   Contributions published or made publicly available before November 
   10, 2008. The person(s) controlling the copyright in some of this 
   material may not have granted the IETF Trust the right to allow 
   modifications of such material outside the IETF Standards Process.  
   Without obtaining an adequate license from the person(s) controlling 
   the copyright in such materials, this document may not be modified 
   outside the IETF Standards Process, and derivative works of it may 
   not be created outside the IETF Standards Process, except to format 
   it for publication as an RFC or to translate it into languages other 
   than English. 

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents 
   at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as 
   reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html 

 
  
 
Bai, Zhao             Expires February 2, 2013                [Page 1]
Internet-Draft                  MMSSMS                     August 2012 
    

   This Internet-Draft will expire on February 2, 2013. 

Copyright Notice 

   Copyright (c) 2012 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the 
   document authors. All rights reserved. 

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal 
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents 
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of 
   publication of this document. Please review these documents 
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with 
   respect to this document. Code Components extracted from this 
   document must include Simplified BSD License text as described in 
   Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without 
   warranty as described in the Simplified BSD License. 

Abstract 

   This document describes a mechanism for maintaining the 
   survivability of streaming media services in the circumstances of 
   the IP network (MSSMS). This service-oriented mechanism can 
   calculate the health value(HV) of each service and judged their 
   survivability in order to control the routing and the decision-
   making of each service. 

     

Table of Contents 

    
   1. Introduction ................................................ 3 
      1.1. Overview ............................................... 3 
      1.2. Application ............................................ 3 
   2. Conventions used in this document ........................... 4 
    3. Terminology and Definition ................................. 4 
   4. Path/Traffic Info ........................................... 4 
      4.1. Statistic of Routing ................................... 4 
      4.2. Statistic of Traffic ................................... 5 
      4.3. Path/Traffic Info ...................................... 5 
   5. Normalized Evaluations ...................................... 5 
      5.1. Normalized Evaluations of Bandwidth and Delay .......... 5 
      5.2. Setting Loss Rate ...................................... 6 
   6. Health value ................................................ 6 
      6.1. Path's Health Value  ................................... 6 
      6.2. Service's Health Value  ................................ 6 
   7. Working Process of the Mechanism ............................ 7 
 
 
Bai, Zhao             Expires February 2, 2013                [Page 2] 
Internet-Draft                  MMSSMS                     August 2012 
    

      7.1. Pseudo code of General Process ......................... 7 
      7.2. Working Process of Control Mechanism(MSSMS) ............ 7 
   8. Security Considerations ..................................... 9 
   9. IANA Considerations ......................................... 9 
   10. References ................................................. 9 
   11. Acknowledgments ............................................ 9 
    
1. Introduction 

1.1. Overview 

   The main trend of future network is to become more controllable and 
   has multiple overlays which are service-oriented. With the 
    development of the high-speed broad-band internet, the need of 
   massive streaming media service(SMS) has become larger. Thus, the 
   quality of this kind of businesses is becoming more and more 
   important in current and future networks.  

   In multi-layer networks, the routing strategies and resource 
   allocation are depending on the instant quality of current SMS. But 
   most methods of current quality control of streaming media service 
   are only mainly based either on the protection of multicast 
   tree(such as reserve route) or on the cache technology. There is no 
   a comprehensive mechanism which can be used precisely despite the 
   different structures of networks.  

   As a solution, the health value(HV) is proposed to measure the 
   survivability of streaming media service. This design is to provide 
   a universal service-oriented standard for assuring the survivability
   of streaming media service. 

   With the mechanism proposed in this document, the control center of 
   the service-oriented multi-layer network can get the calculated 
   health value of the goal service. Then the center can adjust the 
   routing strategy and the resource allocation for this service 
   through comparing the health value with the QoS requirements which 
   are preset by the administration of the network or business. By all 
   the processes before, the mechanism can judge whether the goal 
   service need to be rerouted. 

1.2. Application  

   This mechanism can be used in the environment of IP networks with 
   sustentation of OSPF-TE/ISIS-TE. 



 
 
Bai, Zhao             Expires February 2, 2013                [Page 3] 
Internet-Draft                  MMSSMS                     August 2012 
    

2. Conventions used in this document 
    The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [RFC2119].  

3. Terminology and Definition 

   The following definitions are used in this document; they follow the 
   terms in [RFC2326], [RFC4567] and [RFC5694]. 

   MSSMS: maintaining the survivability of streaming media service 

   Path/Traffic Info: this info refers to the statistical information 
   about a path's delay, bandwidth and packet loss rate. 

   Health Value(HV): this value refers to the quantized state of a path
   or a service. It has two applications. One of them is the HV of one 
   path, the other one is the HV of one whole kind of streaming media 
   services. The specific definition of two kind of health values are 
   given in the following contents. 

4. Path/Traffic Info  

   The control center is laid on an independent overlay which can 
   provide the function of centralized control. Basically the control 
   center is consisted of an algorithm center, a topology information 
   database and a service-categories database. Though the practical 
   constitution may be more complex than above, the fundamental 
   functions will remain the same. 

4.1. Statistic of Routing 

   To calculate the health value of one specific service, the system 
   must know both the paths that the packets of this particular service
   are going through and the traffic in these paths. In the OSPF 
   networks with traffic engineering, the routing information can be 
   acquired by inquiring the routing table from OSPF routers. By this 
   means, control center can get all the paths in which the 
   correspondent packets( of one specific service) are traveling trough.
   Another way to get all those paths between source and destination is 
   to use the command of Tracert. At the meanwhile, all the paths need 
   to be saved to topology database for next process. 




 
 
Bai, Zhao             Expires February 2, 2013                [Page 4] 
Internet-Draft                  MMSSMS                     August 2012 
    

4.2. Statistic of Traffic 

   The traffic of each path is needed when it comes to calculation of 
   the path's weight. Each path's traffic can be acquired from the 
   information given by the last hop of each path. Another way to get 
   traffic's statistical data is to run the tool of Tracert at the 
   destination node of the service. 

4.3. Path/Traffic Info 

   According to the information given above, control center can 
   calculate the weight of each path in influence on the service's 
   health condition through the expression given here. If kn is the 
   weight of the path, then kn=mn/M, in which M is the total traffic of 
   one service in the destination node, n=0,1,2,...,N-1,N. 

5. Normalized Evaluations 

   Usually in the environment of OSPF network, the link state can be 
   sensed and saved in the link state database(LSDB) in OSPF router. 
   This LSDB can provide the most elementary assessment about the 
   link's state. However, the assessment of health value needs a more 
   detailed link state. The parameter of bandwidth, delay and loss rate 
   are indispensable when calculating the health values. 

5.1. Normalized Evaluations of Bandwidth and Delay 

   In the environment of ISIS-TE network, the information of currently 
   available bandwidth can be offered by the ISIS-TE protocol. Thus the 
   normalized evaluation of bandwidth would be: 

                     bandwidthEV=b2/B=(B-b1)/B=1-b1/B 

   In the equation above B is the total bandwidth of one path, b1 is 
   the bandwidth which has been used already by current service, b2 is 
   the currently available bandwidth. The bandwidthEV is proportional 
   to the health value of path. The bigger the bandwidthEV is, the 
   better the condition of the path is.  

   The delayEV is the normalized evaluation of delay condition of one 
   path. Its value can be calculated from this equation: 

                              delayEV=1-d/Dm 

 
 
Bai, Zhao             Expires February 2, 2013                [Page 5]  
Internet-Draft                  MMSSMS                     August 2012 
    

   In the equation above, delayEV is proportional to the health value 
   of path; Dm is the maximum of the delay values of all paths. The 
   bigger the delayEV is, the better the condition of the path is. 

5.2. Setting Loss Rate 

   Loss rate is set according to the specific requirement of each 
   service. At each destination node, loss rate will be calculated. 
   Different services have different loss rate. Furthermore, the 
   weights of loss rate are different in health values of different 
   services, because the services' requirements of QoS are varied. 

6. Health value 

   Health value is a quantitive parameter which can indicate the 
   current condition of service. It can provide a synthesized standard 
   to judge whether the present health condition of service is good 
   enough to meet the requirements of QoS. 

6.1. Path's Health Value 

   In IP network especially in P2P network, packets of same service may
   go through multiple paths to arrive at the destination node. Thus 
   each path's health value is relevant to the health condition of the 
   service. The equation of path's health value is give below: 

                  PHVn= i*bandwidthEV+j*delayEV, (i+j=1) 

   i is the weight of path's bandwidth condition and j is the weight of 
   path's delay condition. The values of i and j depend on the specific 
   requirements of service. For example, if the service needs high 
   level of instant respond, j should be larger than i because in this 
   case high level of instant respond means very short delay. On the 
   contrary, if the service causes massive transportation, i should be 
   larger because bandwidth is more important than delay in this case. 

6.2. Service's Health Value 

   After path's health value is acquired, service's health value can be 
   got by the equation below: 

         SHV = -ql+k1*PHV1+k2*PHV2+...+kn*PHVn, k1+k2+k3+...+kn=1, 

   l stands for loss rate at the destination node, q is the weight of l.


 
 
Bai, Zhao             Expires February 2, 2013                [Page 6] 
Internet-Draft                  MMSSMS                     August 2012 
    

7. Working Process of the Mechanism 

7.1. Pseudo code of General Process 

   if control center didn't receive alarm datagram: 

   judge whether current network situation is good enough for service 
   according to the topology information database and the function of 
   health value 

   if situation is good enough: output the judgment that the service is 
   healthy enough 

   else: tell routing module that the service is not healthy enough  

   else: tell routing module directly that the path is malfunctioning 

7.2. Working Process of Control Mechanism(MSSMS) 

   The working process of MSSMS is listed as below: 

a.    Gathering topology information 
   Centralized control module are respondent for monitoring the 
   environment of network. It collects the link state information and 
   stores them into topology information database, such as delay and 
   bandwidth. The database is refreshed at a fixed rate. 

b.    Recognizing services 
   Category information of varies services is prestored in 
   database(service-categories database) which is set in control center.
   Different services have different threshold of QoS, thus the 
   information about categories is different from one to another. After 
   getting topology information, the control center can classify 
   different services according to their QoS threshold. 

c.    Calculating path's weights 
   The counter set in the destination node must supervise the traffic 
   into this node. M stands for the total incoming traffic. At this 
   point, control center counts each path's traffic according to the 
   topology information database. If there are N paths in total and each
   path's traffic is mn then the weight of each path is kn=mn/M, in
   which n=0,1,2,...,N-1,N. Because in real P2P network circumstances 
   every path's traffic is changing instantly, a refresh rate r is set 
   in the control center of this mechanism in order to make the weights 
   of those paths change instantly as the traffic changes. 
 
 
Bai, Zhao             Expires February 2, 2013                [Page 7] 
Internet-Draft                  MMSSMS                     August 2012 
    

d.    Calculating health values 
   After weights of all paths have been acquired, health values of these
   paths can be calculated by the equation below: 

                     bandwidthEV=b2/B=(B-b1)/B=1-b1/B 

                             delayEV=1-d/Dm 

                 PHVn= i*bandwidthEV+j*delayEV, (i+j=1) 

                                      

   In the equations above, B is the total bandwidth of one path, b1is                                                                   
   the bandwidth which has been occupied; b2 is the free bandwidth which
   has been remained. Dm is the maximum of the delay values of all paths.
   In the third equation, i is the weight of path's bandwidth condition 
   and j is the weight of path's delay condition. 

   After path's health value is acquired, service's health value can be 
   got by the equation below: 

         SHV = -ql+k1*PHV1+k2*PHV2+...+kn*PHVn, k1+k2+k3+...+kn=1 

   l stands for loss rate at the destination node, q is the weight of l. 

e.    Judging the health level 
   Once service's health value has been acquired by the way described in 
   process b, the judge function in the control center will decide 
   whether the current service is healthy enough. The standard of health 
   is preset according different thresholds of service QoS parameters.  

   If current service's health value is larger than the threshold, 
   control center will consider this service as healthy enough to 
   continuing current routing strategies. Otherwise, if current 
   service's health value can't reach the threshold, control center will 
   consider it's not healthy anymore and output the judging result to 
   the routing module to adjust the routing strategies such as Fast Re-
   Route(FRR) and so on. 

   If centralized control center has detected the warning packets from 
   the lower network, control center shall escape the process of 
   calculating health values and output the judgment of ill 
   survivability to routing model to activate FRR. 


 
 
Bai, Zhao             Expires February 2, 2013                [Page 8] 
Internet-Draft                  MMSSMS                     August 2012 
    

8. Security Considerations 

   As MSSMS can be used in IP-based networks, especially in P2P 
   networks, it might be related with the stability of the network 
   infrastructure (such as routing protocols). At the same time, the 
   quality of service will be more stable under the control of MSSMS, 
   because the MSSMS can adjust routing strategies instantly. However, 
   the premises of this mechanism are that the threshold of QoS must be 
   preset properly; otherwise there will be a jitter in system's 
   routing strategies. 

9. IANA Considerations 

   This document does not request any action from IANA. 

10. References 

   [1]  H.Schulzrinne, "Real Time Streaming Protocol(RTSP)", RFC 2326, 
         April 1998. 

   [2]  J.Arkko, F.Lindholm, M.Naslund, "Key Management Extensions for 
         Session Description Protocol(SDP) and Real Time Streaming 
         Protocol(RSTP)", RFC 4567, July 2006. 

   [3]  G.Camarillo, Ed., "Peer-to-Peer(P2P) Architecture: Definition, 
         Taxonomies, Examples, and Applicability", RFC 5694, November 
         2009. 

   [4]  N.Cook, "Streaming Internet Messaging Attachments", RFC 5616, 
         August 2009. 

11. Acknowledgments 

   This context is written to provide a service-oriented mechanism for 
   maintaining the survivability of streaming media service in the 
   circumstances of the IP network. 

   Copyright (c) 2012 IETF Trust and the persons identified as authors 
   of the code. All rights reserved. 

   Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without 
   modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions 
   are met: 

   o Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright 
      notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.  

 
 
Bai, Zhao             Expires February 2, 2013                [Page 9] 
Internet-Draft                  MMSSMS                     August 2012 
    

   o Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright 
      notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in 
      the documentation and/or other materials provided with the 
      distribution.  

   o Neither the name of Internet Society, IETF or IETF Trust, nor the 
      names of specific contributors, may be used to endorse or promote 
      products derived from this software without specific prior 
      written permission. 






























 
 
Bai, Zhao             Expires February 2, 2013               [Page 10] 
Internet-Draft                  MMSSMS                     August 2012 
    

   Authors' Addresses 

   Bo Bai 
   Xi'an Jiaotong University 
   Box1761 Xi'an Jiaotong University 
   No.28 Xianning West Road, People's Republic of China 
   Email: rastlin108@gmail.com 
    

   Jihong Zhao 
   Xi'an Jiaotong University 
   Box1761 Xi'an Jiaotong University 
   No.28 Xianning West Road, People's Republic of China 
   Email: eeleeg@gmail.com 
    




 
Bai, Zhao             Expires February 2, 2013               [Page 11]                                  