NFSv4 Working Group                                       D. Hildebrand
Internet Draft                                                 M. Eshel
Intended status: Standards Track                            IBM Almaden
Expires: September 2010                                   March 1, 2010



             Simple and Efficient Read Support for Sparse Files
                    draft-hildebrand-nfsv4-read-sparse-00.txt


Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   This document may contain material from IETF Documents or IETF
   Contributions published or made publicly available before November
   10, 2008. The person(s) controlling the copyright in some of this
   material may not have granted the IETF Trust the right to allow
   modifications of such material outside the IETF Standards Process.
   Without obtaining an adequate license from the person(s) controlling
   the copyright in such materials, this document may not be modified
   outside the IETF Standards Process, and derivative works of it may
   not be created outside the IETF Standards Process, except to format
   it for publication as an RFC or to translate it into languages other
   than English.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 1, 2010.






Hildebrand, et al.    Expires September 1, 2010                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft      Read Support for Sparse Files            March 2010


Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors. All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the BSD License.

   This document may contain material from IETF Documents or IETF
   Contributions published or made publicly available before November
   10, 2008.  The person(s) controlling the copyright in some of this
   material may not have granted the IETF Trust the right to allow
   modifications of such material outside the IETF Standards Process.
   Without obtaining an adequate license from the person(s) controlling
   the copyright in such materials, this document may not be modified
   outside the IETF Standards Process, and derivative works of it may
   not be created outside the IETF Standards Process, except to format
   it for publication as an RFC or to translate it into languages other
   than English.

Abstract

   This document extends the NFSv4.1 protocol to support efficient
   reading of sparse files.  The number of sparse files is growing in
   the data center, most notably due to the increasing number of virtual
   disk images.  This simple extension provides an easy and efficient
   way for administrators to copy and manage these files without wasting
   disk space or transferring data unnecessarily.

Table of Contents


   1. Introduction...................................................3
      1.1. Requirements Language.....................................4
   2. Terminology....................................................4
   3. Applications and Sparse Files..................................4
   4. Overview of Sparse Files and NFSv4.............................5
   5. Definition of Sparse Reads with NFS............................6
      5.1. Definition of the READ4res................................6
      5.2. Definition of the READ4reshole............................7


Hildebrand, et al.    Expires September 1, 2010                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft      Read Support for Sparse Files            March 2010


   6. Related Work...................................................7
   7. Security Considerations........................................8
   8. IANA Considerations............................................8
   9. References.....................................................8
      9.1. Normative References......................................8
      9.2. Informative References....................................8
   10. Acknowledgments...............................................8

1. Introduction

   NFS is now used in many data centers as the sole or primary method of
   data access.  Consequently, more types of applications are using NFS
   than ever before, each with their own requirements and generated
   workloads.  As part of this, sparse files are increasing in number
   while NFS continues to lack any specific knowledge of a sparse file's
   layout.  This document extends the NFSv4.1 protocol to support
   efficient reading of sparse files.

   A sparse file is a common way of representing a large file without
   having to pre-allocate data for it.  Consequently, a sparse file uses
   fewer blocks than its size indicates.  This means the file contains
   'holes', byte ranges within the file that contain no data.  Most
   modern file systems support sparse files, including most UNIX file
   systems and NTFS, but notably not Apple's HFS+.  Common examples of
   sparse files include VM OS/disk images, database files, log files,
   and even checkpoint recovery files most commonly used by the HPC
   community.

   If an application reads 'holes' in a sparse file, the file system
   converts empty blocks into "real" blocks filled with zeros, and
   returns them to the application.   For local data access there is
   little penalty, but with NFS these zeroes must be transferred back to
   the client.  If an application uses the NFS client to read data into
   memory, this wastes time and bandwidth as the application waits for
   the zeroes to be transferred.  Once the zeroes arrive, they then
   steal memory or cache space from real data.  To make matters worse,
   if an application then proceeds to write data to another file system,
   the zeros are written into the file, expanding the sparse file into a
   full sized regular file.  Beyond wasting disk space, this can
   actually prevent large sparse files from ever being copied to another
   storage location due to space limitations.

   This document simply adds a new return value to the READ RPC to avoid
   reading holes in sparse files and to tell the client the location of
   the next valid data block.  This solution is intentionally very
   simple and does not build on complicated and optional features such



Hildebrand, et al.    Expires September 1, 2010                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft      Read Support for Sparse Files            March 2010


   as pNFS.  This hopefully ensures that sparse files become supported
   by the widest number of client implementations.

   The XDR description is provided in this document in a way that makes
   it simple for the reader to extract into a ready to compile form.
   The reader can feed this document into the following shell script to
   produce the machine readable XDR description of the metadata layout:

   #!/bin/sh
   grep "^  *///" | sed 's?^  *///  ??' | sed 's?^.*///??'

   I.e. if the above script is stored in a file called "extract.sh", and
   this document is in a file called "spec.txt", then the reader can do:

    sh extract.sh < spec.txt > md.x

   The effect of the script is to remove leading white space from each
   line of the specification, plus a sentinel sequence of "///".

1.1. Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [1].

2. Terminology

   o  Regular file: An object of file type NF4REG or NF4NAMEDATTR.

   o  Sparse File. A Regular file that has a size greater than the
      number of blocks allocated for the file.

   o  Hole. A byte range within a Sparse file that contains no data or
      simply zeroes.

3. Applications and Sparse Files

   Applications may cause an NFS client to read empty blocks in a file
   for several reasons.  This section describes three different
   application workloads that cause the NFS client to transfer data
   unnecessarily.  These workloads are simply examples, and there are
   probably many more workloads that are negatively impacted by sparse
   files.

   The first workload that can cause empty blocks to be read is
   sequential reads within a sparse file.  When this happens, the NFS
   client may perform read requests ("readahead") into sections of the


Hildebrand, et al.    Expires September 1, 2010                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft      Read Support for Sparse Files            March 2010


   file not explicitly requested by the application. Since the NFS
   client cannot differentiate between allocated and unallocated
   sections, the NFS client can end up prefetching empty sections of the
   file.

   This workload is exemplified by Virtual Machines and their associated
   file system images, e.g., VMware .vmdk files, which are large sparse
   files encapsulating an entire operating system.  If a VM reads files
   within the file system image, this will translate to sequential NFS
   read requests into the much larger file system image file.  Since NFS
   does not understand the internals of the file system image, it ends
   up performing readahead into unallocated sections. Note that it is
   also common for several VMs on different NFS clients to share a
   single file system image file, which exacerbates the problem by
   resending empty blocks to multiple clients.

   The second workload is generated by copying a file from a directory
   in NFS to either the same NFS server, to another file system, e.g.,
   another NFS or Samba server, to a local ext3 file system, or even a
   network socket.  In this case, bandwidth and server resources are
   wasted as the entire file, including both allocated and unallocated
   blocks, are transferred from the NFS server to the NFS client.   Once
   a data block has been transferred to the client, it is up to the
   client application, e.g., rsync, cp, scp, on how it writes the data
   to the target location.  For example, cp supports sparse files and
   will not write zero filled blocks, whereas scp does not support
   sparse files and will transfer every data block.

   The third workload is generated by applications that do not utilize
   the NFS client cache, but instead use direct I/O and manage cached
   data independently, e.g., databases.  These applications may perform
   whole file caching with sparse files, which would mean that even the
   unallocated sections will be transferred to the clients and cached.

4. Overview of Sparse Files and NFSv4

   This proposal seeks to provide sparse file support to the largest
   number of NFS client and server implementations, and as such proposes
   to add a new return code to the mandatory NFSv4.1 READ operation
   instead of proposing additions or extensions of new or existing
   optional features (such as pNFS).

   As well, this document seeks to ensure that the proposed extensions
   are simple and do not transfer data between the client and server
   unnecessarily. For example, one possible way to implement sparse file
   read support would be to have the client, on the first hole
   encountered or at OPEN time, request a block layout map from the


Hildebrand, et al.    Expires September 1, 2010                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft      Read Support for Sparse Files            March 2010


   server.  While this option seems simple, it can become inefficient
   and cumbersome quite easily.  First, large block layout maps can be
   returned from the server, which can reduce overall READ performance.
   For example, VMware's .vmdk files use 64KB blocks and can have a file
   size of over 100 GBs.  This means that the possible number of
   allocated (or unallocated) blocks in the file can grow very large in
   the worse case scenario.  In addition, this large block layout map
   may need to be transferred multiple times with each update to the
   file.  For example, a VM that updates a config file in its file
   system image would invalidate the block layout map not only for
   itself, but for all other clients accessing the same file system
   image.

   Another way to handle holes is compression, but this not ideal since
   it requires all implementations to agree on a single compression
   algorithm and requires a fair amount of computational overhead.

   Note that supporting writing to a sparse file does not require
   changes to the protocol.  Applications and/or NFS implementations can
   choose to ignore WRITE requests of all zeroes to the NFS server
   without consequence.

5. Definition of Sparse Reads with NFS

   The following sections details changes to the READ operation in the
   NFSv4.1 specification [3] to allow NFS clients to avoid reading holes
   in a file.

   Our proposal is very simple, if a client READ request would return
   all zeroes from a file hole, the server does not waste computational
   and network overhead by sending the zeroes back to the client.
   Instead, the server returns a new return value and result structure
   that tells the client that the READ result is all zeroes AND the
   offset of the next non-zero segment of data. Sending the location of
   the next valid data block, and only upon request, avoids transferring
   large block layout maps that may be soon invalidated and avoids
   sending large amount of information about a file that may not even be
   read in its entirely.

5.1. Definition of the READ4res

   ///  union READ4res switch (nfsstat4 status) {
   ///   case NFS4_OK:
   ///           READ4resok     resok4;
   ///   case NFS4ERR_HOLE:
   ///           READ4reshole   reshole4;
   ///   default:


Hildebrand, et al.    Expires September 1, 2010                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft      Read Support for Sparse Files            March 2010


   ///           void;
   ///  };

   If status is NFS4ERR_HOLE, then the entire byte range of the read
   request is in a hole, and can be assumed to be zero.  Information
   regarding the location of the next non-hole, or allocated block, in
   the file is contained in reshole4.


5.2. Definition of the READ4reshole

   ///  struct READ4reshole {
   ///          offset4         data_offset;
   ///          length4         data_length;
   ///   };

   If a READ request is into a hole, a READ4reshole structure is
   returned.  The READ4reshole structure is considered valid until the
   file is changed (detected via the change attribute).

   The values of the fields are as follows,

   o  data_offset, which is the offset of the next region of allocated
      data in the file.

   o  data_length, which is the length of the non-zero data segment at
      data_offset.  If data_length is greater than 0, then the data in
      the file from data_offset until data_length is allocated and does
      not contain a hole.  If data_length is set to zero, then either
      the server has no further information regarding holes in the
      remainder of the file or it can be assumed that all remaining
      bytes in the file are allocated and contain no holes. Either way,
      the client can ignore the information in READ4reshole.

6. Related Work

   Solaris and ZFS support an extension to lseek(2) that allows
   applications to discover holes in a file. The values, SEEK_HOLE and
   SEEK_DATA, allow clients to seek to the next hole or beginning of
   data, respectively.

   XFS supports the XFS_IOC_GETBMAP extended attribute, which returns
   the allocation information for a file. Clients can then use this
   information to only read allocated data blocks.





Hildebrand, et al.    Expires September 1, 2010                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft      Read Support for Sparse Files            March 2010


   NTFS and CIFS support the FSCTL_SET_SPARSE attribute, which allows
   applications to control whether empty regions of the file are
   preallocated and filled in with zeros or simply left unallocated.

7. Security Considerations

   The additions to the NFS protocol for supporting sparse file reads
   does not alter the security considerations of the NFSv4.1 protocol
   [3].

8. IANA Considerations

   There are no IANA considerations in this document.  All NFSv4.1 IANA
   considerations are covered in [3].

9. References

9.1. Normative References

   [1]   Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
         Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [2]   Shepler, S., Callaghan, B., Robinson, D., Thurlow, R., Beame,
         C., Eisler, M., and D. Noveck, "Network File System (NFS)
         version 4 Protocol", RFC 3530, April 2003.

   [3]   Shepler, S., Eisler, M., and D. Noveck, "Network File System
         (NFS) Version 4 Minor Version 1 Protocol", RFC 5661, January
         2010.

9.2. Informative References

   [4]   Shepler, S., Eisler, M., and D. Noveck, "Network File System
         (NFS) Version 4 Minor Version 1 External Data Representation
         Standard (XDR) Description", RFC 5662, January 2010.

   [5]   Nowicki, B., "NFS: Network File System Protocol specification",
         RFC 1094, March 1989.

   [6]   Callaghan, B., Pawlowski, B., and P. Staubach, "NFS Version 3
         Protocol Specification", RFC 1813, June 1995.

10. Acknowledgments

   This document was prepared using 2-Word-v2.0.template.dot.




Hildebrand, et al.    Expires September 1, 2010                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft      Read Support for Sparse Files            March 2010


Authors' Addresses

   Dean Hildebrand
   IBM Almaden
   650 Harry Rd
   San Jose, CA 95120

   Phone: +1 408-927-2013
   Email: dhildeb@us.ibm.com

   Marc Eshel
   IBM Almaden
   650 Harry Rd
   San Jose, CA 95120

   Phone: +1 408-927-1894
   Email: eshel@almaden.ibm.com
































Hildebrand, et al.    Expires September 1, 2010                [Page 9]

