



Routing Working Group                                    M. Jethanandani
Internet-Draft                                         Ciena Corporation
Intended status: Informational                                  K. Patel
Expires: October 10, 2013                             Cisco Systems, Inc
                                                                L. Zheng
                                                     Huawei Technologies
                                                          April 08, 2013


  Analysis of BGP, LDP, PCEP and MSDP Issues According to KARP Design
                                 Guide
              draft-ietf-karp-routing-tcp-analysis-07.txt

Abstract

   This document analyzes TCP based routing protocols, Border Gateway
   Protocol (BGP), Label Distribution Protocol (LDP), Path Computation
   Element Communication Protocol (PCEP), and Multicast Source
   Distribution Protocol (MSDP) according to guidelines set forth in
   section 4.2 of Keying and Authentication for Routing Protocols Design
   Guidelines (RFC6518).

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on October 10, 2013.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents



Jethanandani, et al.    Expires October 10, 2013                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft      BGP, LDP, PCEP and MSDP Analysis          April 2013


   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
     1.1.  Abbreviations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   2.  Current Assessment of BGP, LDP, PCEP and MSDP . . . . . . . .   4
     2.1.  Transport layer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     2.2.  Keying mechanisms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     2.3.  BGP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     2.4.  LDP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
       2.4.1.  Spoofing attacks  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
       2.4.2.  Denial of Service Attacks . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     2.5.  PCEP  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     2.6.  MSDP  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   3.  Optimal State for BGP, LDP, PCEP, and MSDP  . . . . . . . . .  10
     3.1.  LDP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   4.  Gap Analysis for BGP, LDP, PCEP and MSDP  . . . . . . . . . .  11
     4.1.  LDP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
     4.2.  PCEP  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   5.  Transition and Deployment Considerations  . . . . . . . . . .  13
   6.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
   7.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
   8.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
   9.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
     9.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
     9.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16

1.  Introduction

   In March 2006, the Internet Architecture Board (IAB) described an
   attack on core routing infrastructure as an ideal attack that would
   inflict the greatest amount of damage, in their Report from the IAB
   workshop on Unwanted Traffic March 9-10, 2006 [RFC4948], and suggests
   steps to tighten the infrastructure against the attack.  Four main
   steps were identified for that tightening:

   1.  Create secure mechanisms and practices for operating routers.

   2.  Clean up the Internet Routing Registry (IRR) repository, and
       securing both the database and the access, so that it can be used
       for routing verifications.




Jethanandani, et al.    Expires October 10, 2013                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft      BGP, LDP, PCEP and MSDP Analysis          April 2013


   3.  Create specifications for cryptographic validation of routing
       message content.

   4.  Secure the routing protocols' packets on the wire.

   In order to secure the routing protocols this document performs an
   initial analysis of the current state of the following TCP based
   protocols: BGP, LDP, PCEP, and MSDP according to the requirements of
   KARP Design Guidelines [RFC6518].  Section 4.2 of the document uses
   the term "state" which will be referred to as the "state of the
   security method".  Thus a term like "Define Optimal State" would be
   referred to as "Define Optimal State of the Security Method".  This
   document builds on several previous analysis efforts into routing
   security.

   This document builds on several previous efforts into routing
   security:

   o  Issues with existing Cryptographic Protection Methods for Routing
      Protocols [RFC6039], describes issues with existing cryptographic
      protection methods for routing protocols.

   o  Analysis of OSPF Security According to KARP Design Guide [RFC6863]
      analyzes Open Shortest Path First (OSPF) security according to
      KARP Design Guide.

   Section 2 of this document looks at the current state of the security
   method for the four routing protocols, BGP, LDP, PCEP and MSDP.
   Section 3 examines what the optimal state of the security method
   would be for the four routing protocols, according to KARP Design
   Guidelines [RFC6518] and Section 4 does an analysis of the gap
   between the existing state of the security method and the optimal
   state of the security method for protocols and suggests some areas
   where improvement is needed.

1.1.  Abbreviations

   AES - Advanced Encryption Standard

   AO - Authentication Option

   AS - Autonomous Systems

   BGP - Border Gateway Protocol

   CMAC - Ciper Based MAC

   DoS - Denial of Service



Jethanandani, et al.    Expires October 10, 2013                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft      BGP, LDP, PCEP and MSDP Analysis          April 2013


   GTSM - Generalized TTL Security Mechanism

   HMAC - Hash Based MAC

   KARP - Key and Authentication for Routing Protocols

   KDF - Key Derivation Function

   KEK - Key Encrypting Key

   KMP - Key Management Protocol

   LDP - Label Distribution Protocol

   LSR - Label Switching Routers

   MAC - Message Authentication Code

   MKT - Master Key Tuple

   MSDP - Multicast Source Distribution Protocol

   MD5 - Message Digest algorithm 5

   OSPF - Open Shortest Path First

   PCEP - Path Computation Element Communication Protocol

   PCC - Path Computation Client

   PCE - Path Computation Element

   SHA - Security Hash Algorithm

   TCP - Transmission Control Protocol

   TTL - Time To Live

   UDP - User Datagram Protocol

   WG - Working Group

2.  Current Assessment of BGP, LDP, PCEP and MSDP

   This section assesses the transport protocols for any authentication
   or integrity mechanisms used by the protocol.  It describes the
   current security mechanisms if any used by BGP, LDP, PCEP and MSDP.




Jethanandani, et al.    Expires October 10, 2013                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft      BGP, LDP, PCEP and MSDP Analysis          April 2013


2.1.  Transport layer

   At a transport layer, routing protocols are subject to a variety of
   DoS attacks, as outlined in Internet Denial-of-Service Considerations
   [RFC4732].  Such attacks can cause the routing protocol to become
   congested with the result that routing updates are supplied too
   slowly to be useful.  In extreme cases, these attacks prevent routers
   from converging after a change.

   Routing protocols use several methods to protect themselves.  Those
   that use TCP as a transport protocol use access lists to accept
   packets only from known sources.  These access lists also help
   protect edge routers from attacks originating outside the protected
   domain.  In addition, for edge routers running eBGP, TCP LISTEN is
   run only on interfaces on which its peers have been discovered or via
   which routing sessions are expected (as specified in router
   configuration databases).

   Generalized TTL Security Mechanism (GTSM) [RFC5082] describes a
   generalized Time to Live (TTL) security mechanism to protect a
   protocol stack from CPU-utilization based attacks.TCP Robustness
   [RFC5961] recommends some TCP level mitigations against spoofing
   attacks targeted towards long-lived routing protocol sessions.

   Even when BGP, LDP, PCEP and MSDP sessions use access lists, they are
   vulnerable to spoofing and man in the middle attacks.  Authentication
   and integrity checks allow the receiver of a routing protocol update
   to know that the message genuinely comes from the node that claims to
   have sent it, and to know whether the message has been modified.
   Sometimes routers can be subjected to a large number of
   authentication and integrity requests, exhausting connection
   resources on the router in a way that could lead to deny genuine
   requests.

   TCP MD5 [RFC2385] has been obsoleted by TCP-AO [RFC5925].  However,
   it is still widely used to authenticate TCP based routing protocols
   such as BGP.  It provides a way for carrying a MD5 digest in a TCP
   segment.  This digest is computed using information known only to the
   end points and this ensures authenticity and integrity of messages.
   The MD5 key used to compute the digest is stored locally on the
   router.  This option is used by routing protocols to provide for
   session level protection against the introduction of spoofed TCP
   segments into any existing TCP streams, in particular TCP Reset
   segments.  TCP MD5 does not provide a generic mechanism to support
   key roll-over.  It also does not support algorithm agility.

   The Message Authentication Codes (MACs) used by TCP MD5 option, is
   considered too weak both because of the use of the hash function and



Jethanandani, et al.    Expires October 10, 2013                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft      BGP, LDP, PCEP and MSDP Analysis          April 2013


   because of the way the secret key used by TCP MD5 is managed.
   Furthermore, TCP MD5 does not support any algorithm agility.  TCP-AO
   [RFC5925], and its companion document Crypto Algorithms for TCP-AO
   [RFC5926], describe steps towards correcting both the MAC weakness
   and the management of secret keys.  For MAC it requires that two MAC
   algorithms be supported.  They are HMAC-SHA-1-96 as specified in HMAC
   [RFC2104], and AES-128-CMAC-96 as specified in NIST-SP800-38B
   [NIST-SP800-38B].  Cryptographic research suggests that both these
   MAC algorithms defined are fairly secure.  By supporting multiple MAC
   algorithms, TCP-AO supports algorithm agility.  TCP-AO also allows
   additional MACs to be added in the future.

2.2.  Keying mechanisms

   For TCP-AO [RFC5925] there is no Key Management Protocol (KMP) used
   to manage the keys that are employed to generate the Message
   Authentication Code (MAC).  TCP-AO talks about coordinating keys
   derived from Master Key Table (MKT) between endpoints and allows for
   a master key to be configured manually or for it to be managed via a
   out of band mechanism.

   It should be noted that most routers configured with static keys have
   not seen the key changed ever.  The common reason given for not
   changing the key is the difficulty in coordinating the change between
   pairs of routers when using TCP MD5.  It is well known that the
   longer the same key is used, the greater the chance that it can be
   guessed or exposed e.g.  when an administrator with knowledge of the
   keys leaves the company.

   For point-to-point key management IKEv2 [RFC5996] protocol provides
   for automated key exchange under a SA, and can be used for a
   comprehensive Key Management Protocol (KMP) solution for routers.
   IKEv2 can be used for both IPsec SAs [RFC4301] and other types of
   SAs.  For example, Fibre Channel SAs [RFC4595] are currently
   negotiated with IKEv2.  Using IKEv2 to negotiate TCP-AO is a possible
   option.

2.3.  BGP

   All BGP communications take place over TCP.  Therefore, all security
   vulnerabilities for BGP can be categorised as relating to the
   security of the transport protocol itself, or to the compromising of
   individual routers and the data they handle.  This document examines
   the issues for the transport protocol, while the SIDR Working Group
   (WG) looks at ways to sign and secure the data exchanged in BGP as
   described in An Infrastructure to Support Secure Internet Protocol
   [RFC6480].




Jethanandani, et al.    Expires October 10, 2013                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft      BGP, LDP, PCEP and MSDP Analysis          April 2013


2.4.  LDP

   Security Framework for MPLS and GMPLS Networks [RFC5920] outlines
   security aspects that are relevant in the context of MPLS and GMPLS.
   It describes the security threats, the related defensive techniques,
   and the mechanism for detection and reporting.

   Section 5 of LDP [RFC5036] states that LDP is subject to two
   different types of attacks: spoofing, and denial of service attacks.

2.4.1.  Spoofing attacks

   A spoofing attack against LDP can occur both during the discovery
   phase and during the session communication phase.

2.4.1.1.  Discovery exchanges using UDP

   Label Switching Routers (LSRs) indicate their willingness to
   establish and maintain LDP sessions by periodically sending Hello
   messages.  Reception of a Hello message serves to create a new "Hello
   adjacency", if one does not already exist, or to refresh an existing
   one.

   There are two variants of the discovery mechanism.  A Basic Discovery
   mechanism that is used to discover LSR neighbors that are directly
   connected at the link level and a Extended Discovery mechanism that
   is used by LSRs that are more than one hop away.

   Unlike all other LDP messages, the Hello messages are sent using UDP.
   This means that they cannot benefit from the security mechanisms
   available with TCP.  LDP [RFC5036] does not provide any security
   mechanisms for use with Hello messages except for some configuration
   which may help protect against bogus discovery events.  These
   configurations include directly connected links and interfaces.
   Routers that do not use directly connected links have to use Extended
   Discovery mechanism, and will not be able to use configuration to
   protect against bogus discovery events.

   Spoofing a Hello packet for an existing adjacency can cause the
   adjacency to time out and result in termination of the associated
   session.  This can occur when the spoofed Hello message specifies a
   small Hold Time, causing the receiver to expect Hello messages within
   this interval, while the true neighbor continues sending Hello
   messages at the lower, previously agreed to frequency.

   Spoofing a Hello packet can also cause the LDP session to be
   terminated.  This can occur when the spoofed Hello specifies a
   different Transport Address from the previously agreed one between



Jethanandani, et al.    Expires October 10, 2013                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft      BGP, LDP, PCEP and MSDP Analysis          April 2013


   neighbors.  Spoofed Hello messages are observed and reported as real
   problem in production networks.

2.4.1.2.  Session communication using TCP

   LDP like other TCP based routing protocols specifies use of the TCP
   MD5 Signature Option to provide for the authenticity and integrity of
   session messages.  As stated in section 2.1 of this document and in
   section 2.9 of LDP [RFC5036], MD5 authentication is considered too
   weak for this application as outlined in MD5 and HMAC-MD5 Security
   Considerations [RFC6151].  It also does not support algorithm
   agility.  A stronger hashing algorithm e.g SHA1, which is supported
   by TCP-AO [RFC5925] could be deployed to take care of the weakness.

   Alternatively, one could move to using TCP-AO which provides for
   stronger MAC algorithms, makes it easier to setup manual keys and
   protects against replay attacks.

2.4.2.  Denial of Service Attacks

   LDP is subject to Denial of Service (DoS) attacks both in its
   discovery mode and in session mode.  These are documented in
   Section 5.3 of LDP [RFC5036].

2.5.  PCEP

   For effective selection by PCCs, a PCC needs to know the location of
   PCEs in its domain along with some information relevant for PCE
   selection.  Such PCE information could be learned through manual
   configuration, on each PCC, along with their capabilities or
   automatically through a PCE discovery mechanism as outlined in
   Requirements for PCE Discovery [RFC4674].

   Attacks on PCEP [RFC5440] may result in damage to active networks.
   These include computation responses, which if changed can cause
   protocols like RSVP-TE [RFC3209] to setup sub-optimal or
   inappropriate LSPs.  In addition, PCE itself can attacked by a
   variety of DoS attacks.  Such attacks can cause path computations to
   be supplied too slowly to be of any value particularly as it relates
   to recovery or establishment of LSPs.

   Finally, PCE discovery as outlined in OSPF Protocol Extensions for
   PCE Discovery [RFC5088] and IS-IS Protocol Extensions for PCE
   Discovery [RFC5089] is a significant feature for the successful
   deployment of PCEP in large networks.  These mechanisms allow PCC to
   discover the existence of PCEs within the network.  If the discovery
   mechanism is compromised, it will impair the ability of the nodes to
   function as described below.



Jethanandani, et al.    Expires October 10, 2013                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft      BGP, LDP, PCEP and MSDP Analysis          April 2013


   As RFC 5440 states, PCEP which makes use of TCP as a transport, could
   be the target of the following attacks:

   o  Spoofing (PCC or PCE implementation)

   o  Snooping (message interception)

   o  Falsification

   o  Denial of Service

   In inter-Autonomous Systems (AS) scenarios where PCE-to-PCE
   communication is required, attacks may be particularly significant
   with commercial as well as service-level agreement implications.

   Additionally, snooping of PCEP requests and responses may give an
   attacker information about the operation of the network.  By viewing
   the PCEP messages an attacker can determine the pattern of service
   establishment in the network, and can know where traffic is being
   routed, thereby making the network susceptible to targeted attacks
   and the data within specific LSPs vulnerable.

   Ensuring PCEP communication privacy is of key importance, especially
   in an inter-AS context, where PCEP communication end-points do not
   reside in the same AS.  An attacker that intercepts a PCE message
   could obtain sensitive information related to computed paths and
   resources.

   At the time PCEP was documented in [RFC5440], TCP-AO had not been
   fully specified.  Therefore, [RFC5440] mandates that PCEP
   implementations include support for TCP-MD5, and that use of the
   function should be configurable by the operator.  [RFC5440] also
   describes the vulnerabilities and weaknesses of TCP-MD5 as noted in
   this document.  [RFC5440] goes on to state that PCEP implementations
   should include support for TCP-AO as soon as that specification is
   complete.  Since TCP-AO [RFC5925] has now been published, new PCEP
   implementation should fully support TCP-AO.

2.6.  MSDP

   Similar to BGP and LDP, Multicast Source Distribution Protocol (MSDP)
   uses TCP MD5 [RFC2385] to protect TCP sessions via the TCP MD5
   option.  But with a weak MD5 authentication, TCP MD5 is not
   considered strong enough for this application.  It also does not
   support algorithm agility.

   MSDP also advocates imposing a limit on number of source address and
   group addresses (S,G) that can be cached within the protocol and



Jethanandani, et al.    Expires October 10, 2013                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft      BGP, LDP, PCEP and MSDP Analysis          April 2013


   thereby mitigate state explosion due to any denial of service and
   other attacks.

3.  Optimal State for BGP, LDP, PCEP, and MSDP

   The ideal state of the security method for BGP, LDP, PCEP and MSDP
   protocols are when they can withstand any of the known types of
   attacks.  The protocols also need to support algorithm agility, i.e.
   they must not hardwire themselves to one algorithm.

   Additionally, Key Management Protocol (KMP) for the routing sessions
   should help negotiate unique, pair wise random keys without
   administrator involvement.  It should also negotiate Security
   Association (SA) parameters required for the session connection,
   including key life times.  It should keep track of those lifetimes
   and negotiate new keys and parameters before they expire and do so
   without administrator involvement.  In the event of a breach,
   including when an administrator with knowledge of the keys leaves the
   company, the keys should be changed immediately.

   The DoS attacks for BGP, LDP, PCEP and MSDP are attacks to the
   transport protocol, TCP for the most part and UDP in case of
   discovery phase of LDP.  TCP and UDP should be able to withstand any
   of DoS scenarios by dropping packets that are attack packets in a way
   that does not impact legitimate packets.

   The routing protocols should provide a mechanism to authenticate the
   routing information carried within the payload and administrators
   should enable it.

3.1.  LDP

   To harden LDP against its current vulnerability to spoofing attacks,
   LDP needs to be upgraded such that an implementation is able to
   determine the authenticity of the neighbors sending the Hello
   message.

   Labels are similar to routing information which is distributed in the
   clear.  However, there is currently no requirement that the labels be
   encrypted.  And stated before, is currently out of scope of this
   document.

   Similarly, it is important to ensure that routers exchanging labels
   are mutually authenticated, and that there are no rogue peers or
   unauthenticated peers that can compromise the stability of the
   network.





Jethanandani, et al.    Expires October 10, 2013               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft      BGP, LDP, PCEP and MSDP Analysis          April 2013


4.  Gap Analysis for BGP, LDP, PCEP and MSDP

   This section outlines the differences between the current state of
   the security methods for routing protocols, and the desired state of
   the security methods as outlined in section 4.2 of KARP Design
   Guidelines [RFC6518].  As that document states, these routing
   protocols fall into the category of one-to-one peering messages and
   will use peer keying protocol.  It covers issues that are common to
   the four protocols in this section, leaving protocol specific issues
   to sub-sections.

   At a transport level these routing protocols are subject to some of
   the same attacks that TCP applications are subject to.  These include
   DoS and spoofing attacks.  Internet Denial-of-Service Considerations
   [RFC4732] outlines some solutions.  Defending TCP Against Spoofing
   Attacks [RFC4953] recommends ways to prevent spoofing attacks.  In
   addition, the recommendations in [RFC5961] should also be followed
   and implemented to strengthen TCP.

   Routers lack comprehensive key management and keys derived from it
   that they can use to authenticate data.  As an example TCP-AO
   [RFC5925], talks about coordinating keys derived from Master Key
   Table (MKT) between endpoints, but the MKT itself has to be
   configured manually or through an out of band mechanism.  Also TCP-AO
   does not address the issue of connectionless reset, as it applies to
   routers that do not store MKT across reboots.

   Authentication, integrity protection, and encryption all require the
   use of keys by sender and receiver.  An automated KMP therefore has
   to include a way to distribute key material between two end points
   with little or no administration overhead.  It has to cover automatic
   key rollover.  It is expected that authentication will cover the
   packet, i.e.  the payload and the TCP header and will not cover the
   frame i.e.  the link layer 2 header.

   There are two methods of automatic key rollover.  Implicit key
   rollover can be initiated after certain volume of data gets exchanged
   or when a certain time has elapsed.  This does not require explicit
   signaling nor should it result in a reset of the TCP connection in a
   way that the links/adjacencies are affected.  On the other hand,
   explicit key rollover requires an out of band key signaling
   mechanism.  It can be triggered by either side and can be done
   anytime a security parameter changes e.g.  an attack has happened, or
   a system administrator with access to the keys has left the company.
   An example of this is IKEv2 [RFC5996], but it could be any other new
   mechanisms also.





Jethanandani, et al.    Expires October 10, 2013               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft      BGP, LDP, PCEP and MSDP Analysis          April 2013


   As stated earlier TCP-AO [RFC5925], and its accompanying document
   Crypto Algorithms for TCP-AO [RFC5926], requires that two MAC
   algorithms be supported, and they are HMAC-SHA-1-96 as specified in
   HMAC [RFC2104], and AES-128-CMAC-96 as specified in NIST-SP800-38B
   [NIST-SP800-38B].  Therefore, TCP-AO meets the algorithm agility
   requirement.

   There is a need to protect authenticity and validity of the routing/
   label information that is carried in the payload of the sessions.
   However, that is outside the scope of this document and is being
   addressed by SIDR WG.  Similar mechanisms could be used for intra-
   domain protocols.

   Finally, replay protection is required.  The replay mechanism needs
   to be sufficient to prevent an attacker from creating a denial of
   service or disrupting the integrity of the routing protocol by
   replaying packets.  It is important that an attacker not be able to
   disrupt service by capturing packets and waiting for replay state to
   be lost.

4.1.  LDP

   As described in LDP [RFC5036], the threat of spoofed Basic Hellos can
   be reduced by only accepting Basic Hellos on interfaces that LSRs
   trust, employing GTSM [RFC5082] and ignoring Basic Hellos not
   addressed to the "all routers on this subnet" multicast group.
   Spoofing attacks via Targeted Hellos are potentially a more serious
   threat.  An LSR can reduce the threat of spoofed Extended Hellos by
   filtering them and accepting Hellos from sources permitted by an
   access lists.  However, performing the filtering using access lists
   requires LSR resource, and the LSR is still vulnerable to the IP
   source address spoofing.  Spoofing attacks can be solved by being
   able to authenticate the Hello messages, and an LSR can be configured
   to only accept Hello messages from specific peers when authentication
   is in use.

   LDP Hello Cryptographic Authentication
   [draft-zheng-mpls-ldp-hello-crypto-auth-04] suggest a new
   Cryptographic Authentication TLV that can be used as an
   authentication mechanism to secure Hello messages.

4.2.  PCEP

   Path Computation Element (PCE) discovery according to its RFC
   [RFC5440], is a significant feature for the successful deployment of
   PCEP in large networks.  This mechanism allows a Path Computation
   Client (PCC) to discover the existence of suitable PCEs within the
   network without the necessity of configuration.  It should be obvious



Jethanandani, et al.    Expires October 10, 2013               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft      BGP, LDP, PCEP and MSDP Analysis          April 2013


   that, where PCEs are discovered and not configured, the PCC cannot
   know the correct key to use.  There are different approaches to
   retain some aspect of security, but all of them require use of a keys
   and a keying mechanism, the need for which has been discussed above.

5.  Transition and Deployment Considerations

   As stated in KARP Design Guidelines [RFC6518], it is imperative that
   the new authentication, security mechanisms defined, and key
   management protocol support incremental deployment, as it is not
   feasible to deploy the new routing protocol authentication mechanism
   overnight.

   Typically, authentication and security in a peer-to-peer protocol
   requires that both parties agree to the mechanisms that will be used.
   If an agreement is not reached the setup of the new mechanism will
   fail or will be deferred.  Upon failure, the routing protocols can
   fallback to the mechanisms that were already in place e.g.  use
   static keys if that was the mechanism in place.  The fallback should
   be configurable on a per-node or per-interface.  It is usually not
   possible for one end to use the new mechanism while the other end
   uses the old.  Policies can be put in place to retry upgrading after
   a said period of time, so a manual coordination is not required.

   If the automatic KMP requires use of Public Key Infrastructure
   Certificates [RFC5280] to exchange key material, the required
   Certificate Authority (CA) root certificates may need to be installed
   to verify authenticity of requests initiated by a peer.  Such a step
   does not require coordination with the peer except to decide what CA
   authority will be used.

6.  Security Considerations

   This section describes security considerations that BGP, LDP, PCEP
   and MSDP should try to meet.

   As with all routing protocols, they need protection from both on-path
   and off-path blind attacks.  A better way to protect them would be
   with per-packet protection using a cryptographic MAC.  In order to
   provide for the MAC, keys are needed.

   The routing protocols need to support algorithm agility, i.e.  they
   must not hardwire themselves to one algorithm.

   Once keys are used, mechanisms are required to support key rollover.
   This should cover both manual and automatic key rollover.  Multiple
   approaches could be used.  However, since the existing mechanisms
   provide a protocol field to identify the key as well as management



Jethanandani, et al.    Expires October 10, 2013               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft      BGP, LDP, PCEP and MSDP Analysis          April 2013


   mechanisms to introduce and retire new keys, focusing on the existing
   mechanism as a starting point is prudent.

   Furthermore, it is strongly suggested that these routing protocols
   need to support algorithm agility.  It has been proven that
   algorithms weaken over time.  Supporting algorithm agility assists in
   smooth transition from old to new algorithms.

7.  IANA Considerations

   None.

8.  Acknowledgements

   We would like to thank Brian Weis for encouraging us to write this
   draft, and to Anantha Ramaiah and Mach Chen for providing comments on
   it.

9.  References

9.1.  Normative References

   [RFC5926]  Lebovitz, G. and E. Rescorla, "Cryptographic Algorithms
              for the TCP Authentication Option (TCP-AO)", RFC 5926,
              June 2010.

   [RFC6518]  Lebovitz, G. and M. Bhatia, "Keying and Authentication for
              Routing Protocols (KARP) Design Guidelines", RFC 6518,
              February 2012.

9.2.  Informative References

   [NIST-SP800-38B]
              Dworking, , "Recommendation for Block Cipher Modes of
              Operation: The CMAC Mode for Authentication", May 2005.

   [RFC2104]  Krawczyk, H., Bellare, M., and R. Canetti, "HMAC: Keyed-
              Hashing for Message Authentication", RFC 2104, February
              1997.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC2385]  Heffernan, A., "Protection of BGP Sessions via the TCP MD5
              Signature Option", RFC 2385, August 1998.






Jethanandani, et al.    Expires October 10, 2013               [Page 14]

Internet-Draft      BGP, LDP, PCEP and MSDP Analysis          April 2013


   [RFC3209]  Awduche, D., Berger, L., Gan, D., Li, T., Srinivasan, V.,
              and G. Swallow, "RSVP-TE: Extensions to RSVP for LSP
              Tunnels", RFC 3209, December 2001.

   [RFC3618]  Fenner, B. and D. Meyer, "Multicast Source Discovery
              Protocol (MSDP)", RFC 3618, October 2003.

   [RFC4271]  Rekhter, Y., Li, T., and S. Hares, "A Border Gateway
              Protocol 4 (BGP-4)", RFC 4271, January 2006.

   [RFC4301]  Kent, S. and K. Seo, "Security Architecture for the
              Internet Protocol", RFC 4301, December 2005.

   [RFC4595]  Maino, F. and D. Black, "Use of IKEv2 in the Fibre Channel
              Security Association Management Protocol", RFC 4595, July
              2006.

   [RFC4674]  Le Roux, J.L., "Requirements for Path Computation Element
              (PCE) Discovery", RFC 4674, October 2006.

   [RFC4732]  Handley, M., Rescorla, E., IAB, "Internet Denial-of-
              Service Considerations", RFC 4732, December 2006.

   [RFC4948]  Andersson, L., Davies, E., and L. Zhang, "Report from the
              IAB workshop on Unwanted Traffic March 9-10, 2006", RFC
              4948, August 2007.

   [RFC4953]  Touch, J., "Defending TCP Against Spoofing Attacks", RFC
              4953, July 2007.

   [RFC5036]  Andersson, L., Minei, I., and B. Thomas, "LDP
              Specification", RFC 5036, October 2007.

   [RFC5082]  Gill, V., Heasley, J., Meyer, D., Savola, P., and C.
              Pignataro, "The Generalized TTL Security Mechanism
              (GTSM)", RFC 5082, October 2007.

   [RFC5088]  Le Roux, JL., Vasseur, JP., Ikejiri, Y., and R. Zhang,
              "OSPF Protocol Extensions for Path Computation Element
              (PCE) Discovery", RFC 5088, January 2008.

   [RFC5089]  Le Roux, JL., Vasseur, JP., Ikejiri, Y., and R. Zhang,
              "IS-IS Protocol Extensions for Path Computation Element
              (PCE) Discovery", RFC 5089, January 2008.







Jethanandani, et al.    Expires October 10, 2013               [Page 15]

Internet-Draft      BGP, LDP, PCEP and MSDP Analysis          April 2013


   [RFC5280]  Cooper, D., Santesson, S., Farrell, S., Boeyen, S.,
              Housley, R., and W. Polk, "Internet X.509 Public Key
              Infrastructure Certificate and Certificate Revocation List
              (CRL) Profile", RFC 5280, May 2008.

   [RFC5440]  Vasseur, JP. and JL. Le Roux, "Path Computation Element
              (PCE) Communication Protocol (PCEP)", RFC 5440, March
              2009.

   [RFC5920]  Fang, L., "Security Framework for MPLS and GMPLS
              Networks", RFC 5920, July 2010.

   [RFC5925]  Touch, J., Mankin, A., and R. Bonica, "The TCP
              Authentication Option", RFC 5925, June 2010.

   [RFC5961]  Ramaiah, A., Stewart, R., and M. Dalal, "Improving TCP's
              Robustness to Blind In-Window Attacks", RFC 5961, August
              2010.

   [RFC5996]  Kaufman, C., Hoffman, P., Nir, Y., and P. Eronen,
              "Internet Key Exchange Protocol Version 2 (IKEv2)", RFC
              5996, September 2010.

   [RFC6039]  Manral, V., Bhatia, M., Jaeggli, J., and R. White, "Issues
              with Existing Cryptographic Protection Methods for Routing
              Protocols", RFC 6039, October 2010.

   [RFC6151]  Turner, S. and L. Chen, "Updated Security Considerations
              for the MD5 Message-Digest and the HMAC-MD5 Algorithms",
              RFC 6151, March 2011.

   [RFC6480]  Lepinski, M. and S. Kent, "An Infrastructure to Support
              Secure Internet Routing", RFC 6480, February 2012.

   [RFC6863]  Hartman, S. and D. Zhang, "Analysis of OSPF Security
              According to the Keying and Authentication for Routing
              Protocols (KARP) Design Guide", RFC 6863, March 2013.

   [draft-zheng-mpls-ldp-hello-crypto-auth-04]
              Zheng, , "LDP Hello Cryptographic Authentication", May
              2012.

Authors' Addresses








Jethanandani, et al.    Expires October 10, 2013               [Page 16]

Internet-Draft      BGP, LDP, PCEP and MSDP Analysis          April 2013


   Mahesh Jethanandani
   Ciena Corporation
   1741 Technology Drive
   San Jose, CA  95110
   USA

   Phone: + (408) 436-3313
   Email: mjethanandani@gmail.com


   Keyur Patel
   Cisco Systems, Inc
   170 Tasman Drive
   San Jose, CA  95134
   USA

   Phone: +1 (408) 526-7183
   Email: keyupate@cisco.com


   Lianshu Zheng
   Huawei Technologies
   China

   Phone: +86 (10) 82882008
   Email: vero.zheng@huawei.com
























Jethanandani, et al.    Expires October 10, 2013               [Page 17]
