


Network Working Group                                           C. Daboo
Internet-Draft                                                     Apple
Intended status: Standards Track                         August 26, 2013
Expires: February 27, 2014


                     CalDAV: Timezones by Reference
                   draft-daboo-caldav-timezone-ref-00

Abstract

   This document defines an extension to the CalDAV calendar access
   protocol to allow clients and servers to exchange iCalendar data
   without the need to send full timezone data.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on February 27, 2014.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.





Daboo                   Expires February 27, 2014               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft              CalDAV Extensions                August 2013


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Conventions Used in This Document . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   3.  Timezones by Reference  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
     3.1.  New Server Behavior . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   4.  New Client Behavior . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   5.  New WebDAV Properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
     5.1.  CALDAV:timezone-service-set . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   6.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   7.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   8.  Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   9.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7





































Daboo                   Expires February 27, 2014               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft              CalDAV Extensions                August 2013


1.  Introduction

   The CalDAV [RFC4791] Calendar Access protocol allows clients to
   access calendar data stored on a server in the iCalendar [RFC5545]
   data format.  In iCalendar, calendar data that uses local time in any
   of its date and/or time values is specified as a date-time value in
   combination with a timezone identifier ("TZID" property parameter).
   The timezone identifier refers to a timezone definition (a
   "VTIMEZONE" component) that has all of the rules required to
   determine local time UTC offsets for the corresponding timezone.  In
   many cases, these "VTIMEZONE" components can be larger, octet-wise,
   than the events or tasks which make use of them.  However, iCalendar
   currently requires all iCalendar objects ("VCALENDAR" components)
   that refer to a timezone via its identifier to also include the
   corresponding "VTIMEZONE" component.  This leads to inefficiencies in
   the CalDAV protocol because large amounts of "VTIMEZONE" data are
   continuously being exchanged, and for the most part these timezone
   definitions are unchanging.  This is of particular problem to mobile
   or limited devices, with limited network bandwidth, cpu processing,
   and power constraints.

   A set of standard timezone definitions are available at the IANA
   Timezone Registry [RFC6557].  That registry provides the "raw" data
   for timezone definitions, and those can be converted into iCalendar
   "VTIMEZONE" components for use in iCalendar applications, as well as
   converted into other formats for use by other applications (e.g.,
   "zoneinfo" files often found on Unix-based operating systems).  A new
   Timezone Service [I-D.douglass-timezone-service] protocol is
   available that allows iCalendar applications to retrieve these
   standard timezone definitions in a timely and accurate fashion,
   instead of relying on possibly infrequent system updates of timezone
   data that frequently result in mismatched calendar data and resulting
   missed meetings between calendar users.  Another benefit of the
   Timezone Service is that it provides a single "reference" for
   standard timezone data that CalDAV clients and servers can make use
   of to "agree" on standard timezone definitions, and thus eliminate
   the need to exchange the data for those.

   This specification defines a new mode of operation for CalDAV clients
   and servers which allow them to exchange iCalendar data without the
   need to send "VTIMEZONE" components for known, standard timezone
   definitions.  This can significantly reduce the amount of data that
   needs to be sent between client and server, giving rise to
   performance and efficiency improvements for each of them.

   Discussion of this Internet-Draft is taking place on the mailing list
   <https://www.ietf.org/mailman/listinfo/caldav>.




Daboo                   Expires February 27, 2014               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft              CalDAV Extensions                August 2013


2.  Conventions Used in This Document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in
   [RFC2119].

   Other notations used in this memo follow the notations of [RFC4791].


3.  Timezones by Reference

   Note that this specification only defines changes to iCalendar data
   sent or received via the CalDAV protocol (both [RFC4791] and
   [RFC6638], and extensions).  If CalDAV clients and servers also offer
   alternative means of sending or receiving iCalendar data, they MUST
   follow the requirements of those alternative protocols in regards to
   whether timezone definitions are required or not.

3.1.  New Server Behavior

3.1.1.  Associated Timezone Service

   A CalDAV server MUST have one or more associated timezone services
   [I-D.douglass-timezone-service] that provides data for the set of
   standard timezones known to the server and expected to be used by
   clients.  A CalDAV server advertises the set of timezone services it
   makes use of via a CALDAV:timezone-service-set WebDAV property (see
   Section 5.1) defined on calendar home collections.  Clients can use
   the timezone services listed in this property to fetch up to date
   timezone definitions for the standard timezone identifiers in
   iCalendar data retrieved from the server.  This allows clients to
   keep their "built-in" timezone definitions up to date.  It also
   allows clients to use an "on-demand" model for populating their local
   timezone definition cache, only fetching a timezone definition when
   it is first seen in calendar data.  This can be beneficial to limited
   devices that might not be able to store the full set of standard
   timezone definitions, and might only "ship" with a limited set based
   on the region where the device is sold.

   When making use of the timezone services advertised by a CalDAV
   server, clients MUST follow all the requirements of the timezone
   service protocol, taking care to refresh timezone data in a timely
   fashion.







Daboo                   Expires February 27, 2014               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft              CalDAV Extensions                August 2013


3.1.2.  Do not Send Timezones

   Observation and experiments have shown that, in the vast majority of
   cases, CalDAV clients typically ignore timezone definitions in data
   received from servers, and instead make use of their own "built-in"
   definitions for the corresponding timezone identifier.  This means
   that it is reasonable for CalDAV servers to unilaterally decide not
   to send "VTIMEZONE" components for standard timezones that clients
   are expected to have "built-in" (i.e., IANA timezones).

   Servers that follow this specification MUST NOT send "VTIMEZONE"
   components in iCalendar data to clients, when the timezone identifier
   and corresponding timezone definitions are available on any of the
   advertised timezone services.  If a non-standard timezone is used in
   the iCalendar data, servers MUST include the corresponding
   "VTIMEZONE" component, as they would in the absence of support for
   this extension.

3.1.3.  Enable Clients not to Send Timezones

   In addition to servers not sending standard timezone definitions to
   clients in iCalendar data, this specification also allows clients not
   to include timezone definitions when sending iCalendar data to the
   server.  In order for that to work, clients need to know that the
   server is capable of handling that situation, as currently servers
   might not be able to.

   A server that allows clients to not send standard timezone
   definitions in iCalendar data MUST include "calendar-no-timezone" as
   a field in the DAV response header from an OPTIONS request on a
   calendar home collection or calendar collection.  Clients MUST check
   for the presence of that field in the DAV response header before
   changing their behavior as per Section 4.

   Note that, as per Section 4, clients might send timezone definitions
   for timezones that are not advertised by any of the timezone services
   associated with the server.  In that case, servers have various
   choices:

   1.  Servers can preserve the original timezone definitions in the
       iCalendar data sent by the client, so that those can be returned
       to that or other clients who subsequently request iCalendar data.

   2.  Servers can refuse to accept any unknown/non-standard timezones,
       in which case they MUST reject the HTTP request containing such
       data using a WebDAV precondition code of CALDAV:valid-timezone.





Daboo                   Expires February 27, 2014               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft              CalDAV Extensions                August 2013


   3.  Servers can, with appropriate knowledge, map the unknown/
       non-standard timezone to a standard timezone definition that
       accurately matches the one supplied by the client.  In doing so,
       servers will need to re-write the iCalendar data to make use of
       the new standard timezone identifier chosen by the mapping
       procedure.


4.  New Client Behavior

   Clients MUST expect servers to not include standard timezone
   definitions in any iCalendar data they receive from the server.
   Clients MUST retrieve standard timezone definitions from the set of
   timezone services advertised from the server, or a known, trusted,
   third party service.

   When a server advertises the "calendar-no-timezone" field in a DAV
   response header (as per Section 3.1.3):

   1.  Clients SHOULD remove standard timezone definitions from
       iCalendar data they send to the server, provided the
       corresponding timezone identifier is one available via any of the
       server's advertised timezone services.

   2.  Clients MUST send timezone definitions in iCalendar data for any
       timezone identifiers not available via any of the server's
       advertised timezone services.  Clients MUST be prepared for the
       server to reject such data or map the timezone to one in the set
       of standard timezones provided by the server's associated
       timezone services (as per Section 3.1.3).


5.  New WebDAV Properties

5.1.  CALDAV:timezone-service-set

   TBD: WebDAV [RFC4918] property containing a list of DAV:hrefs
   pointing to the timezone services used by the server.


6.  Security Considerations

   This specification does not introduce any new security concerns
   beyond those addressed in CalDAV [RFC4791] and iCalendar [RFC5545].







Daboo                   Expires February 27, 2014               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft              CalDAV Extensions                August 2013


7.  IANA Considerations

   No IANA actions are needed.


8.  Acknowledgments

   Thanks to Mike Douglass, and Andrew McMillan.  This specification
   came about via discussions at the Calendaring and Scheduling
   Consortium.


9.  Normative References

   [I-D.douglass-timezone-service]
              Douglass, M. and C. Daboo, "Timezone Service Protocol",
              draft-douglass-timezone-service-08 (work in progress),
              June 2013.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC4791]  Daboo, C., Desruisseaux, B., and L. Dusseault,
              "Calendaring Extensions to WebDAV (CalDAV)", RFC 4791,
              March 2007.

   [RFC4918]  Dusseault, L., "HTTP Extensions for Web Distributed
              Authoring and Versioning (WebDAV)", RFC 4918, June 2007.

   [RFC5545]  Desruisseaux, B., "Internet Calendaring and Scheduling
              Core Object Specification (iCalendar)", RFC 5545,
              September 2009.

   [RFC6557]  Lear, E. and P. Eggert, "Procedures for Maintaining the
              Time Zone Database", BCP 175, RFC 6557, February 2012.

   [RFC6638]  Daboo, C. and B. Desruisseaux, "Scheduling Extensions to
              CalDAV", RFC 6638, June 2012.













Daboo                   Expires February 27, 2014               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft              CalDAV Extensions                August 2013


Author's Address

   Cyrus Daboo
   Apple Inc.
   1 Infinite Loop
   Cupertino, CA  95014
   USA

   Email: cyrus@daboo.name
   URI:   http://www.apple.com/









































Daboo                   Expires February 27, 2014               [Page 8]

