


Network Working Group                                           C. Daboo
Internet-Draft                                                Apple Inc.
Intended status: Standards Track                       February 26, 2010
Expires: August 30, 2010


                  CardDAV Directory Gateway Extension
                draft-daboo-carddav-directory-gateway-00

Abstract

   This document defines and extension to the vCard Extensions to WebDAV
   (CardDAV) protocol that allows a server to expose a directory as a
   read-only address book collection.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 30, 2010.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect



Daboo                    Expires August 30, 2010                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft     CardDAV Directory Gateway Extension     February 2010


   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction and Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Conventions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   3.  CARDDAV:directory-gateway Property  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   4.  Client Guidelines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   5.  Server Guidelines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   6.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   7.  IANA Consideration  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   8.  Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   9.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7

































Daboo                    Expires August 30, 2010                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft     CardDAV Directory Gateway Extension     February 2010


1.  Introduction and Overview

   The CardDAV [I-D.ietf-vcarddav-carddav] protocol defines a standard
   way of accessing, managing, and sharing contact information based on
   the vCard [RFC2426] format.  Often, in an enterprise or service
   provider environment, a directory of all users hosted on the server
   (or elsewhere) is available.  It would be convenient for CardDAV
   clients if this directory were exposed as a "global" address book on
   the CardDAV server so it could be searched just as personal address
   books are.  This specification defines a "directory gateway" feature
   extension to CardDAV to enable this.

   This specification adds one new WebDAV property to principal
   resources that contains the URI to the directory gateway address book
   collection resource.

   Note that this feature is in no way intended to replace full
   directory access - it is meant to simply provide a convenient way for
   CardDAV clients to query contact-related attributes in directory
   records.


2.  Conventions

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].

   The term "protected" is used in the Conformance field of property
   definitions as defined in Section 15 of [RFC4918].

   This document uses XML DTD fragments ([W3C.REC-xml-20081126], Section
   3.2) as a purely notational convention.  WebDAV request and response
   bodies cannot be validated by a DTD due to the specific extensibility
   rules defined in Section 17 of [RFC4918] and due to the fact that all
   XML elements defined by this specification use the XML namespace name
   "DAV:".  In particular:

   1.  element names use the "DAV:" namespace,

   2.  element ordering is irrelevant unless explicitly stated,

   3.  extension elements (elements not already defined as valid child
       elements) may be added anywhere, except when explicitly stated
       otherwise,

   4.  extension attributes (attributes not already defined as valid for
       this element) may be added anywhere, except when explicitly



Daboo                    Expires August 30, 2010                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft     CardDAV Directory Gateway Extension     February 2010


       stated otherwise.

   When XML element types in the namespaces "DAV:" and
   "urn:ietf:params:xml:ns:carddav" are referenced in this document
   outside of the context of an XML fragment, the strings "DAV:" and
   "CARDDAV:" will be prefixed to the element types, respectively.


3.  CARDDAV:directory-gateway Property

   Name:  directory-gateway

   Namespace:  urn:ietf:params:xml:ns:carddav

   Purpose:  Identifies the URL of a CardDAV address book collection
      acting as the directory gateway for the server.

   Protected:  MUST be protected.

   allprop behavior:  SHOULD NOT be returned by a PROPFIND DAV:allprop
      request.

   Description:  The CARDDAV:directory-gateway identifies an address
      book collection resource that is the directory gateway address
      book for the server.

   Definition:

       <!ELEMENT directory-gateway (DAV:href)>

   Example:

       <C:directory-gateway xmlns:D="DAV:"
          xmlns:C="urn:ietf:params:xml:ns:carddav">
         <D:href>/directory</D:href>
       </C:directory-gateway>


4.  Client Guidelines

   Clients wishing to make use of the directory gateway address book can
   request the CARDDAV:directory-gateway property when examining other
   properties on the principal resource for the user.  If the property
   is not present, then the directory gateway feature is not supported
   by the server at that time.

   Since the directory being exposed via the directory gateway address
   book collection could be large, clients SHOULD use the feature to



Daboo                    Expires August 30, 2010                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft     CardDAV Directory Gateway Extension     February 2010


   limit the number of results returned in an CARDDAV:addressbook-query
   REPORT as defined in Section 8.6.1 of [I-D.ietf-vcarddav-carddav].

   Clients MUST treat the directory gateway address book collection as a
   read-only collection, so HTTP methods that modify resource data or
   properties in the address book collection MUST NOT be used.

   Clients SHOULD NOT attempt to cache the entire contents of the
   directory gateway address book collection resource by retrieving all
   resources.  Instead, CARDDAV:addressbook-query REPORTs are used to
   search for specific address book object resources.


5.  Server Guidelines

   Servers wishing to expose a directory gateway as an address book
   collection MUST include the CARDDAV:directory-gateway property on all
   principal resources of users expected to use the feature.

   Since the directory being exposed via the directory gateway address
   book collection could be large, servers SHOULD use the feature to
   truncate the number of results returned in an CARDDAV:addressbook-
   query REPORT as defined in Section 8.6.2 of
   [I-D.ietf-vcarddav-carddav].

   Since the directory being exposed via the directory gateway address
   book collection could be large, servers SHOULD use the feature to
   truncate the number of results returned in an CARDDAV:addressbook-
   query REPORT as defined in Section 8.6.2 of
   [I-D.ietf-vcarddav-carddav].  In addition, servers SHOULD disallow
   requests that effectively enumerate the collection contents (e.g.,
   PROPFIND Depth:1, trivial CARDDAV:addressbook-query, DAV:sync-
   collection REPORT).

   Servers need to expose the directory information as a set of address
   book object resources in the directory gateway address book
   collection resource.  To do that, a mapping between the directory
   record format and the vCard data has to be applied.  In general, only
   directory record attributes that have a direct equivalent in vCard
   SHOULD be mapped.  It is up to individual implementations to
   determine which attributes to map.  But in all cases servers MUST
   generate valid vCard data as returned to the client.


6.  Security Considerations

   Servers MUST ensure that client requests against the directory
   gateway address book collection cannot use excessive resources (CPU,



Daboo                    Expires August 30, 2010                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft     CardDAV Directory Gateway Extension     February 2010


   memory, network bandwidth etc), given that the directory could be
   large.

   Servers MUST take care not to expose sensitive directory record
   attributes in the vCard data via the directory gateway address book.
   In general only those properties that have direct correspondence in
   vCard SHOULD be exposed.

   Servers need to determine whether it is appropriate for the directory
   information to be available via CardDAV to unauthenticated users.  If
   not, servers MUST ensure that unauthenticated users do not have
   access to the directory gateway address book object resource and its
   contents.  If unauthenticated access is allowed, servers MAY choose
   to limit the set of vCard properties that are searchable or returned
   in the address book object resources when unauthenticated requests
   are made.


7.  IANA Consideration

   This document does not require any actions on the part of IANA.


8.  Acknowledgments


9.  Normative References

   [I-D.ietf-vcarddav-carddav]
              Daboo, C., "vCard Extensions to WebDAV (CardDAV)",
              draft-ietf-vcarddav-carddav-10 (work in progress),
              November 2009.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC2426]  Dawson, F. and T. Howes, "vCard MIME Directory Profile",
              RFC 2426, September 1998.

   [RFC4918]  Dusseault, L., "HTTP Extensions for Web Distributed
              Authoring and Versioning (WebDAV)", RFC 4918, June 2007.

   [W3C.REC-xml-20081126]
              Paoli, J., Yergeau, F., Bray, T., Sperberg-McQueen, C.,
              and E. Maler, "Extensible Markup Language (XML) 1.0 (Fifth
              Edition)", World Wide Web Consortium Recommendation REC-
              xml-20081126, November 2008,
              <http://www.w3.org/TR/2008/REC-xml-20081126>.



Daboo                    Expires August 30, 2010                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft     CardDAV Directory Gateway Extension     February 2010


Author's Address

   Cyrus Daboo
   Apple Inc.
   1 Infinite Loop
   Cupertino, CA  95014
   USA

   Email: cyrus@daboo.name
   URI:   http://www.apple.com/









































Daboo                    Expires August 30, 2010                [Page 7]

