


DISPATCH                                                   K. Rehor, Ed.
Internet-Draft                                             Cisco Systems
Intended status: Informational                                   R. Jain
Expires: October 31, 2010                                    IPC Systems
                                                              L. Portman
                                                            NICE Systems
                                                               A. Hutton
                                       Siemens Enterprise Communications
                                                          April 29, 2010


          Requirements for SIP-based Media Recording (SIPREC)
                       draft-rehor-siprec-req-00

Abstract

   Session recording is a critical requirement in many business
   communications environments such as call centers and financial
   trading floors.  In some of these environments, all calls must be
   recorded for regulatory and compliance reasons.  In others, calls may
   be recorded for quality control or business analytics.

   Recording is typically done by sending a copy of the session media to
   the recording devices.  This document specifies requirements for
   extensions to SIP that will manage delivery of RTP media from an end-
   point that originates media (or that has access to it) to a recording
   device.  This is being referred to as SIP-based Media Recording.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on October 31, 2010.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the



Rehor, et al.           Expires October 31, 2010                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft           Requirements for SIPREC              April 2010


   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

   This document may contain material from IETF Documents or IETF
   Contributions published or made publicly available before November
   10, 2008.  The person(s) controlling the copyright in some of this
   material may not have granted the IETF Trust the right to allow
   modifications of such material outside the IETF Standards Process.
   Without obtaining an adequate license from the person(s) controlling
   the copyright in such materials, this document may not be modified
   outside the IETF Standards Process, and derivative works of it may
   not be created outside the IETF Standards Process, except to format
   it for publication as an RFC or to translate it into languages other
   than English.




























Rehor, et al.           Expires October 31, 2010                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft           Requirements for SIPREC              April 2010


Table of Contents

   1.  Requirements notation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Definitions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   4.  Example Deployment Architectures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   5.  Use Cases  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   6.  Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   7.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   8.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   9.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   10. Contributors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   11. Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16





































Rehor, et al.           Expires October 31, 2010                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft           Requirements for SIPREC              April 2010


1.  Requirements notation

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119] and indicate
   requirement levels for compliant mechanisms.


2.  Introduction

   Session recording is a critical operational requirement in many
   businesses, especially where voice is used as a medium for commerce
   and customer support.  A prime example where voice is used for trade
   is the financial industry.  The call recording requirements in this
   industry are quite stringent.  The recorded calls are used for
   dispute resolution and compliance.  Other businesses such as customer
   support call centers typically employ call recording for quality
   control or business analytics, with different requirements.

   Depending on the country and its regulatory requirements, financial
   trading floors typically must record all calls.  The recorded media
   content must be an exact copy of the actual conversation (i.e.
   clipping and loss of media are unacceptable).  A new call attempt
   would be automatically rejected if the recording device becomes
   temporarily unavailable.  An existing call would be dropped in the
   same situation.  In contrast, support call centers typically only
   record a subset of the calls, and calls must not fail regardless of
   the availability of the recording device.

   Furthermore, the scale and cost burdens vary widely, in all markets,
   where the different needs for solution capabilities such as media
   injection, transcoding, and security-related needs do not conform
   well to a one-size-fits-all model.  If a standardized solution
   supports all of the requirements from every recording market, but
   doing so would be expensive for markets with lesser needs, then
   proprietary solutions for those markets will continue to propagate.
   Care must be taken, therefore, to make a standards-based solution
   support optionality and flexibility.

   It should be noted that the requirements for the protocol between a
   Recording Server and Recording Client have very similar requirements
   (such as codec and transport negotiation, encryption key interchange,
   firewall traversal) as compared to regular SIP media sessions.  The
   choice of SIP for session recording provides reuse of an existing
   protocol.  This document specifies requirements for using SIP
   [RFC3261] to record a media session between a Recording Client and a
   Recording Server, The Recording Client is the source of the recorded
   media.  The Recording Server is the sink of recorded media.



Rehor, et al.           Expires October 31, 2010                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft           Requirements for SIPREC              April 2010


   The recorded sessions can be any SIP-based RTP media sessions
   including voice, video, and text (as defined by [RFC4103]).

   An archived session recording is typically comprised of the session
   media content and the session metadata.  The session metadata allows
   recording archives to be searched and filtered at a later time.  The
   conveyance of session metadata from the Recording Client to the
   Recording Server may or may not be over SIP.  The requirements for
   session metadata delivery will be specified in a future revision of
   this document or in a separate document.

   In some situations it may be advantageous to correlate the
   Communication Session with other information, such as an IM or other
   text chat session.

   This document only considers active recording, where the Recording
   Client purposefully streams media to a Recording Server.  Passive
   recording, where a recording device detects media directly from the
   network, is outside the scope of this document.  In addition, lawful
   intercept is outside the scope of this document.


3.  Definitions

   Recording Server (RS): A Recording Server (RS) is a SIP User Agent
   (UA) that is a specialized media server or collector that acts as the
   sink of the recorded media.  An RS is a logical function that
   typically archives media for extended durations of time and provides
   interfaces for search and retrieval of the archived media.  An RS is
   typically implemented as a multi-port device that is capable of
   receiving media from several sources simultaneously.  An RS is
   typically also the sink of the recorded session metadata.  Note that
   the term "Server" does not imply the RS is the server side of a
   signaling protocol - the RS may be the initiator of recording
   requests, for example.

   Recording Client (RC): A Recording Client (RC) is a SIP User Agent
   (UA) that acts as the source of the recorded media, sending it to the
   RS.  An RC is a logical function.  Its capabilities may be
   implemented across one or more physical devices.  In practice, an RC
   could be a personal device (such as a SIP phone), a SIP Media Gateway
   (MG), a Session Border Controller (SBC) or a SIP Media Server (MS)
   integrated with an Application Server (AS).  This specification
   defines the term RC such that all such SIP entities can be
   generically addressed under one definition.  The RC itself or another
   entity working on its behalf (such as a SIP Application Server) may
   act as the source of the recording metadata.




Rehor, et al.           Expires October 31, 2010                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft           Requirements for SIPREC              April 2010


   Communication Session (CS): A session created between two or more SIP
   User Agents (UAs) that is the target for recording.

   Recording Session (RS): The SIP session created between an RC and RS
   for the purpose of recording a Communication Session.


   +---------------------------------------------------------------+
   |                       (Recording Client)                      |
   |   +-------------+                           +-----------+     |
   |   |             |   Communication Session   |           |     |
   |   |     A       |<------------------------->|   B       |     |
   |   |             |                           |           |     |
   |   +-------------+                           +-----------+     |
   +---------------------------------------------------------------+
                                  |
                                  | Recording
                                  | Session
                                  |
                                  v
                           +-------------+
                           |             |
                           |  Recording  |
                           |   Server    |
                           |             |
                           +-------------+


                                 Figure 1

   Metadata: Data that describes the Communication Session.

   SIPREC: The set of SIP extensions that supports recording of
   Communication Sessions.


4.  Example Deployment Architectures

   A recording system deployment consists of the Recording Client and
   Recording Server.  Recording Control is bi-directional; Recording
   Media and Call Metadata are sent from the RC to RS.










Rehor, et al.           Expires October 31, 2010                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft           Requirements for SIPREC              April 2010


   +-------------+                           +--------------+
   |             |      Call Metadata        |              |
   |             |-------------------------->|              |
   |  Recording  |                           |   Recording  |
   |   Client    |    Recording Control      |    Server    |
   |    (RC)     |<------------------------->|     (RS)     |
   |             |                           |              |
   |             |     Recorded Media        |              |
   |             |-------------------------->|              |
   |             |                           |              |
   +-------------+                           +--------------+

                                 Figure 2


5.  Use Cases

   Use Case 1: Full-time Recording: One (or more, in the case of
   redundant recording) Recording Session for each Communication
   Session.

   For example, the diagram below shows the lifecycle of Communication
   Sessions (CS) and the relationship to the Recording Sessions (RS)

   CS  |--- CS 1 ---|      |--- CS 2 ---|     |--- CS 3 ---|

   RS  |--- RS 1 ---|      |--- RS 2 ---|     |--- RS 3 ---|

                                 Figure 3

   Record every call for specific extension/person.  One Recording
   Session is created per Communication Session.

   The need to record all calls is typically due to business process
   purposes (such as transaction confirmation or dispute resolution) or
   to ensure compliance with governmental regulations.  Applications
   include enterprise, contact center, and financial trading floors.

   Also commonly known as Total Recording.

   Use Case 2: Selective Recording: Start a Recording Session when a
   Communication Session is established.  Only specific calls are
   recorded, possibly based on business rules.  A Communication Session
   may or may not have a Recording Session (record only specific calls).







Rehor, et al.           Expires October 31, 2010                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft           Requirements for SIPREC              April 2010


   In this example, Communication Sessions 1 and 3 are recorded but CS 2
   is not.

   CS  |--- CS 1 ---|      |--- CS 2 ---|     |--- CS 3 ---|

   RS  |--- RS 1----|                         |--- RS 2 ---|

                                 Figure 4

   Use Case 3: Dynamic Recording: Start/Stop a Recording Session during
   a Communication Session.

   The Recording Session starts during a Communication Session, either
   manually via a user-controlled mechanism (e.g. button on user's
   phone) or automatically via an application (e.g. a Contact Center
   customer service application) or business event.  A Recording Session
   either ends during the Communication Session, or when the
   Communication Session ends.

   One or more Recording Sessions per Communication Session:

   CS  |------------- Communication Session -----------|

   RS           |---- RS 1 ----|  |---- RS 2 -----|

                                 Figure 5

   Also known as Mid-session or Mid-call Recording.

   Applications include:

   o Enterprise back office recording where only specific calls (based
   on privacy) have to be recorded

   o A user requests session recording at call setup time or during a
   call.

   Use Case 4: Persistent Recording: A Recording Session captures one or
   more Communication Sessions.












Rehor, et al.           Expires October 31, 2010                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft           Requirements for SIPREC              April 2010


             |--- CS 1 ---|      |--- CS 2 ---|     |--- CS 3 ---|

   RS  |---------------------- Recording Session ---------------------|

                                 Figure 6

   A Recording Session records continuously without interruption.
   Applications include financial trading desks and emergency (first-
   responder) service bureaus.  The length of a Persistent Recording
   Sessions is independent from the length of the actual Communication
   Sessions.  Persistent Recording Sessions avoid issues such as media
   clipping that can occur due to delays in Recording Session
   establishment.

   The connection and attributes of media in the Recording Session are
   not dynamically signaled for each Communication Session before it can
   be recorded.  Call details and metadata will still be signaled, but
   can be post- correlated to the recorded media.  There will still need
   to be a means of correlating the recorded media connection/packets to
   the Communication Session, however this may be on a permanent filter-
   type basis, such as based on a SIP AoR of an agent that is always
   recorded, or based on identifiers in the recorded media itself.

   In some cases, more than one concurrent Communication Session (on a
   single end-user apparatus, e.g. trading floor turret) is mixed into
   one Recording Session::

                 |-------- CS 1 -------|
                    |-------- CS 2 -------|
               |-------- CS 3 -------|

   RS  |----------- Recording Session --------------|

                                 Figure 7

   Use Case 5: Real-time Recording Controls.

   For an active Recording Session, privacy or security reasons may
   demand not capturing a specific portion of a conversation.  An
   example is for PCI (payment card industry) compliance where credit
   card info must be protected.  One solution is to not record a caller
   speaking their credit card information.

   Real-time controls may include Pause/Resume, or Mute/Unmute.

   Use Case 6: IVR / Voice Portal Recording.

   Self-service Interactive Voice Response (DTMF or ASR) applications



Rehor, et al.           Expires October 31, 2010                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft           Requirements for SIPREC              April 2010


   may need to be recorded for application performance tuning or to meet
   compliance requirements.

   Metadata about an IVR session recording must include session
   information and may include application context information (e.g.
   VoiceXML session variables, dialog names, etc.)

   Use Case 7: Enterprise Mobility Recording.

   Many agents and enterprise workers are not located on company
   premises.

   Examples:

   o Home-based agents or enterprise workers.

   o Mobile phones of knowledge workers when they conduct work related
   (and legally required recording) calls. i.e. insurance agents,
   brokers, physicians.

   Use Case 8: Geographically distributed or centralized recording.

   Global banks with multiple branches up to thousands of small sites.

   o Only phones and network infrastructure in branches, no recording
   services.

   o Internal calls inside or between branches must be recorded.

   o Centralized recording system in data centers together with
   telephony infrastructure (e.g.  PBX).

   Obtain media by forking:

   o In data centers (inbound/outbound): fork media in gateway.

   o At branch locations (internal): fork from end points or from site
   level gateways.

   o Conference based solution is not applicable because it will require
   to reroute all communications via data centers.

   Use Case 9: Record complex calls.

   Record a call that is associated with another call.

   Example:




Rehor, et al.           Expires October 31, 2010               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft           Requirements for SIPREC              April 2010


   o Customer in conversation with Agent

   o Agent puts customer on hold in order to consult with a supervisor.

   o Agent in conversation with Supervisor.

   o Agent disconnects from Supervisor, reconnects with Customer.

   o Each conversation is stored as a separate recording.  The
   Supervisor call must be associated with the original customer call.

   Use case 10: High-Availability, High Reliability Recording.

   If recorder is not available at call setup time:

   o Reject request to establish Communication Session.

   o Redirect to alternate recorder.

   If recorder has failed during a call, take specific action:

   o Fail/Transfer call / fail over to a different recorder (may involve
   loss of recording during transition time).

   o Failover recovery situation: continuation of a call recorded on a
   different recorder.  Protocol must indicate that a Recording Session
   is a continuation of a previous Recording Session.

   For some use cases, if recording is not available or failed in a
   middle of the call, original conversation has to be terminated or
   alerted as well.

   Use Case 11: Record multi-channel, multi-media session.

   Some applications require the recording of more than one media
   stream, possibly of different types.  Media is synchronized, either
   at storage or at playback.

   Speech analytics technologies (e.g. word spotting, emotion detection,
   speaker identification) may require speaker-separated recordings for
   optimum performance.

   Multi-modal Contact Centers may include audio, video, IM or other
   interaction modalities.

   In trading floors environments, in order to save resources, it may be
   preferable to mix multiple concurrent calls (Communication Sessions)
   on different handsets/speakers on the same turret into single



Rehor, et al.           Expires October 31, 2010               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft           Requirements for SIPREC              April 2010


   recording session.

   Use Case 12: Real-time media processing.

   Recorder must support real-time media processing, such as speech
   analytics.

   Recording and real-time analytics of trading floor interactions
   (including video and instant messaging).  Real time analytics is
   required for automatic intervention (stopping interaction or alert)
   if for example, trader is not following regulations.

   Speaker separation is required in order to reliably detect who is
   saying specific phrases.


6.  Requirements

   The following are requirements for the Session Recording Protocol:

   o REQ-001 The mechanism MUST support Full-time Recording Sessions.

   o REQ-002 The mechanism MUST support Selective Recording Sessions.

   o REQ-003 The mechanism MUST support Dynamic (on-demand) Recording
   Sessions.

   o REQ-004 The mechanism MUST support Persistent Recording Sessions.

   o REQ-005 The mechanism MUST support establishing Recording Sessions
   from the RC to the RS.  This requirement typically applies when the
   decision on whether a session should be recorded or not resides in
   the RC.

   o REQ-006 The mechanism MUST support establishing Recording Sessions
   from the RS to the RC.  This requirement typically applies when the
   decision on whether a session should be recorded or not resides in
   the RS.

   o REQ-007 The mechanism MUST support the recording of IVR sessions.

   o REQ-008 The mechanism SHOULD support RS failover and migration of
   Recording Sessions to a working RS without disconnecting the
   Communication Sessions.

   o REQ-009 A request for a new Recording Session MUST be rejected by
   the Recording Server if service is unavailable (e.g. system overload,
   disk full, etc.)



Rehor, et al.           Expires October 31, 2010               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft           Requirements for SIPREC              April 2010


   o REQ-010 A request for a new Recording Session MUST be redirected to
   an available recorder server.

   o REQ-011 If no recording resources are available, appropriate error
   message MUST be returned.

   o REQ-012 The mechanism MUST support the ability to deliver mixed
   media streams to the RS.  The RS MAY be informed about the
   composition of the mixed streams through session metadata.

   Note: A mixed media stream is where several Communication Sessions
   are carried in a single Recording Session.  A mixed media stream is
   typically produced by a mixer function.

   o REQ-013 The mechanism MUST support the ability to deliver multiple
   media streams for a given Communication Session over separate
   Recording Sessions to the RS.

   o REQ-014 The mechanism MUST support the ability to deliver multiple
   media streams for a given Communication Session over a single
   Recording Session to the RS.

   o REQ-015 The mechanism MUST support the ability to pause and resume
   the Recording Session from the RC.

   o REQ-016 The mechanism MUST support the ability to pause and resume
   the Recording Session from the RS.

   o REQ-017 The mechanism MUST support the ability to correlate the
   request to record a call with the session being recorded.

   o REQ-018 The mechanism MUST support the ability to correlate the
   request to record specific media sessions with the SIP session and
   media to be recorded (Recorded Session).

   o REQ-019 The mechanism MUST support the ability to transport the
   metadata in the same SIP dialog as the Recording Session.

   o REQ-020 The mechanism MUST support the ability to transport the
   metadata outside of the Recording Session SIP dialog.

   o REQ-021 Metadata format must be agnostic of the transport protocol.

   o REQ-022 The mechanism MUST support the ability to correlate
   metadata to the Recording Session.

   o REQ-023 The mechanism MUST support a means for a SIP UA to request
   that a session is not recorded.



Rehor, et al.           Expires October 31, 2010               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft           Requirements for SIPREC              April 2010


   o REQ-024 The mechanism MUST provide an indication to the end users
   of a Communication Session that the session in which they are
   participating is being recorded.

   Examples include: inject tones into the Communication Session from
   the RC, play a message at the beginning of a session, a visual
   indicator on a display, etc.

   o REQ-025 A Recording Session may start at call setup.

   o REQ-026 A Recording Session may start during a call.

   o REQ-027 The mechanism SHOULD support means to avoid clipping media
   (leading or trailing samples) when the media is transported from the
   RC to the RS.

   Note: Media clipping can occur due to delays in recording session
   establishment.  RC implementations typically buffer some portion of
   the media to overcome this problem.

   o REQ-028 Recorder MUST provide alarm notifications when a failure
   occurs.

   o REQ-029 The mechanism MUST support a means of providing security
   (confidentiality, integrity and authentication) for the SIPREC.

   o REQ-015 The mechanism MUST enable the Recording Session to identify
   itself as a SIP session that is established for the purpose of
   recording.

   o REQ-016 The mechanism MUST support the existing SIP security model,
   including eavesdropping protection, authorization and authentication.

   o REQ-032 if the Communication Session is encrypted, the Recording
   Session must not share the same keys.


7.  Security Considerations

   Session recording has substantial security implications, both for the
   SIP UA's being recorded, and for the Session Recording Protocol
   itself in terms of the RC and RS.

   For the SIP UA's involved in the Communication Session, the
   requirements in this draft enable the UA to identify that a session
   is being recorded and for the UA to request that a given session is
   not subject to recording.




Rehor, et al.           Expires October 31, 2010               [Page 14]

Internet-Draft           Requirements for SIPREC              April 2010


   Since humans don't typically look at or know about protocol signaling
   such as SIP, and indeed the SIP session might have originated through
   a PSTN Gateway without any ability to pass on in-signaling
   indications of recording, users can be notified of recording in the
   media itself through voice announcements, a visual indicator on the
   endpoint, or other means.

   With regards to security implications of the protocol(s), clearly
   there is a need for authentication, authorization, eavesdropping
   protection, and non-repudiation for the solution.  The RC needs to
   know the RS it is communicating with is legitimate, and vice-versa,
   even if they are in different domains.  Both the signaling and media
   for the SIPREC needs the ability to be authenticated and protected
   from eavesdropping and non-repudiation.  Requirements are detailed in
   the requirements section.


8.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no IANA actions.


9.  Acknowledgements

   Thanks to Dan Wing, Alan Johnson, Vijay Gurbani and Cullen Jennings
   for their help with this document, and to all the members of the
   DISPATCH WG mailing list for providing valuable input to this work.


10.  Contributors

   In addition to the editors, the following people provided substantial
   technical and writing contributions to this document, listed
   alphabetically:

   Hadriel Kaplan
   Acme Packet
   71 Third Ave.
   Burlington, MA 01803
   USA
   hkaplan@acmepacket.com

   Henry Lum
   Genesys, Alcatel-Lucent
   1380 Rodick Road, Suite 200
   Markham, Ontario L3R 4G5
   Canada
   henry.lum@genesyslab.com



Rehor, et al.           Expires October 31, 2010               [Page 15]

Internet-Draft           Requirements for SIPREC              April 2010


   Martin Palmer
   BT Global Services
   Annandale House,1 Hanworth Road,
   Sunbury on Thames Middlesex TW16 5DJ
   UK
   martin.4.palmer@bt.com

   Dave Smith
   Genesys, Alcatel-Lucent
   2001 Junipero Serra Blvd, Daly City, CA 94014
   USA
   dsmith@genesyslab.com


11.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC2804]  IAB and IESG, "IETF Policy on Wiretapping", RFC 2804,
              May 2000.

   [RFC3261]  Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., Camarillo, G., Johnston,
              A., Peterson, J., Sparks, R., Handley, M., and E.
              Schooler, "SIP: Session Initiation Protocol", RFC 3261,
              June 2002.


Authors' Addresses

   Ken Rehor (editor)
   Cisco Systems
   170 West Tasman Dr.
   Mail Stop SJC30/2/
   San Jose, CA  95134
   USA

   Email: krehor@cisco.com


   Rajnish Jain
   IPC Systems
   777 Commerce Drive
   Fairfield, CT  06825
   USA

   Email: rajnish.jain@ipc.com




Rehor, et al.           Expires October 31, 2010               [Page 16]

Internet-Draft           Requirements for SIPREC              April 2010


   Leon Portman
   NICE Systems
   8 Hapnina
   Ra'anana  43017
   Israel

   Email: leon.portman@nice.com


   Andrew Hutton
   Siemens Enterprise Communications

   Email: andrew.hutton@siemens-enterprise.com
   URI:   http://www.siemens-enterprise.com





































Rehor, et al.           Expires October 31, 2010               [Page 17]


