


Network Working Group                                         C. Lonvick
Internet-Draft                                                   D. Spak
Intended status: Informational                             Cisco Systems
Expires: October 15, 2013                                 April 13, 2013


             Security Best Practices Efforts and Documents
                    draft-ietf-opsec-efforts-20.txt

Abstract

   This document provides a snapshot of the current efforts to define or
   apply security requirements in various Standards Developing
   Organizations (SDO).

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on October 15, 2013.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.





Lonvick & Spak          Expires October 15, 2013                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft       Security Efforts and Documents           April 2013


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.  Format of this Document  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   3.  Online Security Glossaries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     3.1.  ATIS Telecom Glossary 2007 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     3.2.  Internet Security Glossary - RFC 4949  . . . . . . . . . .  7
     3.3.  Compendium of Approved ITU-T Security Definitions  . . . .  7
     3.4.  Microsoft Malware Protection Center  . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     3.5.  SANS Glossary of Security Terms  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     3.6.  Security Taxonomy and Glossary - Anne & Lynn Wheeler . . .  8
     3.7.  NIST - Glossary of Key Information Security Terms  . . . .  8
     3.8.  RSA Information Security Glossary  . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   4.  Standards Developing Organizations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     4.1.  3GPP - Third Generation Partnership Project  . . . . . . . 10
     4.2.  3GPP2 - Third Generation Partnership Project 2 . . . . . . 10
     4.3.  ANSI - The American National Standards Institute . . . . . 11
       4.3.1.  Accredited Standards Committee X9 (ASC X9) . . . . . . 11
     4.4.  ATIS - Alliance for Telecommunications Industry
           Solutions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
       4.4.1.  ATIS NPRQ - Network Performance, Reliability, and
               Quality of Service Committee, formerly T1A1  . . . . . 12
       4.4.2.  ATIS TMOC - Telecom Management and Operations
               Committee, formerly T1M1 OAM&P . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     4.5.  CC - Common Criteria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     4.6.  DMTF - Distributed Management Task Force, Inc. . . . . . . 14
     4.7.  ETSI - The European Telecommunications Standard
           Institute  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
       4.7.1.  ETSI SEC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
       4.7.2.  ETSI OCG SEC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
     4.8.  GGF - Global Grid Forum  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
       4.8.1.  Global Grid Forum Security Area  . . . . . . . . . . . 16
     4.9.  IEEE - The Institute of Electrical and Electronics
           Engineers, Inc.  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
       4.9.1.  IEEE Computer Society's Technical Committee on
               Security and Privacy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
     4.10. IETF - The Internet Engineering Task Force . . . . . . . . 17
       4.10.1. IETF Security Area . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
     4.11. INCITS - InterNational Committee for Information
           Technology Standards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
       4.11.1. Identification Cards and Related Devices (B10) . . . . 17
       4.11.2. Cyber Security (CS1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
       4.11.3. Biometrics (M1)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
     4.12. ISO - The International Organization for
           Standardization  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
     4.13. ITU - International Telecommunication Union  . . . . . . . 19
       4.13.1. ITU Telecommunication Standardization Sector -
               ITU-T  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19



Lonvick & Spak          Expires October 15, 2013                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft       Security Efforts and Documents           April 2013


       4.13.2. ITU Radiocommunication Sector - ITU-R  . . . . . . . . 19
       4.13.3. ITU Telecom Development - ITU-D  . . . . . . . . . . . 20
     4.14. OASIS -  Organization for the Advancement of
           Structured Information Standards . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
     4.15. OIF - Optical Internetworking Forum  . . . . . . . . . . . 21
       4.15.1. OAM&P Working Group  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
     4.16. National Security Telecommunications Advisory
           Committee (NSTAC)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
     4.17. TIA - The Telecommunications Industry Association  . . . . 22
       4.17.1. APCO Project 25 Public Safety Standards  . . . . . . . 22
     4.18. TTA - Telecommunications Technology Association  . . . . . 23
     4.19. The World Wide Web Consortium  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
     4.20. TM Forum . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
       4.20.1. Security Management  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
   5.  Security Best Practices Efforts and Documents  . . . . . . . . 25
     5.1.  3GPP - SA3 - Security  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
     5.2.  3GPP2 - TSG-S Working Group 4 (Security) . . . . . . . . . 25
     5.3.  ATIS-0300276.2008 - Operations, Administration,
           Maintenance, and Provisioning Security Requirements
           for the Public Telecommunications Network: A Baseline
           of Security Requirements for the Management Plane  . . . . 25
     5.4.  DMTF - Security Modeling Working Group . . . . . . . . . . 26
     5.5.  Common Criteria  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
     5.6.  ETSI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
     5.7.  Operational Security Requirements for IP Network
           Infrastructure : Advanced Requirements . . . . . . . . . . 28
     5.8.  ISO JTC 1/SC 27 - Information security Technology
           techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
     5.9.  ITU-T Study Group 2  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
     5.10. ITU-T Study Group 17 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
     5.11. NRIC VII Focus Groups  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
     5.12. OASIS Security Technical Committees  . . . . . . . . . . . 31
     5.13. OIF Implementation Agreements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
     5.14. TIA - Critical Infrastructure Protection (CIP) and
           Homeland Security (HS) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
     5.15. NIST Special Publications (800 Series) . . . . . . . . . . 32
     5.16. NIST Interagency or Internal Reports (NISTIRs) . . . . . . 32
     5.17. NIST ITL Security Bulletins  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
     5.18. SANS Information Security Reading Room . . . . . . . . . . 32
   6.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
   7.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
   8.  Acknowledgments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
   9.  Changes from Prior Drafts  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41







Lonvick & Spak          Expires October 15, 2013                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft       Security Efforts and Documents           April 2013


1.  Introduction

   The Internet is being recognized as a critical infrastructure similar
   in nature to the power grid and a potable water supply.  Just like
   those infrastructures, means are needed to provide resiliency and
   adaptability to the Internet so that it remains consistently
   available to the public throughout the world even during times of
   duress or attack.  For this reason, many SDOs are developing
   standards with hopes of retaining an acceptable level, or even
   improving this availability, to its users.  These SDO efforts usually
   define themselves as "security" efforts.  It is the opinion of the
   authors that there are many different definitions of the term
   "security" and it may be applied in many diverse ways.  As such, we
   offer no assurance that the term is applied consistently throughout
   this document.

   Many of these SDOs have diverse charters and goals and will take
   entirely different directions in their efforts to provide standards.
   However, even with that, there will be overlaps in their produced
   works.  If there are overlaps then there is a potential for conflicts
   and confusion.  This may result in:

      Vendors of networking equipment who are unsure of which standard
      to follow.

      Purchasers of networking equipment who are unsure of which
      standard will best apply to the needs of their business or
      ogranization.

      Network Administrators and Operators unsure of which standard to
      follow to attain the best security for their network.

   For these reasons, the authors wish to encourage all SDOs who have an
   interest in producing or in consuming standards relating to good
   security practices to be consistent in their approach and their
   recommendations.  In many cases, the authors are aware that the SDOs
   are making good efforts along these lines.  However, the authors do
   not participate in all SDO efforts and cannot know everything that is
   happening.

   The OpSec Working Group met at the 61st IETF and agreed that this
   document could be a useful reference in producing the documents
   described in the Working Group Charter.  The authors have agreed to
   keep this document current and request that those who read it will
   submit corrections or comments.

   Comments on this document may be addressed to the OpSec Working Group
   or directly to the authors.



Lonvick & Spak          Expires October 15, 2013                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft       Security Efforts and Documents           April 2013


      opsec@ops.ietf.org

   This document will be updated in sections.  The most recently updated
   part of this document is Section 4.















































Lonvick & Spak          Expires October 15, 2013                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft       Security Efforts and Documents           April 2013


2.  Format of this Document

   The body of this document has three sections.

   The first part of the body of this document, Section 3, contains a
   listing of online glossaries relating to networking and security.  It
   is very important that the definitions of words relating to security
   and security events be consistent.  Inconsistencies between the
   useage of words on standards is unacceptable as it would prevent a
   reader of two standards to appropriately relate their
   recommendations.  The authors of this document have not reviewed the
   definitions of the words in the listed glossaries so can offer no
   assurance of their alignment.

   The second part, Section 4, contains a listing of SDOs that appear to
   be working on security standards.

   The third part, Section 5, lists the documents which have been found
   to offer good practices or recommendations for securing networks and
   networking devices.

   The text used in sections 3, 4, and 5 have been copied from their
   referring web sites.  The authors make no claim about the validity or
   accuracy of the information listed.



























Lonvick & Spak          Expires October 15, 2013                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft       Security Efforts and Documents           April 2013


3.  Online Security Glossaries

   This section contains references to glossaries of network and
   computer security terms.

3.1.  ATIS Telecom Glossary 2007

   http://www.atis.org/tg2k/

   This Glossary began as a 5800-entry, search-enabled hypertext
   telecommunications glossary titled Federal Standard 1037C, Glossary
   of Telecommunication Terms .  Federal Standard 1037C was updated and
   matured into an American National Standard (ANS): T1.523-2001,
   Telecom Glossary 2000 , under the aegis of ASC T1.  In turn, T1.523-
   2001 has been revised and redesignated under the ATIS procedures for
   ANS development as ATIS-0100523.2007, ATIS Telecom Glossary 2007.

   Date published: 2007

3.2.  Internet Security Glossary - RFC 4949

   http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc4949.txt

   This document was originally created as RFC 2828 in May 2000.  It was
   revised as RFC 4949 and the document defines itself to be, "an
   internally consistent, complementary set of abbreviations,
   definitions, explanations, and recommendations for use of terminology
   related to information system security."

   Date published: August 2007

3.3.  Compendium of Approved ITU-T Security Definitions

   http://www.itu.int/itudoc/itu-t/com17/activity/add002.html

   Addendum to the Compendium of the Approved ITU-T Security-related
   Definitions

   These extensive materials were created from approved ITU-T
   Recommendations with a view toward establishing a common
   understanding and use of security terms within ITU-T.  The original
   Compendium was compiled by SG 17, Lead Study Group on Communication
   Systems Security (LSG-CSS).
   http://www.itu.int/itudoc/itu-t/com17/activity/def004.html

   Date published: 2003





Lonvick & Spak          Expires October 15, 2013                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft       Security Efforts and Documents           April 2013


3.4.  Microsoft Malware Protection Center

   http://www.microsoft.com/security/portal/threat/encyclopedia/
   glossary.aspx

   The Microsoft Malware Protection Center, Threat Research and Response
   Glossary was created to explain the concepts, technologies, and
   products associated with computer security.

   Date published: indeterminate

3.5.  SANS Glossary of Security Terms

   http://www.sans.org/security-resources/glossary-of-terms/

   The SANS Institute (SysAdmin, Audit, Network, Security) was created
   in 1989 as, "a cooperative research and education organization."
   This glossary was updated in May 2003.  The SANS Institute is also
   home to many other resources including the SANS Intrusion Detection
   FAQ and the SANS/FBI Top 20 Vulnerabilities List.

   Date published: indeterminate

3.6.  Security Taxonomy and Glossary - Anne & Lynn Wheeler

   http://www.garlic.com/~lynn/secure.htm

   Anne and Lynn Wheeler maintain a security taxonomy and glossary with
   terms merged from AFSEC, AJP, CC1, CC2, CC21 (CC site), CIAO, FCv1,
   FFIEC, FJC, FTC, IATF V3 (IATF site), IEEE610, ITSEC, Intel, JTC1/
   SC27 (SC27 site), KeyAll, MSC, NIST 800-30, 800-33, 800-37, 800-53,
   800-61, 800-77, 800-83 FIPS140, NASA, NCSC/TG004, NIAP, NSA
   Intrusion, CNSSI 4009, online security study, RFC1983, RFC2504,
   RFC2647, RFC2828, TCSEC, TDI, and TNI.

   Date updated: October 2010

3.7.  NIST - Glossary of Key Information Security Terms

   http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/nistir/ir7298-rev1/
   nistir-7298-revision1.pdf

   This glossary of basic security terms has been extracted from NIST
   Federal Information Processing Standards (FIPS) and the Special
   Publication (SP) 800 series.  The terms included are not all
   inclusive of terms found in these publications, but are a subset of
   basic terms that are most frequently used.  The purpose of this
   glossary is to provide a central resource of definitions most



Lonvick & Spak          Expires October 15, 2013                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft       Security Efforts and Documents           April 2013


   commonly used in NIST security publications.

   Date originally published: April 2006

   Date of this update: February 2010

3.8.  RSA Information Security Glossary

   http://www.rsa.com/glossary/

   Welcome to the RSA Security Information Security Glossary.  This
   glossary is offered as an aid to understanding current concepts and
   initiatives in the realm of Information Security.  The terms were
   chosen based on their importance in understanding the solutions,
   services and products that RSA security provides for its customers.

   Date originally published: 2005


































Lonvick & Spak          Expires October 15, 2013                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft       Security Efforts and Documents           April 2013


4.  Standards Developing Organizations

   This section of this document lists the SDOs, or organizations that
   appear to be developing security related standards.  These SDOs are
   listed in alphabetical order.

   Note: The authors would appreciate corrections and additions.  This
   note will be removed before publication as an RFC.

4.1.  3GPP - Third Generation Partnership Project

   http://www.3gpp.org/

   The 3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP) unites [Six]
   telecommunications standards bodies, known as "Organizational
   Partners" and provides their members with a stable environment to
   produce the highly successful Reports and Specifications that define
   3GPP technologies.

4.2.  3GPP2 - Third Generation Partnership Project 2

   http://www.3gpp2.org/

   The Third Generation Partnership Project 2 (3GPP2) is:

      a collaborative third generation (3G) telecommunications
      specifications-setting project

      comprising North American and Asian interests developing global
      specifications for ANSI/TIA/EIA-41 Cellular Radiotelecommunication
      Intersystem Operations network evolution to 3G

      and global specifications for the radio transmission technologies
      (RTTs) supported by ANSI/TIA/EIA-41.

   3GPP2 was born out of the International Telecommunication Union's
   (ITU) International Mobile Telecommunications "IMT-2000" initiative,
   covering high speed, broadband, and Internet Protocol (IP)-based
   mobile systems featuring network-to-network interconnection, feature/
   service transparency, global roaming and seamless services
   independent of location.  IMT-2000 is intended to bring high-quality
   mobile multimedia telecommunications to a worldwide mass market by
   achieving the goals of increasing the speed and ease of wireless
   communications, responding to the problems faced by the increased
   demand to pass data via telecommunications, and providing "anytime,
   anywhere" services.





Lonvick & Spak          Expires October 15, 2013               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft       Security Efforts and Documents           April 2013


4.3.  ANSI - The American National Standards Institute

   http://www.ansi.org/

   As the voice of the U.S. standards and conformity assessment system,
   the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) empowers its members
   and constituents to strengthen the U.S. marketplace position in the
   global economy while helping to assure the safety and health of
   consumers and the protection of the environment.

   The Institute oversees the creation, promulgation and use of
   thousands of norms and guidelines that directly impact businesses in
   nearly every sector: from acoustical devices to construction
   equipment, from dairy and livestock production to energy
   distribution, and many more.  ANSI is also actively engaged in
   accrediting programs that assess conformance to standards - including
   globally-recognized cross-sector programs such as the ISO 9000
   (quality) and ISO 14000 (environmental) management systems.

4.3.1.  Accredited Standards Committee X9 (ASC X9)

   http://www.x9.org/

   The Accredited Standards Committee X9 (ASC X9) has the mission to
   develop, establish, maintain, and promote standards for the Financial
   Services Industry in order to facilitate the delivery of financial
   services and products.  Under this mission ASC X9 fulfills the
   objectives of: (1) Supporting (maintain, enhance, and promote use of)
   existing standards; (2) Facilitating development of new, open
   standards based upon consensus; (3) Providing a common source for all
   standards affecting the Financial Services Industry; (4) Focusing on
   current and future standards needs of the Financial Services
   Industry; (5) Promoting use of Financial Services Industry standards;
   and (6) Participating and promoting the development of international
   standards.

4.4.  ATIS - Alliance for Telecommunications Industry Solutions

   http://www.atis.org/

   ATIS member companies develop the standards and solutions that are
   creating the future of the information and communications technology
   (ICT) industry.  From efforts to realize the cost benefits of cloud
   services, to standards underpinning the nation's emergency
   communications system, to improvements in data access to support
   health care delivery, or developing new avenues to interactive
   sources of entertainment, ATIS' work makes ICT innovation possible.




Lonvick & Spak          Expires October 15, 2013               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft       Security Efforts and Documents           April 2013


   Through involvement in our committees and forums, ATIS member
   companies achieve their technical potential and business objectives.
   They also get a strategic view of the future of technology to help
   them better position their products and services.  ATIS members
   further benefit from valuable networking opportunities with other
   companies leading change in our industry, as well as the insights of
   leading CIOs, CTOs and other thought leaders.

   ATIS gives our members a place at the table where today's ICT
   standards decisions are being made.  Our work helps members prepare
   for when the future becomes today.  And, with the fast pace of
   innovation, the gap between today's technologies and tomorrow's
   networks is all but disappearing.

   ATIS creates solutions that support the rollout of new products and
   services into the information, entertainment and communications
   marketplace.  Its activities provide the basis for the industry's
   delivery of:

      Existing and next generation IP-based infrastructures;

      Reliable converged multimedia services, including IPTV;

      Enhanced Operations Support Systems and Business Support Systems;
      and

      Greater levels of service quality and performance.

      ATIS is accredited by the American National Standards Institute
      (ANSI).

4.4.1.  ATIS NPRQ - Network Performance, Reliability, and Quality of
        Service Committee, formerly T1A1

   http://www.atis.org/0010/index.asp

   PRQC develops and recommends standards,requirements, and technical
   reports related to the performance,reliability, and associated
   security aspects of communications networks, as well as the
   processing of voice, audio, data, image,and video signals, and their
   multimedia integration.  PRQC alsodevelops andrecommends positions
   on, and foster consistency with, standards and related subjects under
   consideration in other North American and international standards
   bodies.

   PRQC Focus Areas are:





Lonvick & Spak          Expires October 15, 2013               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft       Security Efforts and Documents           April 2013


      Performance and Reliability of Networks (e.g.  IP, ATM, OTN, and
      PSTN), and Services (e.g.  Frame Relay, Dedicated and Switched
      Data),

      Security-related aspects,

      Emergency communications-related aspects,

      Coding (e.g. video and speech), at and between carrier-to-carrier
      and carrier-to-customer interfaces, with due consideration of end-
      user applications.

4.4.2.  ATIS TMOC - Telecom Management and Operations Committee,
        formerly T1M1 OAM&P

   http://www.atis.org/0130/index.asp

   The Telecom Management and Operations Committee (TMOC) develops
   operations, administration, maintenance and provisioning standards,
   and other documentation related to Operations Support System (OSS)
   and Network Element (NE) functions and interfaces for communications
   networks - with an emphasis on standards development related to
   U.S.A. communication networks in coordination with the development of
   international standards.

   The scope of the work in TMOC includes the development of standards
   and other documentation for communications network operations and
   management areas, such as: Configuration Management, Performance
   Management (including in-service transport performance management),
   Fault Management, Security Management (including management plane
   security), Accounting Management, Coding/Language Data
   Representation, Common/Underlying Management Functionality/
   Technology, and Ancillary Functions (such as network tones and
   announcements).  This work requires close and coordinated working
   relationships with other domestic and international standards
   development organizations and industry forums.

4.5.  CC - Common Criteria

   http://www.commoncriteriaportal.org/

   The Common Criteria for Information Technology Security Evaluation
   (CC), and the companion Common Methodology for Information Technology
   Security Evaluation (CEM) are the technical basis for an
   international agreement, the Common Criteria Recognition Arrangement
   (CCRA), which ensures that:





Lonvick & Spak          Expires October 15, 2013               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft       Security Efforts and Documents           April 2013


      Products can be evaluated by competent and independent licensed
      laboratories so as to determine the fulfilment of particular
      security properties, to a certain extent or assurance;

      Supporting documents, are used within the Common Criteria
      certification process to define how the criteria and evaluation
      methods are applied when certifying specific technologies;

      The certification of the security properties of an evaluated
      product can be issued by a number of Certificate Authorizing
      Schemes, with this certification being based on the result of
      their evaluation;

      These certificates are recognized by all the signatories of the
      CCRA.

   The CC is the driving force for the widest available mutual
   recognition of secure IT products.  This web portal is available to
   support the information on the status of the CCRA, the CC and the
   certification schemes, licensed laboratories, certified products and
   related information, news and events.

4.6.  DMTF - Distributed Management Task Force, Inc.

   http://www.dmtf.org/

   DMTF enables more effective management of millions of IT systems
   worldwide by bringing the IT industry together to collaborate on the
   development, validation and promotion of systems management
   standards.

   The group spans the industry with 160 member companies and
   organizations, and more than 4,000 active participants crossing 43
   countries.  The DMTF board of directors is led by 15 innovative,
   industry-leading technology companies.  They include Advanced Micro
   Devices (AMD); Broadcom Corporation; CA, Inc.; Cisco; Citrix Systems,
   Inc.; EMC; Fujitsu; HP; Huawei; IBM; Intel Corporation; Microsoft
   Corporation; Oracle; RedHat and VMware, Inc.

   With this deep and broad reach, DMTF creates standards that enable
   interoperable IT management.  DMTF management standards are critical
   to enabling management interoperability among multi-vendor systems,
   tools and solutions within the enterprise.

4.7.  ETSI - The European Telecommunications Standard Institute

   http://www.etsi.org/




Lonvick & Spak          Expires October 15, 2013               [Page 14]

Internet-Draft       Security Efforts and Documents           April 2013


   The European Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI) produces
   globally-applicable standards for Information and Communications
   Technologies (ICT), including fixed, mobile, radio, converged,
   broadcast and internet technologies.

   We are officially recognized by the European Union as a European
   Standards Organization.  The high quality of our work and our open
   approach to standardization has helped us evolve into a European
   roots - global branches operation with a solid reputation for
   technical excellence.

4.7.1.  ETSI SEC

   http://portal.etsi.org/portal/server.pt/gateway/
   PTARGS_0_13938_491_312_425_43/tb/closed_tb/sec.asp

   Board#38 confirmed the closure of TC SEC.

   At the same time it approved the creation of an OCG Ad Hoc group OCG
   Security

   TC SEC documents can be found in the SEC archive

   The SEC Working groups (ESI and LI) were closed and TC ESI and a TC
   LI were created to continue the work.

   All documents and information relevant to ESI and LI are available
   from the TC ESI and TC LI sites

4.7.2.  ETSI OCG SEC

   http://portal.etsi.org/ocgsecurity/OCG_security_ToR.asp

   The creation of the OCG SEC was decided at the Board #38 on 30 May
   2002.  The group's primary role is to provide a horizontal co-
   ordination structure for security issues that will ensure this work
   is seriously considered in each ETSI TB and that any duplicate or
   conflicting work is detected.  To achieve this aim the group should
   mainly conduct its work via email and, where appropriate, co-sited
   "joint security" technical working meetings.

   When scheduled, appropriate time at each "joint SEC" meeting should
   be allocated during the meetings to allow for:

      Individual committee activities as well as common work;

      Coordination between the committees; and




Lonvick & Spak          Expires October 15, 2013               [Page 15]

Internet-Draft       Security Efforts and Documents           April 2013


      Experts to contribute to more than one committee.

4.8.  GGF - Global Grid Forum

   http://www.gridforum.org/

   OGF is an open community committed to driving the rapid evolution and
   adoption of applied distributed computing.  Applied Distributed
   Computing is critical to developing new, innovative and scalable
   applications and infrastructures that are essential to productivity
   in the enterprise and within the science community.  OGF accomplishes
   its work through open forums that build the community, explore
   trends, share best practices and consolidate these best practices
   into standards.

4.8.1.  Global Grid Forum Security Area

   http://www.ogf.org/gf/group_info/areasgroups.php?area_id=7

   The Security Area is concerned with technical and operational
   security issues in Grid environments, including authentication,
   authorization, privacy, confidentiality, auditing, firewalls, trust
   establishment, policy establishment, and dynamics, scalability and
   management aspects of all of the above.

   The Security Area is comprised of the following Working Groups and
   Research Groups.

      Certificate Authority Operations WG (CAOPS-WG)

      Firewall Issues RG (FI-RG)

      Levels Of Authentication Assurance Research Group (LOA-RG)

      OGSA Authorization WG (OGSA-AUTHZ-WG)

4.9.  IEEE - The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc.

   http://www.ieee.org/

   IEEE is the world's largest professional association dedicated to
   advancing technological innovation and excellence for the benefit of
   humanity.  IEEE and its members inspire a global community through
   IEEE's highly cited publications, conferences, technology standards,
   and professional and educational activities.






Lonvick & Spak          Expires October 15, 2013               [Page 16]

Internet-Draft       Security Efforts and Documents           April 2013


4.9.1.  IEEE Computer Society's Technical Committee on Security and
        Privacy

   http://www.ieee-security.org/

4.10.  IETF - The Internet Engineering Task Force

   http://www.ietf.org/

   The goal of the IETF is to make the Internet work better.

   The mission of the IETF is to make the Internet work better by
   producing high quality, relevant technical documents that influence
   the way people design, use, and manage the Internet.

4.10.1.  IETF Security Area

   The Working Groups in the Security Area may be found from this page.

   http://datatracker.ietf.org/wg/

   The wiki page for the IETF Security Area may be found here.

   http://trac.tools.ietf.org/area/sec/trac/wiki

4.11.  INCITS - InterNational Committee for Information Technology
       Standards

   http://www.incits.org/

   INCITS is the primary U.S. focus of standardization in the field of
   Information and Communications Technologies (ICT), encompassing
   storage, processing, transfer, display, management, organization, and
   retrieval of information.  As such, INCITS also serves as ANSI's
   Technical Advisory Group for ISO/IEC Joint Technical Committee 1.
   JTC 1 is responsible for International standardization in the field
   of Information Technology.

   There are three active Groups in the Security / ID Technical
   Committee.

4.11.1.  Identification Cards and Related Devices (B10)

   http://standards.incits.org/a/public/group/b10

   Development of national and international standards in the area of
   identification cards and related devices for use in inter-industry
   applications and international interchange.



Lonvick & Spak          Expires October 15, 2013               [Page 17]

Internet-Draft       Security Efforts and Documents           April 2013


4.11.2.  Cyber Security (CS1)

   http://standards.incits.org/a/public/group/cs1

   INCITS/CS1 was established in April 2005 to serve as the US TAG for
   ISO/IEC JTC 1/SC 27 and all SC 27 Working Groups.

   The scope of CS1 explicitly excludes the areas of work on cyber
   security standardization presently underway in INCITS B10, M1, T3,
   T10 and T11; as well as other standard groups, such as ATIS, IEEE,
   IETF, TIA, and X9.

4.11.3.  Biometrics (M1)

   http://standards.incits.org/a/public/group/m1

   INCITS/M1, Biometrics Technical Committee was established by the
   Executive Board of INCITS in November 2001 to ensure a high priority,
   focused, and comprehensive approach in the United States for the
   rapid development and approval of formal national and international
   generic biometric standards.  The M1 program of work includes
   biometric standards for data interchange formats, common file
   formats, application program interfaces, profiles, and performance
   testing and reporting.  The goal of M1's work is to accelerate the
   deployment of significantly better, standards-based security
   solutions for purposes, such as, homeland defense and the prevention
   of identity theft as well as other government and commercial
   applications based on biometric personal authentication.

4.12.  ISO - The International Organization for Standardization

   http://www.iso.org/

   ISO (International Organization for Standardization) is the world's
   largest developer and publisher of International Standards.

   ISO is a network of the national standards institutes of 163
   countries, one member per country, with a Central Secretariat in
   Geneva, Switzerland, that coordinates the system.

   ISO is a non-governmental organization that forms a bridge between
   the public and private sectors.  On the one hand, many of its member
   institutes are part of the governmental structure of their countries,
   or are mandated by their government.  On the other hand, other
   members have their roots uniquely in the private sector, having been
   set up by national partnerships of industry associations.

   Therefore, ISO enables a consensus to be reached on solutions that



Lonvick & Spak          Expires October 15, 2013               [Page 18]

Internet-Draft       Security Efforts and Documents           April 2013


   meet both the requirements of business and the broader needs of
   society.

4.13.  ITU - International Telecommunication Union

   http://www.itu.int/

   ITU (International Telecommunication Union) is the United Nations
   specialized agency for information and communication technologies -
   ICTs.

   We allocate global radio spectrum and satellite orbits, develop the
   technical standards that ensure networks and technologies seamlessly
   interconnect, and strive to improve access to ICTs to underserved
   communities worldwide.

   ITU is committed to connecting all the world's people - wherever they
   live and whatever their means.  Through our work, we protect and
   support everyone's fundamental right to communicate.

   The ITU is comprised of three sectors:

4.13.1.  ITU Telecommunication Standardization Sector - ITU-T

   http://www.itu.int/ITU-T/

   ITU-T Recommendations are defining elements in information and
   communication technologies (ICTs) infrastructure.  Whether we
   exchange voice, data or video messages, communications cannot take
   place without standards linking the sender and the receiver.  Today's
   work extends well beyond the traditional areas of telephony to
   encompass a far wider range of information and communications
   technologies.

4.13.2.  ITU Radiocommunication Sector - ITU-R

   http://www.itu.int/ITU-R/

   The ITU Radiocommunication Sector (ITU-R) plays a vital role in the
   global management of the radio-frequency spectrum and satellite
   orbits - limited natural resources which are increasingly in demand
   from a large and growing number of services such as fixed, mobile,
   broadcasting, amateur, space research, emergency telecommunications,
   meteorology, global positioning systems, environmental monitoring and
   communication services - that ensure safety of life on land, at sea
   and in the skies.





Lonvick & Spak          Expires October 15, 2013               [Page 19]

Internet-Draft       Security Efforts and Documents           April 2013


4.13.3.  ITU Telecom Development - ITU-D

   (also referred as ITU Telecommunication Development Bureau - BDT)

   http://www.itu.int/ITU-D/

   The mission of the Telecommunication Development Sector (ITU-D) aims
   at achieving the Sector's objectives based on the right to
   communicate of all inhabitants of the planet through access to
   infrastructure and information and communication services.

   In this regard, the mission is to:

      Assist countries in the field of information and communication
      technologies (ICTs), in facilitating the mobilization of
      technical, human and financial resources needed for their
      implementation, as well as in promoting access to ICTs.

      Promote the extension of the benefits of ICTs to all the world's
      inhabitants.

      Promote and participate in actions that contribute towards
      narrowing the digital divide.

      Develop and manage programmes that facilitate information flow
      geared to the needs of developing countries.

      The mission encompasses ITU's dual responsibility as a United
      Nations specialized agency and an executing agency for
      implementing projects under the United Nations development system
      or other funding arrangements.

4.14.  OASIS -  Organization for the Advancement of Structured
       Information Standards

   http://www.oasis-open.org/

   OASIS (Organization for the Advancement of Structured Information
   Standards) is a not-for-profit consortium that drives the
   development, convergence and adoption of open standards for the
   global information society.  The consortium produces more Web
   services standards than any other organization along with standards
   for security, e-business, and standardization efforts in the public
   sector and for application-specific markets.  Founded in 1993, OASIS
   has more than 5,000 participants representing over 600 organizations
   and individual members in 100 countries.

   OASIS promotes industry consensus and produces worldwide standards



Lonvick & Spak          Expires October 15, 2013               [Page 20]

Internet-Draft       Security Efforts and Documents           April 2013


   for security, Cloud computing, SOA, Web services, the Smart Grid,
   electronic publishing, emergency management, and other areas.  OASIS
   open standards offer the potential to lower cost, stimulate
   innovation, grow global markets, and protect the right of free choice
   of technology.

   OASIS has several Technical Committees in the Security Category.

   http://www.oasis-open.org/committees/tc_cat.php?cat=security

4.15.  OIF - Optical Internetworking Forum

   http://www.oiforum.com/

   "The Optical Internetworking Forum (OIF) promotes the development and
   deployment of interoperable networking solutions and services through
   the creation of Implementation Agreements (IAs) for optical
   networking products, network processing elements, and component
   technologies.  Implementation agreements will be based on
   requirements developed cooperatively by end-users, service providers,
   equipment vendors and technology providers, and aligned with
   worldwide standards, augmented if necessary.  This is accomplished
   through industry member participation working together to develop
   specifications (IAs) for:

      External network element interfaces

      Software interfaces internal to network elements

      Hardware component interfaces internal to network elements

   The OIF will create Benchmarks, perform worldwide interoperability
   testing, build market awareness and promote education for
   technologies, services and solutions.  The OIF will provide feedback
   to worldwide standards organizations to help achieve a set of
   implementable, interoperable solutions."

4.15.1.  OAM&P Working Group

   http://www.oiforum.com/public/oamp.html

   In concert with the Carrier, Architecture & Signaling and other OIF
   working groups, the Operations, Administration, Maintenance, &
   Provisioning (OAM&P) working group develops architectures,
   requirements, guidelines, and implementation agreements critical to
   widespread deployment of interoperable optical networks by carriers.
   The scope includes but is not limited to a) planning, engineering and
   provisioning of network resources; b) operations, maintenance or



Lonvick & Spak          Expires October 15, 2013               [Page 21]

Internet-Draft       Security Efforts and Documents           April 2013


   administration use cases and processes; and c) management
   functionality and interfaces for operations support systems and
   interoperable network equipment.  Within its scope are Fault,
   Configuration, Accounting, Performance and Security Management
   (FCAPS) and Security.  The OAM&P working group will also account for
   work by related standards development organizations (SDOs), identify
   gaps and formulate OIF input to other SDOs as may be appropriate.

4.16.  National Security Telecommunications Advisory Committee (NSTAC)

   http://www.ncs.gov/nstac/nstac.html

   Meeting our Nation's critical national security and emergency
   preparedness (NS/EP) challenges demands attention to many issues.
   Among these, none could be more important than the availability and
   reliability of telecommunication services.  The President's National
   Security Telecommunications Advisory Committee (NSTAC) mission is to
   provide the U.S. Government the best possible industry advice in
   these areas.

4.17.  TIA - The Telecommunications Industry Association

   http://www.tiaonline.org/

   The Telecommunications Industry Association (TIA) is the leading
   trade association representing the global information and
   communications technology (ICT) industry through Standards
   development, Policy initiatives, business opportunities, market
   intelligence and networking events.  With support from hundreds of
   members, TIA enhances the business environment for companies involved
   in telecom, broadband, mobile wireless, information technology,
   networks, cable, satellite, unified communications, emergency
   communications and the greening of technology.  TIA is accredited by
   ANSI.

4.17.1.  APCO Project 25 Public Safety Standards

   http://www.tiaonline.org/all-standards/committees/tr-8

   Recognizing the need for common standards for first responders and
   homeland security/emergency response professionals, representatives
   from the Association of Public Safety Communications Officials
   International (APCO), the National Association of State
   Telecommunications Directors (NASTD), selected federal agencies and
   the National Communications System (NCS) established Project 25
   (PDF), a steering committee for selecting voluntary common system
   standards for digital public safety radio communications.  TIA TR-8
   facilitates such work through its role as an ANSI-accredited



Lonvick & Spak          Expires October 15, 2013               [Page 22]

Internet-Draft       Security Efforts and Documents           April 2013


   Standards Development Organization (SDO) and has developed in TR-8
   the 102 series of technical documents.  These standards directly
   address the guidelines of the Communications Assistance for Law
   Enforcement Act (CALEA).

4.18.  TTA - Telecommunications Technology Association

   http://www.tta.or.kr/

   http://www.tta.or.kr/English/index.jsp (English)

   The purpose of TTA is to contribute to the advancement of technology
   and the promotion of information and telecommunications services and
   industry as well as the development of national economy, by
   effectively stablishing and providing technical standards that
   reflect the latest domestic and international technological advances,
   needed for the planning, design and operation of global end-to-end
   telecommunications and related information services, in close
   collaboration with companies, organizations and groups concerned with
   information and telecommunications such as network operators, service
   providers, equipment manufacturers, academia, R&D institutes, etc.

4.19.  The World Wide Web Consortium

   http://www.w3.org/Consortium/

   The World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) is an international community
   where Member organizations, a full-time staff, and the public work
   together to develop Web standards.  Led by Web inventor Tim Berners-
   Lee and CEO Jeffrey Jaffe, W3C's mission is to lead the Web to its
   full potential.

   http://www.w3.org/Security/

   Security online is a vast field that is being worked on by a number
   of organizations, including W3C. Mapping the entire field would be a
   huge endeavor; hence, this page focuses on work that W3C is involved
   in.

   The traditional W3C Security Resources page is no longer maintained,
   but remains online for archival purposes.

   The Web Security Wiki serves as a place for interested parties in the
   Web security community to collect information about security aspects
   of specifications and implementations of Web technologies.






Lonvick & Spak          Expires October 15, 2013               [Page 23]

Internet-Draft       Security Efforts and Documents           April 2013


4.20.  TM Forum

   http://www.tmforum.org/

   TM Forum is a global, non-profit industry association focused on
   simplifying the complexity of running a service provider's business.
   As an established industry thought-leader, the Forum serves as a
   unifying force, enabling more than 850 companies across 195 countries
   to solve critical business issues through access to a wealth of
   knowledge, intellectual capital and standards.

4.20.1.  Security Management

   http://www.tmforum.org/SecurityManagement/9152/home.html

   Securing networks, cyber, clouds, and identity against evolving and
   ever present threats has emerged as a top priority for TM Forum
   members.  In response, the TM Forum's Security Management Initiative
   was formally launched in 2009.  While some of our Security Management
   efforts, such as Identity Management, are well established and boast
   mature Business Agreements and Interfaces, a series of presentations,
   contributions, and multi-vendor technology demonstrations have jumped
   started work efforts on industry hot topics Network Defense, Cyber
   Security, and security for single and multi-regional enterprise
   application cloud bursting.  Our aim is to produce Security
   Management rich frameworks, best practices, and guidebooks.

























Lonvick & Spak          Expires October 15, 2013               [Page 24]

Internet-Draft       Security Efforts and Documents           April 2013


5.  Security Best Practices Efforts and Documents

   This section lists the works produced by the SDOs.

5.1.  3GPP - SA3 - Security

   http://www.3gpp.org/SA3-Security

   The WG is responsible for security in 3GPP systems, determining the
   security requirements, and specifying the security architectures and
   protocols.  The WG also ensures the availability of cryptographic
   algorithms which need to be part of the specifications.  The sub-WG
   SA3-LI provides the requirements and specifications for lawful
   interception in 3GPP systems.

   Specifications:
   http://www.3gpp.org/ftp/Specs/html-info/TSG-WG--S3.htm

5.2.  3GPP2 - TSG-S Working Group 4 (Security)

   http://www.3gpp2.org/Public_html/S/index.cfm

   The Services and Systems Aspects TSG (TSG-S) is responsible for the
   development of service capability requirements for systems based on
   3GPP2 specifications.  It is also responsible for high level
   architectural issues, as required, to coordinate service development
   across the various TSGs.  In this role, the Services and Systems TSG
   shall track the activities within the various TSGs, as required, to
   meet the above service requirements.

   More specifically, TSG-S will address the following areas of work:
   Management, technical coordination, as well as architectural and
   requirements development associated with all end-to-end features,
   services and system capabilities including, but not limited to,
   security and QoS

   TSG-S Specifications: http://www.3gpp2.org/Public_html/specs/tsgs.cfm

5.3.  ATIS-0300276.2008 - Operations, Administration, Maintenance, and
      Provisioning Security Requirements for the Public
      Telecommunications Network: A Baseline of Security Requirements
      for the Management Plane

   This document contains both the published and redline versions of
   ATIS-0300276.2008.  This standard contains a set of baseline security
   requirements for the management plane.  The requirements outlined in
   this standard allow equipment/system suppliers, government
   departments and agencies, and service providers to implement a secure



Lonvick & Spak          Expires October 15, 2013               [Page 25]

Internet-Draft       Security Efforts and Documents           April 2013


   telecommunications management infrastructure.

   Documents: http://www.atis.org/docstore/product.aspx?id=24660

5.4.  DMTF - Security Modeling Working Group

   http://www.dmtf.org/sites/default/files/SecurityWGCharter.pdf

   The Security Modeling Working Group of the Schema Subcommittee is
   responsible for developing the models and profiles required to
   provide interoperable security management interfaces for
   implementations, including the enabling of configuration and
   management of authentication, authorization, and auditing services.

   The operational security requirements for protocols and management
   initiatives are not addressed by this work group and should be
   addressed by the working groups responsible for them.  Management of
   the underlying security capabilities utilized by such protocols and
   initiatives are addressed by this work group, (for example:
   interfaces for the management of keys and certificates).

5.5.  Common Criteria

   http://www.commoncriteriaportal.org/

   The Common Criteria for Information Technology Security Evaluation
   (CC), and the companion Common Methodology for Information Technology
   Security Evaluation (CEM) are the technical basis for an
   international agreement, the Common Criteria Recognition Agreement
   (CCRA), which ensures that:

      Products can be evaluated by competent and independent licensed
      laboratories so as to determine the fulfilment of particular
      security properties, to a certain extent or assurance;

      Supporting documents, are used within the Common Criteria
      certification process to define how the criteria and evaluation
      methods are applied when certifying specific technologies;

      The certification of the security properties of an evaluated
      product can be issued by a number of Certificate Authorizing
      Schemes, with this certification being based on the result of
      their evaluation;

      These certificates are recognized by all the signatories of the
      CCRA.

   The CC is the driving force for the widest available mutual



Lonvick & Spak          Expires October 15, 2013               [Page 26]

Internet-Draft       Security Efforts and Documents           April 2013


   recognition of secure IT products.  This web portal is available to
   support the information on the status of the CCRA, the CC and the
   certification schemes, licensed laboratories, certified products and
   related information, news and events.

5.6.  ETSI

   TC SEC

   http://portal.etsi.org/portal/server.pt/gateway/
   PTARGS_0_13938_491_312_425_43/tb/closed_tb/sec.asp

   Board#38 confirmed the closure of TC SEC.

   At the same time it approved the creation of an OCG Ad Hoc group OCG
   Security

   TC SEC documents can be found in the SEC archive (members login
   required)

   The SEC Working groups (ESI and LI) were closed and TC ESI and a TC
   LI were created to continue the work.

   All documents and information relevant to ESI and LI are available
   from the TC ESI and TC LI sites

   TC ESI: http://portal.etsi.org/portal/server.pt/community/ESI/307

   TC LI: http://portal.etsi.org/portal/server.pt/community/LI/318

   OCG SEC

   http://portal.etsi.org/ocgsecurity/OCG_security_ToR.asp

   The group's primary role is to provide a light-weight horizontal co-
   ordination structure for security issues that will ensure this work
   is seriously considered in each ETSI TB and that any duplicate or
   conflicting work is detected.  To achieve this aim the group should
   mainly conduct its work via email and, where appropriate, co-sited
   "joint security" technical working meetings.

   OCG documents may be found here:

   http://portal.etsi.org/ocg/Summary.asp (members login required)







Lonvick & Spak          Expires October 15, 2013               [Page 27]

Internet-Draft       Security Efforts and Documents           April 2013


5.7.  Operational Security Requirements for IP Network Infrastructure :
      Advanced Requirements

   IETF RFC 3871

   Abstract: This document defines a list of operational security
   requirements for the infrastructure of large ISP IP networks (routers
   and switches).  A framework is defined for specifying "profiles",
   which are collections of requirements applicable to certain network
   topology contexts (all, core-only, edge-only...).  The goal is to
   provide network operators a clear, concise way of communicating their
   security requirements to vendors.

   Documents:

      http://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc3871.txt

5.8.  ISO JTC 1/SC 27 - Information security Technology techniques

   http://www.iso.org/iso/iso_catalogue/catalogue_tc/
   catalogue_tc_browse.htm?commid=45306

   Several security related ISO projects under JTC 1/SC 27 are listed
   here such as:

      IT security techniques -- Message Authentication Codes (MACs)

      IT Security techniques -- Key management

      IT Security techniques -- Entity authentication

      IT Security techniques -- Hash-functions

      IT Security techniques -- Non-repudiation

      IT Security techniques -- IT network security

5.9.  ITU-T Study Group 2

   http://www.itu.int/ITU-T/studygroups/com02/index.asp

   Security related recommendations currently under study:
   http://www.itu.int/ITU-T/recommendations/index_sg.aspx?sg=2

5.10.  ITU-T Study Group 17

   http://www.itu.int/ITU-T/studygroups/com17/index.asp




Lonvick & Spak          Expires October 15, 2013               [Page 28]

Internet-Draft       Security Efforts and Documents           April 2013


   Security related recommendations currently under study:
   http://www.itu.int/ITU-T/recommendations/index_sg.aspx?sg=17

   The ICT Security Standards Roadmap
   http://www.itu.int/ITU-T/studygroups/com17/ict/index.html

   This ICT Security Standards Roadmap has been developed to assist in
   the development of security standards by bringing together
   information about existing standards and current standards work in
   key standards development organizations.

   In addition to aiding the process of standards development, the
   Roadmap will provide information that will help potential users of
   security standards, and other standards stakeholders, gain an
   understanding of what standards are available or under development as
   well as the key organizations that are working on these standards.

   The Roadmap was initiated by ITU-T Study Group 17.  In January 2007
   the initiative became a collaborative effort when the European
   Network and Information Security Agency (ENISA) and the Network and
   Information Security Steering Group (NISSG) joined Study Group 17 in
   the project.

   The Roadmap is in five parts:

   Part 1: ICT Standards Development Organizations and Their Work
   http://www.itu.int/ITU-T/studygroups/com17/ict/part01.html

   Part 1 contains information about the Roadmap structure and about
   each of the listed standards organizations, their structure and the
   security standards work being undertaken.  In addition it contains
   information on terminology by providing links to existing security
   glossaries and vocabularies.

   Part 2: Approved ICT Security Standards
   http://www.itu.int/ITU-T/studygroups/com17/ict/part02.html

   Part 2 contains a summary catalogue of approved standards.

   Part 3: Security standards under development
   http://www.itu.int/ITU-T/studygroups/com17/ict/part03.html

   Part 3 is structured with the same taxonomy as Part 2 but contains
   work in progress, rather than standards that have already been
   approved and published.  Part 3 will also contain information on
   inter-relationships between groups undertaking the work and on
   potential overlaps between existing projects.




Lonvick & Spak          Expires October 15, 2013               [Page 29]

Internet-Draft       Security Efforts and Documents           April 2013


   Part 4: Future needs and proposed new security standards
   http://www.itu.int/ITU-T/studygroups/com17/ict/part04.html

   Part 4 is intended to capture possible future areas of security
   standards work where gaps or needs have been identified as well as
   areas where proposals have been made for specific new standards work.

   Part 4 includes provision for direct feedback, comments and
   suggestions.

   Part 5: Best practices
   http://www.itu.int/ITU-T/studygroups/com17/ict/part05.html

   Part 5 is a recent addition to the Roadmap (May 2007).  It is
   intended to be a repository of security-related best practices
   contributed by our community of members.

   This section will be based on contributions from the security
   community.

   Where possible contributions should refer to best practices relating
   to standards-based security but other best practices will be
   considered for inclusion.

   It is important to note that the Roadmap is a work-in-progress.  It
   is intended that it be developed and enhanced to include other
   standards organizations as well as a broader representation of the
   work from organizations already included.  It is hoped that standards
   organizations whose work is not represented in this version of the
   Roadmap will provide information to ITU-T about their work so that it
   may be included in future editions.

   In May 2007, Part 2 of the Roadmap was converted to a searchable
   database format that allows direct links to the information of
   participating standards organizations.  The database format will
   allow each participating organization to manage its own data within
   the Roadmap.  This will enable more timely updating of the
   information and will also reduce the overhead in maintaining the
   information.

   http://www.itu.int/ITU-T/security/main_table.aspx

5.11.  NRIC VII Focus Groups

   http://www.nric.org/fg/index.html

   The mission of the NRIC is partner with the Federal Communications
   Commission, the communications industry and public safety to



Lonvick & Spak          Expires October 15, 2013               [Page 30]

Internet-Draft       Security Efforts and Documents           April 2013


   facilitate enhancement of emergency communications networks, homeland
   security, and best practices across the burgeoning telecommunications
   industry.

   By December 16, 2005, the Council shall present a final report that
   describes, in detail, any additions, deletions, or modifications that
   should be made to the Homeland Security Best Practices that were
   adopted by the preceding Council.

   Documents in Focus Group 2: Homeland Security, Subcommittee 2.B:
   Cyber Security:

      Focus Group 2B Report - Homeland Security Cyber Security Best
      Practices Published 06-Dec-2004

      Focus Group 2B Report Appendices Published 06-Dec-2004

      Focus Group 2B Final Report - Summary of Activities, Guidance and
      Cybersecurity Issues Published 16-Dec-2005

      Focus Group 2B Final Best Practices Published 16-Dec-2005

5.12.  OASIS Security Technical Committees

   Many Technical Committees have produced standards.

   http://www.oasis-open.org/committees/tc_cat.php?cat=security

5.13.  OIF Implementation Agreements

   The OIF has 3 approved, and in-force Implementation Agreements (IAs)
   relating to security.  They are:

   OIF-SEP-03.0 - Security Extension for UNI and E-NNI 2.0 (Nov 2010)
   http://www.oiforum.com/public/documents/OIF-SEP-03.0.pdf

   OIF-SMI-01.0 - Security for Management Interfaces to Network Elements
   (September 2003)
   http://www.oiforum.com/public/documents/SecurityMgmt-IA.pdf

   OIF-SMI-02.1 - Addendum to the Security for Management Interfaces to
   Network Elements (March 2006)
   http://www.oiforum.com/public/documents/OIF-SMI-02_1.pdf

5.14.  TIA - Critical Infrastructure Protection (CIP) and Homeland
       Security (HS)

   The TIA Cybersecurity Working Group advocates public policy positions



Lonvick & Spak          Expires October 15, 2013               [Page 31]

Internet-Draft       Security Efforts and Documents           April 2013


   related to the security of ICT equipment and services from a vendor
   perspective as it relates to critical infrastructure, supply chain
   and information sharing.

   http://www.tiaonline.org/policy/cybersecurity

5.15.  NIST Special Publications (800 Series)

   http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/PubsSPs.html

   Special Publications in the 800 series present documents of general
   interest to the computer security community.  The Special Publication
   800 series was established in 1990 to provide a separate identity for
   information technology security publications.  This Special
   Publication 800 series reports on ITL's research, guidelines, and
   outreach efforts in computer security, and its collaborative
   activities with industry, government, and academic organizations.

5.16.  NIST Interagency or Internal Reports (NISTIRs)

   http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/PubsNISTIRs.html

   NIST Interagency or Internal Reports (NISTIRs) describe research of a
   technical nature of interest to a specialized audience.  The series
   includes interim or final reports on work performed by NIST for
   outside sponsors (both government and nongovernment).  NISTIRs may
   also report results of NIST projects of transitory or limited
   interest, including those that will be published subsequently in more
   comprehensive form.

5.17.  NIST ITL Security Bulletins

   http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/PubsITLSB.html

   ITL Bulletins are published by NIST's Information Technology
   Laboratory, with most bulletins written by the Computer Security
   Division.  These bulletins are published on the average of six times
   a year.  Each bulletin presents an in-depth discussion of a single
   topic of significant interest to the information systems community.
   Not all of ITL Bulletins that are published relate to computer /
   network security.  Only the computer security ITL Bulletins are found
   here.

5.18.  SANS Information Security Reading Room

   http://www.sans.org/reading_room/

   Featuring over 1,969 original computer security white papers in 77



Lonvick & Spak          Expires October 15, 2013               [Page 32]

Internet-Draft       Security Efforts and Documents           April 2013


   different categories

   Most of the computer security white papers in the Reading Room have
   been written by students seeking GIAC certification to fulfill part
   of their certification requirements and are provided by SANS as a
   resource to benefit the security community at large.  SANS attempts
   to ensure the accuracy of information, but papers are published "as
   is".  Errors or inconsistencies may exist or may be introduced over
   time as material becomes dated.










































Lonvick & Spak          Expires October 15, 2013               [Page 33]

Internet-Draft       Security Efforts and Documents           April 2013


6.  Security Considerations

   This document describes efforts to standardize security practices and
   documents.  As such this document offers no security guidance
   whatsoever.

   Readers of this document should be aware of the date of publication
   of this document.  It is feared that they may assume that the
   efforts, on-line material, and documents are current whereas they may
   not be.  Please consider this when reading this document.









































Lonvick & Spak          Expires October 15, 2013               [Page 34]

Internet-Draft       Security Efforts and Documents           April 2013


7.  IANA Considerations

   This document does not propose a standard and does not require the
   IANA to do anything.















































Lonvick & Spak          Expires October 15, 2013               [Page 35]

Internet-Draft       Security Efforts and Documents           April 2013


8.  Acknowledgments

   The following people have contributed to this document.  Listing
   their names here does not mean that they endorse the document, but
   that they have contributed to its substance.

   David Black, Mark Ellison, George Jones, Keith McCloghrie, John
   McDonough, Art Reilly, Chip Sharp, Dane Skow, Michael Hammer, Bruce
   Moon, Stephen Kent, Steve Wolff, Bob Natale, Marek Lukaszuk.










































Lonvick & Spak          Expires October 15, 2013               [Page 36]

Internet-Draft       Security Efforts and Documents           April 2013


9.  Changes from Prior Drafts

   -00 : Initial draft published as draft-lonvick-sec-efforts-01.txt

   -01 : Security Glossaries:



         Added ATIS Telecom Glossary 2000, Critical Infrastructure
         Glossary of Terms and Acronyms, Microsoft Solutions for
         Security Glossary, and USC InfoSec Glossary.

      Standards Developing Organizations:

         Added DMTF, GGF, INCITS, OASIS, and WS-I

         Removal of Committee T1 and modifications to ATIS and former T1
         technical subcommittees due to the recent ATIS reorganization.

      Efforts and Documents:

         Added DMTF User and Security WG, DMTF SPAM WG, GGF Security
         Area (SEC), INCITS Technical Committee T4 - Security
         Techniques, INCITS Technical Committee T11 - Fibre Channel
         Interfaces, ISO JTC 1/SC 27 projects, OASIS Security Joint
         Committee, OASIS Security Services TC, and WS-I Basic Security
         Profile.

         Updated Operational Security Requirements for IP Network
         Infrastructure : Advanced Requirements.

   -00 : as the WG ID

      Added more information about the ITU-T SG3 Q18 effort to modify
      ITU-T Recommendation M.3016.

   -01 : First revision as the WG ID.

      Added information about the NGN in the sections about ATIS, the
      NSTAC, and ITU-T.

   -02 : Second revision as the WG ID.

      Updated the date.

      Corrected some url's and the reference to George's RFC.

   -03 : Third revision of the WG ID.



Lonvick & Spak          Expires October 15, 2013               [Page 37]

Internet-Draft       Security Efforts and Documents           April 2013


      Updated the date.

      Updated the information about the CC

      Added a Conventions section (not sure how this document got to
      where it is without that)

   -04 : Fourth revision of the WG ID.

      Updated the date.

      Added Anne & Lynn Wheeler Taxonomy & Security Glossary

      CIAO glossary removed.  CIAO has been absorbed by DHS and the
      glossary is no longer available.

      USC glossary removed, could not find it on the site or a reference
      to it elsewhere.

      Added TTA - Telecommunications Technology Association to SDO
      section.

      Removed ATIS Security & Emergency Preparedness Activities from
      Documents section.  Could not find it or a reference to it.

      INCITS T4 incorporated into CS1 - T4 section removed

      X9 Added to SDO list under ANSI

      Various link or grammar fixes.

   -05 : Fifth revision of the WG ID.

      Updated the date.

      Removed the 2119 definitions; this is an informational document.

   -06 : Sixth revision of the WG ID.

      Updated the date.

      Added W3C information.

   -07 : Seventh revision of the WG ID.

      Updated the date.

   -08 : Eighth revision of the WG ID.



Lonvick & Spak          Expires October 15, 2013               [Page 38]

Internet-Draft       Security Efforts and Documents           April 2013


      Updated the reference to RFC 4949, found by Stephen Kent.

   -09 : Nineth revision of the WG ID.

      Updated the date.

   -10 : Tenth revision of the WG ID.

      Added references to NIST documents, recommended by Steve Wolff.
      Updated the date.

   -11 : Eleventh revision of the WG ID.

      Updated the date.

   -12 : Twelfth revision of the WG ID.

      Updated the date.

   -13 : Nothing new.

      Updated the date.

   -14 : Fourteenth revision of the WG ID.

      Updated the date and reviewed the accuracy of Section 3.

      Updated the section on Compendium of Approved ITU-T Security
      Definitions

      Updated the section on the Microsoft glossary.

      Updated the section on the SANS glossary.

      Added the NIST Security glossary.

      Added dates to all glossaries - where I could find them.

      Added the SANS Reading Room material to Section 5.

   -15 : Fifteenth revision of the WG ID.

      Updated the date and reviewed the accuracy of Section 4.  Several
      changes made.

      Removed WS-I as they have merged with OASIS.





Lonvick & Spak          Expires October 15, 2013               [Page 39]

Internet-Draft       Security Efforts and Documents           April 2013


      Added TM Forum.

   -16 : Sixteenth revision of the WG ID.

      Updated the date and reviewed the accuracy of Section 5.  Several
      changes made.

   -17 : Seventeenth revision of the WG ID.

      Updated the date and reviewed the accuracy of Section 3.  A couple
      of changes made.

   -18 : Eighteenth revision of the WG ID.

      Updated the date and reviewed the accuracy of Section 4.  Some
      changes made.

   -19 : Ninteenth revision of the WG ID.

      Updated the date and reviewed the accuracy of Section 5.  Some
      changes made.

   -20 : Twentieth revision of the WG ID.

      Updated the date and reviewed the accuracy of Section 3.  Some
      changes made.

   Note: This section will be removed before publication as an RFC.























Lonvick & Spak          Expires October 15, 2013               [Page 40]

Internet-Draft       Security Efforts and Documents           April 2013


Authors' Addresses

   Chris Lonvick
   Cisco Systems
   12515 Research Blvd.
   Austin, Texas  78759
   US

   Phone: +1 512 378 1182
   Email: clonvick@cisco.com


   David Spak
   Cisco Systems
   12515 Research Blvd.
   Austin, Texas  78759
   US

   Phone: +1 512 378 1720
   Email: dspak@cisco.com































Lonvick & Spak          Expires October 15, 2013               [Page 41]

