
TRILL Working Group                                  Donald Eastlake 3rd
INTERNET-DRAFT                                          Stellar Switches
Intended status: Proposed Standard                        Anoop Ghanwani
                                                                 Brocade
                                                         Caitlin Bestler
                                                                 Quantum
Expires: January 10, 2010                                  July 11, 2010


                     RBridges: TRILL Header Options
               <draft-ietf-trill-rbridge-options-02.txt>


Abstract

   The TRILL base protocol specification [RFCtrill], specifies minimal
   hooks for TRILL Header options. This draft specifies the format for
   options and an initial set of options.


Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Distribution of this document is unlimited. Comments should be sent
   to the TRILL working group mailing list <rbridge@postel.org>.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html












D. Eastlake, A. Ghanwani, & C. Bestler                          [Page 1]

INTERNET-DRAFT                                      TRILL Header Options


Table of Contents

      1. Introduction............................................3
      1.1 Conventions used in this document......................3

      2. TRILL Header Options....................................4
      2.1 RBridge Option Handling Requirements...................5
      2.2 No Critical Surprises..................................5
      2.3 Options Format.........................................6
      2.3.1 Summary Bits and Bit Options.........................6
      2.3.2 TLV Option Format....................................7
      2.3.3 Marshalling of Options...............................8
      2.4 Conflict of Options....................................9

      3. Specific Bit Option....................................10
      3.1 ECN Bit Option........................................10

      4. Specific TLV Options...................................12
      4.1 Flow ID TLV Option....................................12
      4.2 Additional Flags TLV Option...........................13

      5. Additions to IS-IS.....................................14
      5.1 Additions to Link State...............................14
      5.2 Additions to Port Capabilities........................14

      6. IANA Considerations....................................15
      7. Security Considerations................................15

      8. References.............................................16
      8.1 Normative References..................................16
      8.2 Informative References................................16

      Change History............................................17
      Version 00 to 02..........................................17


















D. Eastlake, A. Ghanwani, & C. Bestler                          [Page 2]

INTERNET-DRAFT                                      TRILL Header Options


1. Introduction

   The base TRILL protocol specification, which appears in [RFCtrill],
   provides an options feature and describes minimal hooks to safely
   support that feature. But it does not specify the structure of
   options nor the details of any particular options. This draft
   specifies that format and some initial options

   Section 2 below describes the general principles of operation,
   format, and ordering of TRILL Header Options. Such options are of two
   kinds: bit encoded options and TLV (Type, Length, Value) encoded
   options.

   Section 3 describes a specific bit option while Section 4 describes
   specific TLV encoded options.



1.1 Conventions used in this document

   The terminology and acronyms defined in [RFCtrill] are used herein
   with the same meaning.

   In this documents, "IP" refers to both IPv4 and IPv6.

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].
























D. Eastlake, A. Ghanwani, & C. Bestler                          [Page 3]

INTERNET-DRAFT                                      TRILL Header Options


2. TRILL Header Options

   The TRILL Protocol includes an option feature in the TRILL Header
   (see [RFCtrill] Sections 3.5 and 3.8).  The 5-bit Op-Length header
   field gives the length of the options in units of 4 octets, which
   allows up to 124 octets of options area. If Op-Length is zero there
   are no options present; else, the options follow immediately after
   the Ingress Rbridge Nickname field in the TRILL Header and each
   option is 32-bit aligned.

   As described below, provision is made for both hop-by-hop options,
   which might affect any RBridge that receives a TRILL frame containing
   such an option, and ingress-to-egress options, which would only
   necessarily affect the RBridge(s) where a TRILL frame is
   decapsulated. Provision is also made for both "critical" and "non-
   critical" options. An RBridge receiving a frame with a critical
   option that affects it and that it does not implement MUST discard
   the frame as it is unsafe to process the frame without understanding
   the critical option.  Non-critical options can be safely ignored.

   Any option indicating a significant change in the way later parts of
   the frame are interpreted or sturctured MUST be a critical option and
   MUST be a hop-by-hop critical option if it affect any fields that
   transit RBribges will examine.

   Options also have a "mutability" flag which has a different meaning
   for ingress-to-egress options and for hop-by-hop options.

   For an ingress-to-egress option, the mutability flag indicates
   whether the value associated with the option can change (mutable
   options) or not (immutable options). For example, an ingress-to-
   egress security option could protect the value of an immutable
   ingress-to-egress option. But such a security option generally could
   not protect a mutable value as a transit RBridge could change that
   value but would not normally have the keys to recompute a signature
   or authentication code to take a changed value into account.

   For a non-critial hop-by-hop option, the mutability flag indicates
   whether a transit RBridge that does not implement the option is
   permitted (mutable) or not permitted (immutable) to remove the
   option. A transit RBridge is never required to remove a hop-by-hop
   options that it does not implement.

   For critial hop-by-hop options, the mutability flag is meaningless.
   If the RBridge does not implement the critial hop-by-hop option, it
   MUST drop the frame. If it does implement the critial hop-by-hop
   option, it will know whether or not it may/should/must remove it.
   For critial hop-by-hop options, the mutability flag is set to zero on
   transmission and ignored on receipt.



D. Eastlake, A. Ghanwani, & C. Bestler                          [Page 4]

INTERNET-DRAFT                                      TRILL Header Options


      Note: Most RBridges implementations are expected to be optimized
      for simple and common cases of frame forwarding and processing.
      Although the hard limit on options length, their 32-bit alignment,
      and the presence of critical option summary bits as described
      below, are intended to assist in the efficient processing of
      frames with options, nevertheless the inclusion of options may
      cause frame processing using a "slow path" with inferior
      performance to "fast path" processing. Limited slow path
      throughput of such frames could cause them to be discarded.



2.1 RBridge Option Handling Requirements

   The requirements given in this section are in addition to all option
   handling requirements in [RFCtrill].

   All Rbridges MUST be able to detect whether there are any critical
   options present that are necessarily applicable to their processing
   of the frame as detailed below.  If they do not implement all the
   critical options present, they MUST discard the frame.

   Transit RBridges MUST transparently forward all immutable ingress-to-
   egress options in frames that they forward. Any changes made by a
   transit RBridge to a mutable ingress-to-egress option value MUST be a
   change permitted by the specification of that option.

   In addition, a transit RBridge:

   o  MAY add, if space is available, or remove, hop-by-hop options as
      specified for such hop-by-hop options;
   o  MAY change the value and/or length of a mutable ingress-to-egress
      option as permitted by that option's specification and provided
      there is enough room if lengthening the option;
   o  MUST adjust the length of the options area, including changing Op-
      Length in the TRILL header, as appropriate for any changes it has
      made in the options;
   o  MUST NOT add, remove, or re-order ingress-to-egress options.
   o  with regard to any non-critical hop-by-hop options that the
      transit RBridge does not implement, it MAY remove them if they are
      mutable but MUST transparently copy them when forwarding a frame
      if they are immutable.



2.2 No Critical Surprises

   RBridges advertise the ingress-to-egress options that they support in
   their IS-IS LSP and advertise the hop-by-hop options they support in
   the Hellos they send.  An RBridge is not required to support any


D. Eastlake, A. Ghanwani, & C. Bestler                          [Page 5]

INTERNET-DRAFT                                      TRILL Header Options


   options.

   Unless an RBridge advertises support for a critical option, it will
   not normally receive frames with that option except due to errors or
   transient conditions.

   An RBridge SHOULD NOT add a critical option to a frame unless,
   -  for a critical hop-by-hop option, it has determined that the next
      hop RBridge or RBridges to which the frame will be sent support
      that option, or
   - for a critical ingress-to-egress option, it has determined that the
      RBridge or RBridges that will egress the frame support that
      option.

   "SHOULD NOT" is specified since there may be cases with multi-
   destination frames where it is acceptable for those frames to be
   discarded by the egress RBridges that do not implement the option.



2.3 Options Format

   If any options are present in a TRILL Header, as indicated by a non-
   zero Op-Length field, the first four octets of the options area
   consist of two summary bits and 30 option bits as described below.
   The remainder of the options area, if any, consists of TLV (Type
   Length Value) encoded options aligned on 32-bit boundaries. Section
   2.3.2 specifies the format of an individual TLV option. Section 2.3.3
   describes the marshalling of TLV options.



2.3.1 Summary Bits and Bit Options

         |   0      1    2  3  4  5  6  7| 8 - 15|16 - 23|24 - 31|
         +------+------+--+--+--+--+--+--+-------+-------+-------+
         | CHbH | CItE |                 |       |       |       |
         +------+------+--+--+--+--+--+--+-------+-------+-------+

                Figure 1: Options Area Initial Four Octets

   The top two bits of the options area, bits 0 and 1 above, are called
   summary bits and summarize the presence of critical options as
   follows:

      If the CHbH (Critical Hop by Hop) bit is one, one or more critical
      hop-by-hop options are present in the options area. Transit
      RBridges that do not support all of the critical hop-by-hop
      options present, for example an RBridge that supported no options,
      MUST drop the frame. If the CHbH bit is zero, the frame is safe,


D. Eastlake, A. Ghanwani, & C. Bestler                          [Page 6]

INTERNET-DRAFT                                      TRILL Header Options


      from the point of view of options processing, for a transit
      RBridge to forward, regardless of what options that RBridge does
      or does not support. A transit RBridge that supports none of the
      options present MUST transparently forward the options area when
      it forwards a frame, except that it MAY remove mutable hop-by-hop
      options.

      If the CItE (Critical Ingress to Egress) bit is a one, one or more
      critical ingress-to-egress options are present in the options
      area. If it is zero, no such options are present.  If either CHbH
      or CItE is non-zero, egress RBridges that don't support all
      critical options present, for example an RBridge that supports no
      options, MUST drop the frame.  If both CHbH and CItE are zero, the
      frame is safe, from the point of view of options, for any egress
      RBridge to process, regardless of what options that RBridge does
      or does not support.

   The remaining 30 bits in the initial four octets of the options area
   are available for bit-encoded options. Any RBridge adding an options
   area to a TRILL Header must set these 30 bits to zero except when
   permitted to set one or more as specified an option that RBridge
   implements. The 30 bits are categorized as follows:

       Bits   Category
      ---------------------
       2- 7   Critical hop-by-hop
       8-15   Non-critical hop-by-hop
      16-23   Critical ingress-to-egress
      24-31   Non-critical ingress-to-egress

   All bit encoded options are considered mutable except the critical
   hop-by-hop options. Any transit RBridge MUST transparently copy bits
   16 through 31, except as permitted by an option implemented by that
   RBridge, but MAY either copy or clear any of the bits from 8 through
   15. Even if a transit RBridge removes all TLV options from a TRILL
   Header when allowed to do so, it MUST NOT eliminate the options area
   in a forwarded frame if any of the 2 through 7 or 16 through 31 bits
   remain non-zero; however, if there are no TLV options and all of bits
   2 through 31 are zero, then the summary bits will also be zero and
   the transit RBridge may eliminate the Options area in the frame,
   setting Op-Length to zero.



2.3.2 TLV Option Format

   TRILL Header options, other than bit options described above, are TLV
   encoded, with some flag bits in the Type and Length octets, in the
   format show in Figure 2.



D. Eastlake, A. Ghanwani, & C. Bestler                          [Page 7]

INTERNET-DRAFT                                      TRILL Header Options


   | 0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7| 8|    9-15         |
   +--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+---
   |IE|NC|      Type       |MT|     Length      | value...
   +--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+--+---

                      Figure 2. Option TLV Structure

   The highest order bit of the first octet (IE) is zero for hop-by-hop
   options and one for ingress-to-egress options.  Hop-by-hop options
   are potentially applicable to every RBridge that receives the frame.
   Ingress-to-egress options are only inserted at the ingress RBridge
   and are applicable at egress RBridges. Ingress-to-egress options MAY
   also be examined and acted upon by transit RBridges as specified in
   the particular option.

   The next to highest order bit of the first octet (NC) is zero for
   critical options and one for non-critical options.

   The highest order bit of the second octet (MT) is zero for immutable
   options and one for mutablable options. The IE, NC, Type, and MT
   fields themselves MUST NOT be changed even for a mutable option.

   The bottom six bits of the first octet give the option Type code. The
   option Type may constrain the values of the IE, NC, and MT bits. For
   example, if the Type indicates a Flow ID option (see Section 4.1),
   then it MUST be marked as a hop-by-hop, non-critical, mutable option.
   If the IE, NC, or MT bits have a value not permitted by the option
   Type specification for an option that an RBridge must act on (any
   critial ingress-to-egress option at an egress RBridge and any critial
   hop-by-hop option), the RBridge MUST discard the frame. If these bits
   have a value not permitted by for the Type for an option that an
   RBridge may ignore (any ingress-to-egress option at a transit RBridge
   and any non-critial option), the RBridge MAY discard the frame. "MAY"
   is chosen in this case to minimize the checking burden.

   The Length field is an unsigned quantity giving the length of the
   option value in octets.  It gives the amount of option value data, if
   any, beyond the initial two Type and Length octets.  The Length field
   MUST NOT be such that the option value extends beyond the end of the
   total options area as specified by the TRILL Header Op-Length. Thus,
   the value of Length can vary from zero to 120. The meaning of
   "Length" values of 121 through 127 is reserved and, when such values
   are noticed in a frame, the frame MUST be discarded.



2.3.3 Marshalling of Options

   In a TRILL Header with options, those options start immediately after
   the Ingress RBridge Nickname and completely fill the options area.


D. Eastlake, A. Ghanwani, & C. Bestler                          [Page 8]

INTERNET-DRAFT                                      TRILL Header Options


   TLV options start immediately after the initial four octets of option
   and summary bits and MUST appear in ascending order by the value of
   the nine high order bits of the Type and Length octets considered as
   an unsigned integer in network byte order.  Thus they MUST be ordered
   as follows: (1) critical hop-by-hop options, (2) non-critial hop-by-
   hop options, (3) critical ingress-to-egress options, and (4) non-
   critial ingress-to-egress options. Frames that violate this paragraph
   are erroneous, will produce unspecified results, and MAY be
   discarded. "MAY" is chosen to minimize the format checking burden on
   transit RBridges.

   Options are 32-bit aligned.  Should an option not consist of a
   multiple of four octets, the option is padded at the end up to the
   next multiple of four octets. These padding octets MUST be zero.

   If any options are present, those options, both flag and TLV, MUST be
   correctly summarized into the CHbH and CItE bits at the top of the
   initial four octets of the options area.



2.4 Conflict of Options

   It is possible for options to conflict. Two or more options can be
   present in a frame that direct an RBridge procesing the frame to do
   conflict things or to change its interpretation of later parts of the
   frame in conflicting ways. Such conflicts are resolved by applying
   the following rules in the order given:

   1. Any frame containing options that require mutually incompatible
      changes in way later parts of the frame are interpreted or
      structured MUST be discarded. (Such options will be critical
      options, normally hop-by-hop critical options.)

   2. Critical options always override non-critical options.

   2. Withing the two categories of critical and non-critical options,
      the option appearing first in lexical order in the frame always
      overrides an optiona appearing later in the frame. Thus a conflict
      between a bit option and a TLV option is always resolved in favor
      of the bit option. Bit options with lower bit numbers are
      considered to have occured before bit options with higher bit
      numbers.









D. Eastlake, A. Ghanwani, & C. Bestler                          [Page 9]

INTERNET-DRAFT                                      TRILL Header Options


3. Specific Bit Option

   The table below shows the state of TRILL Header bit option
   assignments. See Section 6 for IANA Considerations.

        Bit    Purpose         Section
      -----------------------------------
        0-1    Summary           2.3
        2-7    available for critical hop-by-hop options
        8-9    ECN               3.1
       10-15   available for non-critical hop-by-hop options
       16-23   available for critical ingress-to-egress options
       24-31   available for non-critical ingress-to-egress options

                           Table 1. Flag Options



3.1 ECN Bit Option

   RBridges may implement an ECN (Explicit Congestion Notification)
   option [RFC3168]. If implemented, it SHOULD be enabled by default but
   can be disable on a per RBridge basis by configuration.

   RBridges that do not implement this option or on which it is disabled
   simply (1) set bits 8 and 9 of the bit options area zero when they
   add an options area to a TRILL Header and (2) transparently copy
   those bits, if an options area is present, when they forward a frame
   with a TRILL Header.

   An RBridge that implements the ECN option does the following when
   that option is enabled:

   o  When ingressing an IP frame that is ECN enabled, it MUST add an
      options area to the TRILL Header and copy the two ECN bits from
      the IP header into option bits 8 and 9.
   o  When ingressing a frame for a non-IP protocol with a means of
      indicating ECN that is understood by the RBridge, it MAY add an
      options area to the TRILL Header with the ECN bits set from the
      ingressed frame.
   o  When forwarding a frame encountering congestion at an RBridge, if
      an options area is present with option bits 8 and 9 indicate ECN-
      capable transport, the RBridge MUST modify them to the congestion
      experienced value.
   o  When egressing an IP frame, if the TRILL Header has an options
      area with option bits 8 and 9 non-zero, it copies those bits into
      the ECN bits in the IP header.
   o  When egressing a non-IP protocol frame with a means of indicating
      ECN that is understood by the RBridge, it MAY transfer the ECN
      information from the ECN bits in the options area to the egressed


D. Eastlake, A. Ghanwani, & C. Bestler                         [Page 10]

INTERNET-DRAFT                                      TRILL Header Options


      native frame.

   The following table is modified from [RFC3168] and shows the meaning
   of bit values in TRILL Header option bits 8 and 9, bits 6 and 7 in
   the IPv4 TOS Byte, and bits 6 and 7 in the IPv6 Traffic Class Octet:

      Binary  Meaning
      ------  -------
        00     Not-ECT (Not ECN-Capable Transport)
        01     ECT(1) (ECN-Capable Transport(1))
        10     ECT(0) (ECN-Capable Transport(0))
        11     CE (Congestion Experienced)

                       Table 2. ECN Bit Combinations


   An RBridge detects congestion either by monitoring its own queue
   depths or from participation in a link-specific protocol. An RBridge
   implementing the ECN option MAY be configured to add congestion
   experienced marking using ECN to any frame with a TRILL Header that
   encounters congestion even if the frame was not previously marked as
   ECN-capable or did not have an options area.






























D. Eastlake, A. Ghanwani, & C. Bestler                         [Page 11]

INTERNET-DRAFT                                      TRILL Header Options


4. Specific TLV Options

   The table below shows the state of TRILL Header TLV option Type
   assignment. See Section 6 for IANA Considerations.

          Type        Purpose             Section
         -----------------------------------------
          0x00       reserved
          0x01       Flow ID               4.1
          0x02-0x2F  available
          0x30       Additional Flags      4.2
          0x31-0x3E  available
          0x3F       reserved

                         Table 3. TLV Option Types


   The following subsections specify particular TRILL TLV options.



4.1 Flow ID TLV Option

   In connection with multi-pathing of frames, frames that are part of
   the same order dependent flow need to follow the same path for
   correct operation.  Methods to determine flows are beyond the scope
   of the this document; however, it may be useful, once the flow of a
   frame has been determined, to preserve and transmit that information
   for use by subsequent RBridges.

   This is a non-critical option. It is considered hop-by-hop because it
   can be added by a transit RBridge and transit RBridges may wish to
   use it to make forwarding decisions. Because the ingress RBridge may
   know the most about a frame, it is expected that this option would
   most commonly be added at the ingress RBridge. Once in a frame, the
   option SHOULD NOT be removed or changed unless, for example, a campus
   is divided into regions such that different flow IDs would make sense
   in different regions.

   The value length of this option is fixed at 2 for efficiency. In a
   TRILL data frame with only this option, the size of the option plus
   the size of the initial 4 summary and flag option octets is such as
   to maintain 64-bit alignment of the encpasulated frame.

   The option fields and flags are as follows:

      o  Type is 0x01.
      o Length is 2. The data is an unsigned integer that is the flow
         ID.
      o  IE MUST be zero. This is a hop-by-hop option.


D. Eastlake, A. Ghanwani, & C. Bestler                         [Page 12]

INTERNET-DRAFT                                      TRILL Header Options


      o  NC and MT MUST be one. This is a non-critical mutable option.



4.2 Additional Flags TLV Option

   This option provides a means of adding a variety of additional flags
   to the TRILL Header beyond the bit options available in the first
   four octets of the options area.

   The value of a flags option consists of additional flags, eight per
   octet, numbered from the high-order to the low-order bit. Thus flag 1
   is the 0x80 bit of the first octet, flag 8 is the 0x01 bit of that
   octet, flag 9 is the 0x80 bit of the second octet, etc. The number of
   additional flags that can be defined is bounded only by the options
   space that can be available. All flags not present, because they
   would be in value octets beyond those specified by the option Length,
   are considered zero.

   This option can appear once in a frame for each possible combination
   of the ingress-to-egress, hop-by-hop, non-critical, critical, mutable
   and immutable flags (all combinations except for mutable critical
   hop-by-hop, which is a meaningless). To simplify canonicalization for
   security, this option MUST NOT be included if all of the flag bits
   would be zero and the value MUST NOT have any trailing zero octets.
   Thus its Length MUST be at least 1 and at least the last octet of the
   value present MUST be non-zero.

   The option fields and flags are as follows:

      o  Type is 0x30.
      o  Length is variable with a minimum value of 1.
      o IE, NC, MT can be any valid combination producing several
         variations of this option.


















D. Eastlake, A. Ghanwani, & C. Bestler                         [Page 13]

INTERNET-DRAFT                                      TRILL Header Options


5. Additions to IS-IS

   RBridges use IS-IS PDUs to inform other RBridges which options they
   support. The specific IS-IS TLVs or sub-TLVs used to encode and
   advertise this information are specified in a separate document.
   Support for critical options MUST be advertised. Support for non-
   critical options MAY be advertised unless the specification of a
   particular non-critial option imposes a requirement higher than "MAY"
   for the advertising of that option by RBridges that implement it.



5.1 Additions to Link State

   Rbridges indicate in their link state which ingress-to-egress TLV and
   bit options they support.

   In addition, if they support any ingress-to-egress Additional Flags
   TLV options, they MUST indicate which critical ingress-to-egress
   Additional Flags TLV option flags they support and MAY indicate which
   non-critial Additional Flags they support.



5.2 Additions to Port Capabilities

   Rbridges indicate in their Hellos which hop-by-hop TLV and bit
   options they support.

   In addition, if they support hop-by-hop Additional Flags TLV options,
   they MUST indicate which critical hop-by-hop Additional Flags TLV
   option flags they support and MAY indicate which non-critial hop-by-
   hop Additional Flags TLV options they support.



















D. Eastlake, A. Ghanwani, & C. Bestler                         [Page 14]

INTERNET-DRAFT                                      TRILL Header Options


6. IANA Considerations

   IANA will create two subregistries within the TRILL registry. A
   "TRILL Header Bit Options" subregistry that is initially populated as
   specified in Table 1 in Section 3.  And a "TRILL TLV Option Types"
   subregistry that is initially populated as specified in Table 3 in
   Section 4. References in both of those tables to sections of this
   document are to be replaced in the IANA subregistries by references
   to this document as an RFC.

   New TRILL bit options and TLV option types are allocated by IETF
   Review [RFC5226].

   IANA will create a third subregistry within the TRILL registry for
   flags in the variations of the Additional Flags TLV option that is
   initially empty. Such flags are allocated by TRILL Expert Review
   [RFC5226].




7. Security Considerations

   For general TRILL protocol security considerations, see [RFCtrill].

   RBridges should not trust that the options that appear in a TRILL
   header reflect the intent of the previous or earlier hop RBridges,
   including the ingress RBridge, unless the option is appropriately
   secured. For example, through inclusion of a TRILL authentication
   option, which may be specified in another document, or authentication
   information internal to the option itself.

   In order to facilitate authentication, options SHOULD be specified so
   they do not have alternative equivalent forms. Authentication of
   anything with alternative equivalent forms almost always requires
   canonicalization that an authenticating RBridge ignorant of the
   option would be unable to do and that may be complex and error prone
   even for an RBridge knowledgeable of the option. It is best for any
   option to have a unique encoding.













D. Eastlake, A. Ghanwani, & C. Bestler                         [Page 15]

INTERNET-DRAFT                                      TRILL Header Options


8. References

   Normative and informative references for this document are given
   below.



8.1 Normative References

   [RFC2119] - Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
      Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC3168] -  Ramakrishnan, K., Floyd, S., and D. Black, "The Addition
      of Explicit Congestion Notification (ECN) to IP", RFC 3168,
      September 2001.

   [RFC5226] Narten, T. and H. Alvestrand, "Guidelines for Writing an
      IANA Considerations Section in RFCs", BCP 26, RFC 5226, May 2008.

   [RFCtrill] - Perlman, R., D. Eastlake, D. Dutt, S. Gai, and A.
      Ghanwani, "RBridges: Base Protocol Specification", draft-ietf-
      trill-rbridge-protocol-16.txt, in RFC Editor's queue.



8.2 Informative References

   None.
























D. Eastlake, A. Ghanwani, & C. Bestler                         [Page 16]

INTERNET-DRAFT                                      TRILL Header Options


Change History

   The sections below summarize changes between successive versions of
   this draft. RFC Editor: Please delete this section before
   publication.



Version 00 to 02

   Change the requirement for TLV option ordering to be strictly ordered
   by the value of the top nine bits of their first two bytes so that
   the MT bit is included.

   Specify meaning of mutability bit for hop-by-hop options.

   Fix length of Flow ID Value at 2.

   Require that options that may significantly affect the interpretation
   or format of subsequent parts of the frame be critical options.
































D. Eastlake, A. Ghanwani, & C. Bestler                         [Page 17]

INTERNET-DRAFT                                      TRILL Header Options


Authors' Addresses

   Donald E. Eastlake 3rd
   Stellar Switches
   155 Beaver Street
   Milford, MA 01757

   Phone: +1-508-333-2270
   email: d3e3e3@gmail.com


   Anoop Ghanwani
   Brocade Communications Systems
   1745 Technology Drive
   San Jose, CA 95110 USA

   Phone: +1-408-333-7149
   Email: anoop@brocade.com


   Caitlin Bestler
   Quantum
   1650 Technology Drive , Suite 700
   San Jose, CA 95110

   Phone: +1-408-944-4000
   email: cait@asomi.com

























D. Eastlake, A. Ghanwani, & C. Bestler                         [Page 18]

INTERNET-DRAFT                                      TRILL Header Options


Copyright and IPR Provisions

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors. All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document. Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the BSD License.  The definitive version of an IETF
   Document is that published by, or under the auspices of, the IETF.
   Versions of IETF Documents that are published by third parties,
   including those that are translated into other languages, should not
   be considered to be definitive versions of IETF Documents. The
   definitive version of these Legal Provisions is that published by, or
   under the auspices of, the IETF. Versions of these Legal Provisions
   that are published by third parties, including those that are
   translated into other languages, should not be considered to be
   definitive versions of these Legal Provisions.  For the avoidance of
   doubt, each Contributor to the IETF Standards Process licenses each
   Contribution that he or she makes as part of the IETF Standards
   Process to the IETF Trust pursuant to the provisions of RFC 5378. No
   language to the contrary, or terms, conditions or rights that differ
   from or are inconsistent with the rights and licenses granted under
   RFC 5378, shall have any effect and shall be null and void, whether
   published or posted by such Contributor, or included with or in such
   Contribution.





















D. Eastlake, A. Ghanwani, & C. Bestler                         [Page 19]

