


conex                                                           Lei. zhu
Internet-Draft                                       Huawei Technologies
Intended status: Informational                        September 30, 2010
Expires: April 3, 2011


           Requirements of Localised Congestion Notification
           draft-lei-ecn-localised-congestion-notification-01

Abstract

   This document introduces analyzes of ECN(Explicit Congestion
   Notification)in case of congestion of local links. 3GPP adopts and
   specifies shared channel for multiple user equipments in a cell.
   Other last mile access systems (e.g. xDSL access and Frame Relay
   access) have to handle congestion since bandwidth multiplexing is
   most likely considered for reducing unnecessary cost.  Therefore,
   congestion in access network is to inform user equipments in case of
   traffic congestion utilizing congestion notification concepts and
   similar mechanisms.

   Besides the argument on the congestions of access networks, this
   document is also to introduce the use case of Conex which might be
   useful for the potential Conex proposals to notify and address the
   congestion of wireless access network further.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 3, 2011.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.




zhu                       Expires April 3, 2011                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                Localised ECN               September 2010


   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

   This document may contain material from IETF Documents or IETF
   Contributions published or made publicly available before November
   10, 2008.  The person(s) controlling the copyright in some of this
   material may not have granted the IETF Trust the right to allow
   modifications of such material outside the IETF Standards Process.
   Without obtaining an adequate license from the person(s) controlling
   the copyright in such materials, this document may not be modified
   outside the IETF Standards Process, and derivative works of it may
   not be created outside the IETF Standards Process, except to format
   it for publication as an RFC or to translate it into languages other
   than English.






























zhu                       Expires April 3, 2011                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                Localised ECN               September 2010


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   2.  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   3.  Definition  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   4.  Requirements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   5.  Use case  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
     5.1.  Access Congestion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
     5.2.  Generated Traffic from Network  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   6.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   7.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   8.  Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   9.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8





































zhu                       Expires April 3, 2011                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                Localised ECN               September 2010


1.  Introduction

   ECN [RFC3168], a proposed standard document, defines the ECN field in
   the IP header, and specifies the semantics for the code points for
   the ECN field.  These are all unicast protocols which negotiate the
   use of ECN during the initial connection establishment handshake
   (supporting incremental deployment, and checking if ECN marked
   packets pass all middleboxes on the path).

   Basically, ECN is an end to end solution involving endpoints and
   intermediate entities in the transport path.  The ECN solution
   requires that terminals and intermediate nodes (e.g. router and
   firewall) in the path to support ECN functions.  Otherwise, the whole
   solution does not fulfill the requirements to mechanisms of ECN.  The
   ECN also updates the definition of the Differentiated Services Field
   (DS Field) in the IPv4 and IPv6 Headers with optional ECN fields.
   The ECN mechanism originally includes the associations with
   congestion control and avoidance algorithms of TCP [RFC0793].  The
   problem is that this end to end solution highly relies on the
   supports of intermediate node in the path.  Since, there exist some
   middleboxes (firewalls, load balancers, or intrusion detection
   systems) in the Internet that either drop a TCP SYN packet configured
   to negotiate ECN, or respond with a RST.

   Besides the congestion appears in backbones of Tier 1 or Tier 2
   service providers, the most of traffic congestion seem happen in
   access network due to a lot of reasons.  For example, the ADSL
   multiplexer is likely to multiplex traffic, but multiplexer would not
   avoid congestion in particular periods (e.g. rush hour of
   transportation system).  Another example is 3GPP LTE architecture
   which specifies shared logic channel in particular cell with very
   high capacity.  However, even though terminals use low class traffic
   (e.g the traffic class only insure best effort service.), the
   capacity of the shared channel could be exhausted by applications
   which generates huge number of traffic.  In general, some problems
   could happy or have appeared in network, all indicate that the
   congestion of access network is likely critical issue to usages of
   congestion notifications in next generation networks.

   Changes from previous drafts (to be removed by the RFC Editor):

   From -00 to -01:

   The revision 01 is to introduce some description of use case on the
   issues that the Conex proposal might be useful to notify congestion
   of wireless access network.  The use case described in this document
   is also expected to be considered as an input of Conex mechanism
   discussion and to be address in future.



zhu                       Expires April 3, 2011                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                Localised ECN               September 2010


   Argument in "Introduction and problem statement" part of 00 version
   could be kept in 01 version.

   The definition and particular description of congestion issues of
   wireless access network might be supplied based on the
   draft-moncaster-conex-concepts-uses-01.  Those supplements are
   expected to be adopting in proper working group document.

   The use case describing Conex usage of wireless access network is
   added in the document.

   A supplied use case describe needs to consider the congestion control
   for Conex proposal in case that traffic is generated from network.


2.  Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].


3.  Definition

   Access Congestion: Access Congestion is due to the multiplexing
   function of access network, and is the congestion situation of access
   network which link layer resource of access network is not sufficient
   to transport downstream or upstream data to the endpoints.  Access
   Congestion would be located at network ingress and egress.  Mobile
   broadband access networks may not use RED algorithm as the criteria
   to detect congestion.


4.  Requirements

   In this section, the author tries to introduce requirements of
   localized ECN mechanism.

   The goals of localized ECN are:

   a.  Provide a locolized congestion notification mechanism extending
   the scope of ECN solution to notify congestion only happened in
   access network;

   b.  The localized ECN mechanism should support notification of
   congestion at access network in spite of intermediate supports in the
   whole path;




zhu                       Expires April 3, 2011                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                Localised ECN               September 2010


   c.  The localized congestion notification mechanism should be
   compliant with the ECN solution, and support the back compatibility
   to ECN solution.

   Therefore, the concluded requirements are,

   the localized ECN mechanism:

   a.  MUST be able to notify congestion of access network to the local
   senders which contributes to the uplink congestion.

   b.  MUST be able to notify congestion of access network to the local
   receivers which receive data contributing to the downlink congestion.

   c.  MUST be able to notify the uplink congestion and downlink
   congestion of access network to senders and receivers.


5.  Use case

5.1.  Access Congestion

   Access Congestion happens in the network ingress and egress.  Access
   Congestion is mainly due to the access network transmission capacity
   of transmission in a specific period of time can not satisfy the
   transportation needs of upstream or downstream traffic.  In addition
   to the existing fixed access network, e.g. the different types of
   last mile access approaches, including xDSL, optical access, more
   legacy TDM, ISDN access networks, it also includes mobile broadband
   access network.  Especially for the mobile broadband access networks,
   at air interface, radio resource controllers need to execute
   scheduling or priority handling functions to enable the flow of
   different users and applications in the empty transmission, with the
   congestion detection and discovery mechanisms different from AQM
   mechanisms.  The Conex mechanism is to reflect the measurement of the
   mobile broadband network as the network ingress or egress of the
   conex enabled network, and might require the supports of link layer
   of such network.

   The RLC layer retransmission by HARQ mechanism and timer in the data
   link layer of mobile broadband network ensure reliable data
   transmission services.  From the implementation point of view, the
   access network entities, such as RNC (Radio Network Controller) may
   support the buffering mechanism which could be able to calculate the
   change in the length of the buffer entry and exit that can be
   estimated network congestion state.  So, Conex is expected to marke
   congestion event according to ECN RFC3168 in addition to other
   provisions of the RED algorithm to obtain the parameters of traffic



zhu                       Expires April 3, 2011                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                Localised ECN               September 2010


   congestion.  Mechanism in the Conex eventually hopes to influence the
   application of business data generated.

5.2.  Generated Traffic from Network

   The reasons generating more traffic congestion in the networks are
   complicated.  But, end users get content from the network in most
   cases.  The endpoints have rare opportunities to send huge number of
   traffic in real network.  For example, HTTP based applications,
   service data are sent from the original server.  In other word, the
   content is transferred to the end points request the traffic.

   According to the ECN concepts, ECN parameter in IP packet header will
   be sent to receiver, while the ECT flag in the TCP ACK is sent to the
   sender.  In the example of the HTTP based applications if the source
   can reduce the transmission of business data is a pretty well
   situation.  On the other hand, Conex solution hopes controlling the
   amount of traffic generated in the state of network congestion
   through economic means.  In these scenarios, existing ECN solution
   does not completely and surely satisfy, because traffic resulting in
   congestion indication is always transferred to the sender.

   In the real networks, operators are able to monitor data flow and a
   user, or subscription of the user, and associate them with policy
   control functions.  If congestion is expected to be controlled by
   economic means, Conex mechanism can be used to further support to the
   above scenarios.


6.  Security Considerations

   TBD


7.  IANA Considerations

   There have been no IANA considerations so far in this document.


8.  Acknowledgments

   TBD


9.  Normative References

   [RFC0793]  Postel, J., "Transmission Control Protocol", STD 7,
              RFC 793, September 1981.



zhu                       Expires April 3, 2011                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                Localised ECN               September 2010


   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC3168]  Ramakrishnan, K., Floyd, S., and D. Black, "The Addition
              of Explicit Congestion Notification (ECN) to IP",
              RFC 3168, September 2001.


Author's Address

   Lei Zhu
   Huawei Technologies
   Huawei Building, Xinxi Road No.3
   Haidian District, Beijing  100085
   P. R. China

   Phone: +86-10-82836301
   Email: Lei.zhu@huawei.com

































zhu                       Expires April 3, 2011                 [Page 8]


