 



RTGWG Working Group                                        Shankar Raman
Internet-Draft                                Balaji Venkat Venkataswami
Intended Status: Experimental RFC                           Gaurav Raina
Expires: September 1, 2012                                  I.I.T Madras
                                                       February 29, 2012


                Building power optimal Multicast Trees 
                   draft-mjsraman-rtgwg-pim-power-01


Abstract

   Power consumption in multicast replication operations is an area of
   concern and choosing suitable replication points that can decrease
   power consumption overall assumes importance. Multicast replication
   capacity is an attribute of every line card of major routers and
   multi-layer switches that support multicast in the core of an
   Internet Service Provider (ISP) or an enterprise network.  

   Currently multicast replication points on Point-to-Multipoint
   Multicast Distribution trees consume power while delivering multiple
   output streams of data from a given input stream. The multicast
   distribution trees are constructed without any regard for a proper
   placement of the replication points and consequent optimal power
   consumption at these points. 

   This results in overloading certain routers while under-utilizing
   others. An optimal usage of these replication resources could reduce
   power consumption on these routers bringing power consumption to
   optimality. In this paper, we propose a mechanism by which Multicast
   Distribution Trees are constructed for carrying multicast traffic
   across multiple routers within a given network. We propose that these
   Multicast Distribution Trees be built by using the information
   pertaining to power-replication capacity ratio available with fine
   grained components such as multicast capable line-cards of routers
   and multi-layer switches deployed within a network. 


Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as
   Internet-Drafts.
 


Shankar Raman et.al.   Expires September 1, 2012                [Page 1]

INTERNET DRAFT   Building Power Optimal Multicast Trees     Feb 29, 2012


   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html


Copyright and License Notice

   Copyright (c) 2012 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors. All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document. Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document. Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.



Table of Contents

   1  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.1  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.  Methodology of the proposal  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     2.1 Discussion of this scheme  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   3 Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   3  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   4  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   5  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     5.1  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     5.2  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10






 


Shankar Raman et.al.   Expires September 1, 2012                [Page 2]

INTERNET DRAFT   Building Power Optimal Multicast Trees     Feb 29, 2012


1  Introduction

   Multicast traffic across multiple areas within a given network such
   as an ISP or a Campus Environment Network, may be carried using
   Multicast Distribution Trees. The traffic may be carried from a
   ingress router to several egress routers, example in a Campus
   Environment network. The Network under consideration may comprise of
   multiple areas involving a backbone area and several non-backbone
   areas connected to each other through the backbone. If several such
   multicast streams are to be carried in the network, it would be most
   useful to have such Multicast Distribution Trees constructed such
   that they have optimal power to available replication capacity ratios
   on the routers' linecards that they traverse from source to
   destinations. The intent is to provide a solution whereby several
   such Distribution Trees can be laid out in such a way that the set of
   routers that replicate multicast traffic traversed by the trees are
   most optimal in the utilization of the power provided to them given
   that there is sufficient replication capacity available. This we
   believe would essentially lead to a equilibrium of power to available
   replication capacity ratios amongst all routers in the topology which
   in turn would optimize and reduce the overall ratios for the network.

   Each router and its respective linecards deployed in the network have
   an advertised capability for replication. Most multi-layer switches
   and routers from vendors advertise in their respective data sheets a
   certain capability for replication for each type of linecard
   deployable on the box.  Replication consumes power and delivers
   multiple streams of data from a given input stream. It is status quo
   that (Point-to-Multipoint) P2MP trees are constructed without taking
   into account the power to available replication capacity ratios of
   such routers thus overloading certain routers while underutilizing
   the others. An optimal usage of these resources could reduce power
   consumption on these routers / multi-layer switches. This equilibrium
   could be arrived at by using a capability to choose from each
   downstream PIM router the most power optimal path to the selected
   (through current mechanisms) PIM upstream neighbor in the PIM-based
   Multicast Distribution Tree which may be a shared tree or a Shortest
   Path Tree as the case may be. The metric used to select the upstream
   PIM neighbor could be the power to available replication capacity
   ratio of each of the said router's line cards that are part of the
   ECMP set of paths to the upstream neighbor if such ECMP paths do
   exist. The metric comparison is done for all ECMP paths and the line
   cards involved therein depending on their current utilization of
   their replication capacity and power consumption.

   This paper is organized as follows; In section 2, we deal with the
   scheme that we propose. In section 2.1, we discuss some examples of
   the scheme at work, and in section 3 we conclude with further areas
 


Shankar Raman et.al.   Expires September 1, 2012                [Page 3]

INTERNET DRAFT   Building Power Optimal Multicast Trees     Feb 29, 2012


   of study that may be useful to undertake.

1.1  Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].


2.  Methodology of the proposal


   The key metric under consideration is the power consumed DIVIDED BY
   available replication capacity on each of the linecards of a router
   in the network whose constituent ports form part of a ECMP set of
   paths to a PIM upstream neighbor. The said ports on the different
   line cards that form the ECMP set of links are eligible to be used as
   a linecard:port atop which multicast traffic on that tree can be
   carried. When choosing the path from a ECMP set of paths to a PIM
   upstream neighbor, the said downstream PIM neighbor calculates the
   power to multicast replication capacity ratio for each of the line
   cards that are eligible to be chosen as the linecard:port combination
   to be used in that section of the distribution tree. The lowest ratio
   decides which linecard is chosen and if there exist multiple ports
   within that linecard that connect to the said PIM upstream neighbor
   the usual algorithm is used to select one of those ports. The key
   proposal that this document recommends is the use of the power-
   multicast-replication-capacity ratio to choose from among the
   different linecards. The choice of port is left to the standard
   method.

   Assume that the following router topology in the vicinity of the
   sender / senders is computed.

                   +----------------+
                  /                 V
                 /         +----> (R2) ------> (R3)<--(RcvrB)
                /         /                      \         |
               /         /                        \ +------+
              /         /              (cost 6)    \V
         (source/s)--->(R1)------> (R5) ------>  (R4)<-(RcvrA)
                        \          ^   (cost 10)  /\       /
                         \ (cost 4)|   ----------+  \     /
                          \        |  /              \   /
                         (R6)----> (R7) --------> (R8)<-+

   Figure 1:  Topology within a given network with an upstream ECMP link
   from R4 to R7
 


Shankar Raman et.al.   Expires September 1, 2012                [Page 4]

INTERNET DRAFT   Building Power Optimal Multicast Trees     Feb 29, 2012


   In the above diagram you can see that the source/sources are
   connected using a multi homed connections to the same ISP through
   Routers R1 nd R2. Similarly there are two Receiver sites RcvrA and
   RcvrB that are multihomed to TWO Routers RcvrB to R3 and R4 and for
   RcvrA to R4 and R8 respectively. You can also observe that R4 is
   connected to R7 through multiple paths. Assuming that both these
   paths are Equal Cost then this gives rise to a situation where ECMP
   paths exist for the downstream router R4 to the upstream router R7.

   Consider that RcvrA sends an IGMP join to R4. R4 now needs to send a
   PIM join towards the upstream router R7. Assume this is a shared tree
   with Rendezvous Point (RP) as R7. There are 2 equal cost paths to R7
   from R4 each with cost 10 ((R7->R5->R4 = 6 + 4 = 10) and (R7 -> R4 =
   10)). Assume that each of these paths from R4 to R5 onto R7 and from
   R4 to R7 directly are on different linecards in the chassis R4.
   Normally one of them would be chosen and power-to-multicast-
   replication-capacity would not be a consideration in that decision.
   What this document proposes is that R4 consider the metric PWR which
   is a ratio formed by dividing the power consumed on each of the
   linecards by their respective current multicast replication capacity.

   Obviously one of them would have to be chosen. In the metric
   comparison the linecard that has the lower PWR metric wins and is
   selected for consideration to send a PIM join to R7 (the PIM upstream
   neighbor and in this case the RP as well).

                   +----------------+
                  /                 V
                 /         +----> (R2) ------> (R3)<--(RcvrB)
                /         /                      \         |
               /         /                        \ +------+
              /         /                          \V
         (source/s)...>(R1)------> (R5) ------>  (R4)<-(RcvrA)
                        .           ^             .\       /
                         .          |  ...........  \     /
                          .         | .              \   /
                         (R6)....> (R7) ........> (R8)<-+

   Legend  : dotted lines represent path computed.

   Figure 2:  Instantiating an optimal power consuming distribution tree

   In our example as in Figure 2 we find that the direct link to R4 and
   R7 wins out as the link to be used in the distribution tree. 

   The one exception that SHOULD be considered in this decision is that
   if the Outgoing Interface List consists of ports on linecard X on
   which R4's downstream PIM neighbors have sent their respective PIM
 


Shankar Raman et.al.   Expires September 1, 2012                [Page 5]

INTERNET DRAFT   Building Power Optimal Multicast Trees     Feb 29, 2012


   joins and if the ECMP set of paths to the router R7 consist of
   linecard X and Y, it would be preferable to choose linecard X without
   taking into consideration the PWR metric. This is in light of the
   fact that if majority of the OIF list's port members lie on linecard
   X and the ingress port were also to be placed on linecard X then the
   replication would be more optimal as it would not have to traverse
   say the switch fabric to get to the majority of the OIF list. Other
   localization conditions could also be considered as exceptions to the
   PWR metric based rule.

   This document assumes that the power used by each linecard and the
   multicast replication utilization and advertised capacity are
   available as data readable from the hardware on the router chassis
   under consideration. Please note that unicast traffic already being
   carried on the linecard may also contribute to the power being
   consumed at the router's linecards under consideration.

   If ECMP paths dont exist then there is no choice to make hence the
   default selection of the link to be used to send a PIM join to the
   upstream neighbor is followed.

   As a result of this decision to include the PWR metric the paths in
   the tree where ECMP links occur have the least power to available
   replication capacity ratios at the time of computation.

   Assume the following path is computed as per the least power to
   available replication capacity ratios. Paths are computed through R6,
   R7, R8, R4, and say the multicast stream occupies 4GB of traffic
   along this tree so constructed and the available capacity of these
   routers reduces to 6GB assuming all of them have a base capacity of
   10GB. Subsequent paths constructed would have to take into account
   the newly computed power to current replication capacity ratio in the
   topology for multicast streams / trees yet to come. Now the linecard
   connecting R4 to R7 directly will have reduction of a quantum of 4GB
   capacity. It would reduce to 6GB as its available capacity.

   Assume another 6GB worth of traffic is loaded onto this topology in
   terms of a multicast stream / multiple streams then the new path
   computed for these new streams would NOT possibly utilize the same
   path as computed before since the power utilization and the available
   replication capacity would have been changed to create a higher PWR
   ratio. If the old streams reduce the replication capacity to an
   extent such that routers through which they pass can no longer be
   used since these routers' power to available replication capacity has
   become poor when compared to other paths then a different path may be
   computed from the ingress router to the egress router in such a way
   as to avoid those routers which have such poor ratios. This again
   applies only in ECMP sections of the distribution tree.
 


Shankar Raman et.al.   Expires September 1, 2012                [Page 6]

INTERNET DRAFT   Building Power Optimal Multicast Trees     Feb 29, 2012


                   -----------------+
                  /                 V
                 /         +----> (R2)--------> (R3)<--(RcvrB)
                /         /                      \         |
               /         /                        \ +------+
              /         /                           V
         (source/s)...>(R1) ------> (R5) .......> (R4)<-(RcvrA)
                        .            .             /\       /
                         .           .  ----------+  \     /
                          .          . /              \   /
                         (R6).....> (R7) .......>  (R8)<+

   Legend  : dotted lines represent path computed.

   Figure 3:  Instantiating a subsequent optimal power consuming
   distribution tree

   Here R4 would now have to choose the path to R7 (which is also the
   RP) through R5 since the PWR metric on R4 to R7 direct link would
   have increased as a result of carrying the old stream.

   Dynamism in multicast trees is another important point to consider as
   PIM-Prunes and other PIM-joins may happen with respect to the
   replication point under consideration. Suitable modifications to the
   algorithm may be proposed to take into consideration such dynamic
   conditions without causing major interruption to the multicast flows.

2.1 Discussion of this scheme 

   This scheme applies to PIM-SM, PIM-SSM. Applicability to PIM-Bidir is
   also possible but currently not discussed in this document in detail.

   Routers may have step levels in which they increase power consumption
   when they additively are loaded with more large bandwidth consuming
   multicast streams. Calibrating these levels may be useful for
   implementing this scheme. It is possible that such calibrated
   thresholds can be used for calculating the power to available
   replication capacity ratios in the Multicast environments. This would
   be useful for bringing down the frequency of calculations on a line-
   card about its ratios. When power consumption meanders within a
   certain given interval these ratios need not be calculated even if
   further multicast streams are added to it. The incentive is to
   recognize a linecard that does not drastically change power
   consumption even if large bandwidth streams are added onto it for
   replication and thus give it credit for its power optimal
   functioning. If a linecard on a router tends to consume the highest
   level of power even when carrying low amounts of multicast streams
   and replicating them on its line card, it would automatically have a
 


Shankar Raman et.al.   Expires September 1, 2012                [Page 7]

INTERNET DRAFT   Building Power Optimal Multicast Trees     Feb 29, 2012


   poor ratio when compared to a linecard that efficiently uses power
   when considering the replication capacity being used. The best case
   would be a low power consuming line-card or a router filled with such
   line cards that does not leave its power interval no matter how much
   ever replication capacity is sought to be used on it. But that would
   be an ideal condition but it is definitely an idealistic scenario
   towards which the router manufacturers should look at. 

3 Conclusion

   Here we propose a scheme that takes into account the power to
   available replication capacity ratios as weights for the edges which
   are the ECMP set of paths to a PIM upstream neighbor and compute a
   low cost power path for multicast replication. This is an area of
   future study which would be most conducive in terms of bringing about
   optimal power usage and thus incentivising vendors to manufacture low
   power consuming equipment. Compelled to bring about radical change in
   the thinking relating to power consumption vendors manufacturing
   networking equipment will drive down power consumption since the
   scheme proposed chooses or gives priority to low power guzzling
   linecards.



























 


Shankar Raman et.al.   Expires September 1, 2012                [Page 8]

INTERNET DRAFT   Building Power Optimal Multicast Trees     Feb 29, 2012


3  Security Considerations

   None.

4  IANA Considerations

   None.


5  References

5.1  Normative References

   [KEYWORDS] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC1776]  Crocker, S., "The Address is the Message", RFC 1776, April
              1 1995.

   [TRUTHS]   Callon, R., "The Twelve Networking Truths", RFC 1925,
              April 1 1996.


5.2  Informative References


              [1] G. Appenzeller, Sizing router buffers, Doctoral
              Thesis, Department of Electrical Engineering, Stanford
              University, 2005.  

              [2] A. P. Bianzino, C. Chaudet, D. Rossi and J. L.
              Rougier, A survey of green networking research, IEEE
              Communications and Surveys Tutorials, preprint.

              [3] J. Baliga, K. Hinton and R. S. Tucker, Energy
              consumption of the internet, Proc. of joint international
              conference on optical internet, June 2007, pp. 1993.

              [4] J. Chabarek, J. Sommers, P. Barford, C. Estan, D.
              Tsiang and S. Wright, Power awareness in network design
              and routing, Proc. of the IEEE INFOCOM 2008, April 2008,
              pp. 457-465.

              [5] M. Xia et. al., Greening the optical backbone network:
              A traffic engineering approach, IEEE ICC Proceedings, May
              2010, pp. 1995.

              [6] W. Lu and S. Sahni, Low-power TCAMs for very large
 


Shankar Raman et.al.   Expires September 1, 2012                [Page 9]

INTERNET DRAFT   Building Power Optimal Multicast Trees     Feb 29, 2012


              forwarding tables, IEEE/ACM Transactions on Computer
              Networks, June 2010, vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 948-959.

              [7] B. Zhang, Routing Area Open Meeting, Proceedings of
              the IETF 81, Quebec, Canada, July 2011.

   [EVILBIT]  Bellovin, S., "The Security Flag in the IPv4 Header",
              RFC 3514, April 1 2003.

   [RFC5513]  Farrel, A., "IANA Considerations for Three Letter
              Acronyms", RFC 5513, April 1 2009.

   [RFC5514]  Vyncke, E., "IPv6 over Social Networks", RFC 5514, April 1
              2009.



Authors' Addresses



   Shankar Raman.M.J.
   Department of Computer Science and Engineering
   I.I.T Madras,
   Chennai - 600036
   TamilNadu,
   India.

   EMail: mjsraman@cse.iitm.ac.in



   Balaji Venkat Venkataswami
   Department of Electrical Engineering,
   I.I.T Madras,
   Chennai - 600036,
   TamilNadu,
   India.

   EMail: balajivenkat299@gmail.com



   Prof.Gaurav Raina
   Department of Electrical Engineering,
   I.I.T Madras,
   Chennai - 600036,
   TamilNadu,
 


Shankar Raman et.al.   Expires September 1, 2012               [Page 10]

INTERNET DRAFT   Building Power Optimal Multicast Trees     Feb 29, 2012


   India.

   EMail: gaurav@ee.iitm.ac.in
















































Shankar Raman et.al.   Expires September 1, 2012               [Page 11]
