


SAVI                                                               J. Bi
Internet-Draft                                                    B. Liu
Intended status:  Informational                           Tsinghua Univ.
Expires:  August 2, 2012                                January 30, 2012


             Problem Statement of SAVI Beyond the First Hop
                        draft-bi-savi-problem-01

Abstract

   IETF Source Address Validation Improvements (SAVI) working group is
   chartered for source address validation within the first hop from the
   end hosts, i.e. preventing a node from spoofing the IP source address
   of another node in the same IP link.  For source address validation
   beyond the first hop (SAVI-BF), Ingress Filtering [BCP38]/[BCP84] is
   the best current practice.  However Ingress Filtering may drop
   legitimate packets (false positive) or fail to recognize spoofing
   packets (false negative) in case of asymmetric routing, which is not
   rare under SAVI-BF scenario.

   This document states the possible scenarios in which Ingress
   Filtering may have problems (false positive or false negative), and
   lists five causes of the problems.  These fives causes, we believe,
   are the challeges that need be conquered by SAVI-BF solutions
   (including possible improved version of Ingress Filtering).  We also
   observe that the incentive for Internet Service Providers (ISP) to
   deploy SAVI-BF differs from intra-domain scenario to inter-domain
   scenario, and incenting ISPs to deploy inter-domain SAVI is more
   challenging.  Although not intend to provide any SAVI-BF solution in
   this document, we discuss the philosophy in designing a SAVI-BF
   mechanism.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."




Bi & Liu                 Expires August 2, 2012                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft        SAVI Problem Beyond First Hop         January 2012


   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 2, 2012.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2012 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

   This document may contain material from IETF Documents or IETF
   Contributions published or made publicly available before November
   10, 2008.  The person(s) controlling the copyright in some of this
   material may not have granted the IETF Trust the right to allow
   modifications of such material outside the IETF Standards Process.
   Without obtaining an adequate license from the person(s) controlling
   the copyright in such materials, this document may not be modified
   outside the IETF Standards Process, and derivative works of it may
   not be created outside the IETF Standards Process, except to format
   it for publication as an RFC or to translate it into languages other
   than English.























Bi & Liu                 Expires August 2, 2012                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft        SAVI Problem Beyond First Hop         January 2012


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.  Problems of Ingress Filtering  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     2.1.  Ingress Access Lists . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     2.2.  Strict Reverse Path Forwarding . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     2.3.  Feasible Reverse Path Forwarding . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     2.4.  Loose Reverse Path Forwarding  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     2.5.  Loose Reverse Path Forwarding Ignoring Default Routes  . .  9
   3.  Challenges to SAVI-BF  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     3.1.  Asymmetric Link Metrics  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     3.2.  ECMP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     3.3.  Static Routing and Local Routing Policy  . . . . . . . . . 10
     3.4.  Fast Reroute . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     3.5.  Inter-domain Route Aggregation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   4.  Deployment Incentive . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     4.1.  Intra-Domain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     4.2.  Inter-Domain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   5.  Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     5.1.  Distributing Routing Information or Routing Decisions  . . 13
     5.2.  Distributed or Centralized . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     5.3.  Routing Protocol Dependent or Independent  . . . . . . . . 13
     5.4.  Deployment Incentive or Regulation . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   6.  Acknowledgment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   7.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   8.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   9.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15























Bi & Liu                 Expires August 2, 2012                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft        SAVI Problem Beyond First Hop         January 2012


1.  Introduction

   Ingress Filtering [BCP38]/[BCP84] is now the only practical source
   address validation technique beyond the frist hop from the end hosts.
   According to the report [ARBOR] by ARBOR Networks in 2009, of the 132
   network operators as the survey respondents, only about 35% deployed
   [BCP38] at dedicated customer edge, about 35% deployed it at
   broadband edge, and about 45% deployed it at peering edge.  And the
   measurement by MIT ANA Spoofer project [Spoofer] shows that 31% of
   the test clients were able to successfully spoof an arbitrary,
   routable source address, while 77% of clients otherwise unable to
   spoof could forge an address within their own /24 subnetwork, and no
   mitigation improvement against spoofing over four years of
   measurement.

   The difficulties ISP met in deploying Ingress Filtering implies the
   intrinsic problems of Reverse Path Forwarding (RPF).  Detailed in
   [BCP84], Ingress Filtering has five ways of implementation.  The
   first one is Ingress Access Lists, which are typically manually
   maintained and thus difficult to be practical in dynamic environment.
   Strict Reverse Path Forwarding (Strict RPF) and Feasible Path Reverse
   Path Forwarding (Feasible RPF) take advantage of the Reverse Path
   Forwarding technique, and they share the same flaw with RPF, i.e.
   droping legitimate packets (false positive) under asymmetric routing.
   Loose Reverse Path Forwarding (Loose RPF) and Loose Reverse Path
   Forwarding Ignoring Default Routes (Loose RPF Ignoring Default
   Routes) check the existence of a route instead of where the route
   points to.  These two ways of implementation, of course, have lower
   false positive, but they in a lot of cases cannot recognize spoofing
   packets (false negative) and thus are known as very inefficient.

   The reason of the problems of Ingress Filtering, is the lack of
   routing information, because the behavior of a SAVI-BF solution
   should adhere to the routing system.  If the routing information on
   routers is asynchronous, a router may fail to predict the inbound
   direction of an incoming packet from other routers when the route is
   asymmetric.  We list five causes that result in the routing
   information asynchrony, i.e. asymmetric link metrics, equal-cost
   multi-path (ECMP), static routing and local routing policy, fast
   reroute and inter-domain route aggregation.  These causes, we
   believe, are the challeges that need be conquered by SAVI-BF
   solutions (including possible improved version of Ingress Filtering)
   to make the solutions more extensively practical.

   We also observe that, the incentive for Internet Service Providers
   (ISP) to deploy SAVI-BF differs from intra-domain scenario to inter-
   domain scenario.  In the intra-domain scenario, an ISP may want to
   deploy SAVI-BF for better security, accountability and management.



Bi & Liu                 Expires August 2, 2012                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft        SAVI Problem Beyond First Hop         January 2012


   In the inter-domain scenario, however, an ISP could not filter much
   inbound spoofing traffic unless the degree the autonomous system (AS)
   is high.  And filtering outbound spoofing traffic only protects other
   ISPs (possibly competitors), not protecting itself.  So incenting
   ISPs to deploy inter-domain SAVI-BF is much more challenging, in the
   sense that an ISP is a benefit unit in the Internet.

   This document is organized as follows.  In Section 2, the problems of
   Ingress Filtering are stated.  The challenges to SAVI-BF are
   discussed in Section 3.  Incentives for ISPs to deploy SAVI-BF is
   discussed in Section 4.  Discussion on philosophy of designing a
   SAVI-BF mechanism is provided in Section 5.


2.  Problems of Ingress Filtering

   In this section, we examine each mode of Ingress Filtering, and
   explore possible practical problems.

2.1.  Ingress Access Lists

   Ingress Access Lists are typically maintained manually, and it is
   only applicable where the number of prefix is small and the routing
   is stable over time.  However, when dynamic routing protocols (e.g.
   BGP, OSPF, IS-IS and RIP) are in use, routing will oscillate in case
   of link failure, new link creation or reconfiguration.  Thus Ingress
   Access Lists may filter out valid packets (false positive) or let
   spoofing packets pass (fase negative).

2.2.  Strict Reverse Path Forwarding

   The procedure of Strict RPF is that the source address is looked up
   in the Forwarding Information Base (FIB) - and if the packet is
   received on the interface which would be used to forward the traffic
   to the source of the packet, it passes the check.  Obviously if the
   route is asymmetric, Strict RPF will cause false positive.
   Unfortunately, asymmetric routing is not rare in intra-domain or
   inter-domain routing.  Next, we list five causes of asymmetric
   routing.

   o  Asymmetric Link Metrics:  The metric of a link in the forth
      direction is different to that in the reverse direction.  For
      example, in OSPF, IS-IS and EIGRP, the cost of a link in the
      reverse direction can be assigned a differet value than that in
      the forth direction.  Hence the source and destination nodes may
      see different total cost on the same path.  Therefore they may
      choose different best paths to each other, and then asymmetric
      routing occurs.  In BGP, although the cost of an AS link is always



Bi & Liu                 Expires August 2, 2012                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft        SAVI Problem Beyond First Hop         January 2012


      1, an AS can prepend its AS number in the BGP path multiple times
      (AS-Path Prepending, or ASPP [ASPP]) to tune the "link" cost.
      Thus the cost of a same path is evaluated differently from
      different direction, which causes asymmetry.  RIP, however,
      doesn't allow asymmetric link metrics.  The cost of every link is
      1 (hop).

   o  Equal-Cost Multi-Path (ECMP) [ECMP]:  Even if there is no
      asymmetric link metric, the route can still be asymmetric because
      of the multiple equal-cost best paths.  In this case, the source
      node and the destination node see same cost on every possible
      path, and they both have the same set of best paths toward each
      other, but they may choose different ones to use in the data plane
      (FIB).  Thus the route can still be asymmetric.

   o  Static Routing and Local Routing Policy:  Besides the dynamic
      routing protocols, static routing and policy routing are also in
      use in many situations.  For instance, static routing (default
      route as an extreme example) is often used in the intra-domain
      scenario for the purpose of traffic engineering or management.  In
      the inter-domain scenario, policy routing is a way to implement
      local preference to reflect inter-domain economic relationship.
      And when there are multiple equally-good BGP routes, hot-potato
      routing is often used to select the one with the closest egress
      point based on the intra-domain path cost [Hot-Potato].  In the
      inter-domain routing, where the units are ASes, hot-potato routing
      is a local policy made inside an AS.  Usually, static routing and
      local routing policy are used to select a route that is not a best
      route computed by dynamic routing protocols, or select one route
      from multiple best routes.  Obviously, manipulating routing
      locally may cause routing asymmetry.  Even worse, because static
      routes or local route policies are typically not spread to the
      network with routing protocols, other nodes on the network are not
      able to collect this information or predict it.

   o  Fast Reroute [Fast-Reroute-MPLS]/[Fast-Reroute-Framework]:  Fast
      reroute is a mechanism that provides protection against link or
      router failure by invoking locally determined repair paths.  When
      fast reroute takes into effect, the paths between the source and
      the destination will become asymmetric temporarily.  During this
      time, a valid packet may arrive a router from an unexpected
      direction, and be filtered improperly.

   o  Inter-Domain Route Aggregation [Aggregation]:  Route aggregation
      is often used in inter-domain routing to reduce the size, slows
      the growth, of the Internet routing table, and limit the route
      flaps in number, frequence and scope.  However, route aggregation
      may cause inter-domain path asymmetry.  For example, in the figure



Bi & Liu                 Expires August 2, 2012                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft        SAVI Problem Beyond First Hop         January 2012


      below, we have four ASes S, D, P1 and P2.  Consider that S is a
      multi-homed AS, and its two providers P1 and P2.  S announces a
      prefix 10.0.0.0/22 to both P1 and P2.  P1 aggregats, and announces
      only 10.0.0.0/19 to D. In contrast, P2 announces the original
      prefix 10.0.0.0/22 to D. Thus a piece of FIB of D is shown as the
      table below.  Assuming that S prefers P1 to P2 as the next hop for
      destination D, and hence the AS path for a legitimate packet (s,
      d) would be "S -> P1 -> D".  However, because routers always do
      longest prefix matching, D will select P2 as the next hop toward
      S, i.e. the path for (d, s) would be "D -> P2 -> S".  Then the
      path is asymmetric.


                          D
                         ^ ^
           10.0.0.0/19  /   \  10.0.0.0/22
                       /     \
                      P1     P2
                       ^     ^
           10.0.0.0/22  \   /  10.0.0.0/22
                         \ /
                          S

                        +-------------+----------+
                        |    Prefix   | Next Hop |
                        +-------------+----------+
                        | 10.0.0.0/22 |    P2    |
                        | 10.0.0.0/19 |    P1    |
                        +-------------+----------+

                                 FIB of D

2.3.  Feasible Reverse Path Forwarding

   Feasible RPF extends Strict RPF by inserting alternative routes (if
   any) into FIB, instead of just inserting one best route.  A well-
   known implementation of Feasible RPF is RPF check considering ECMP.
   ECMP installs multiple best routes into FIB.  All the ECMP out-
   interfaces are considered valid as the in-interfaces of the given
   source address prefix.

   Feasible RPF doesn't solve all the problems causing routing asymmetry
   introduced in the "Strict RPF" subsection.  Indeed, Feasible RPF only
   partially solves the "ECMP" problem.  Ideally, Feasible RPF can store
   all ECMPs.  However, in practice, there can be many (tens of) ECMPs
   for a prefix, but the implementation of routers can only store
   several (e.g. 4 or 8) of them.  Then the ECMPs for the prefix
   installed in FIB may be different in different routers, which



Bi & Liu                 Expires August 2, 2012                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft        SAVI Problem Beyond First Hop         January 2012


   eventually causes asymmetric routing and false positive.

2.4.  Loose Reverse Path Forwarding

   Loose RPF is algorithmically similar to strict RPF, but differs in
   that it checks only for the existence of a route.  The obvious
   drawback is that Loose RPF could be very inefficient, because any
   routable source prefix could be accpeted regardless of its incoming
   direction, which results in high false negative.  In a more rigorous
   case, a slightly smarter attacker can use only routable source
   addresses to launch spoofing based attacks, and this can nullify the
   efficacy of Loose RPF completely.  Even without "smarter attack",
   randomly selected source addresses have the probability higher than
   50% to pass Loose RPF, because in the current Internet, more than 50%
   of the address span is routable [BGP-Table].

   There are two variants of Loose RPF, depending on how to deal with
   default route (or 0.0.0.0/0).  The first one treats default route as
   a normal route, so that any source prefix from any direction will be
   accepted with the presence of the default route.  The second variant,
   in contrast, checks the direction of the default route, i.e. any
   source prefix from the direction where the default route points to is
   accepted, and the source prefixes coming from other directions are
   checked against the remaining FIB (FIB without default route).

   With the presence of default route, the first variant won't filter
   any source prefix, and thus doesn't have false positive.  However,
   for the second variant, we reveal the scenario where it can cause
   false positive with the presence of default route.  In the figure
   below, router S and D take advantage of static routing.  The FIB of S
   and D is shown below.  In this case, a packet (s, d) will be
   delivered via the path (S -> R2 -> D).  However, according to the FIB
   of D, this packet is supposed to come from R1 if Loose RPF (second
   variant) is used by D. So this asymmetric path causes false positive.

                          S      10.0.0.0/16
                         / \
                        /   \
         10.1.0.0/16  R1     R2  10.2.0.0/16
                        \   /
                         \ /
                          D      10.3.0.0/16









Bi & Liu                 Expires August 2, 2012                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft        SAVI Problem Beyond First Hop         January 2012


                        +-------------+----------+
                        |    Prefix   | Next Hop |
                        +-------------+----------+
                        | 10.0.0.0/16 |   local  |
                        | 10.1.0.0/16 |    R1    |
                        |  0.0.0.0/0  |    R2    |
                        +-------------+----------+

                                 FIB of S

                        +-------------+----------+
                        |    Prefix   | Next Hop |
                        +-------------+----------+
                        | 10.3.0.0/16 |   local  |
                        | 10.2.0.0/16 |    R2    |
                        |  0.0.0.0/0  |    R1    |
                        +-------------+----------+

                                 FIB of D

2.5.  Loose Reverse Path Forwarding Ignoring Default Routes

   The Loose RPF Ignoring Default Routes is similar to Loose RPF except
   that the default route is excluded, i.e. the source prefixes matching
   (in terms of longest prefix matching) the default route will be
   discarded.  Therefore, the technique is mostly usable in scenarios
   where default routes are used only to catch traffic with bogus source
   addresses, with an extensive (or even full) list of explicit routes
   to cover legitimate traffic.  If applied in other scenarios, this
   technique will cause false positive because of the routing asymmetry.


3.  Challenges to SAVI-BF

   The reason of the problems of Ingress Filtering is routing
   information asynchrony, so that it fails to predict the inbound
   direction of an incoming packet if the route if asymmetric.  In the
   last section, we listed five causes of routing information
   asynchrony, i.e. asymmetric link metrics, ECMP, static routing and
   local routing policy, fast reroute, and inter-domain route
   aggregation.  We discuss them in greater detail in this section,
   because we believe these are the challenges that need to be conquered
   by the SAVI-BF solutions.

3.1.  Asymmetric Link Metrics

   Some routing protocols, like BGP, EIGRP, OSPF and IS-IS, allow
   asymmetric link metrics, which finally cause routing asymmetry.



Bi & Liu                 Expires August 2, 2012                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft        SAVI Problem Beyond First Hop         January 2012


   However, we observe that, using a link-state routing protocol (OSPF,
   IS-IS), a router has sufficient information to learn the asymmetric
   link metrics.  To utilizing this information, a router should build a
   reverse forwarding tree (RFT) using the reverse link metrics, instead
   of using the forward link metrics like RPF doing so.  However, for a
   distance-vecter routing protocol (RIP, EIGRP, BGP), the reverse link
   metrics are not available to all nodes, so they couldn't build RFT
   correctly.

3.2.  ECMP

   There could be multiple equally good paths (ECMPs) from the source to
   the destination.  Source may choose one of them randomly or by some
   means that the destination doesn't know.  So the destination has to
   maintain the multipul equally good paths (if it is able to know them)
   as valid incoming directions.  Although Feasible RPF is designed to
   solve this issue, in practice hardward capacity is usually
   insufficient to hold all the ECMP entries.  Last but not least, this
   issue is solved only if the source and the destination see a same set
   of best paths; otherwise it is useless for the destination to hold
   the ECMPs that are different from those held by the source.

3.3.  Static Routing and Local Routing Policy

   Static routing is often used to configure a default route, select a
   route from ECMPs, or implement traffic engineering.  Local routing
   policy is typically implemented with policy routing.  It is often
   used in inter-domain routing as a method to implement local
   preference and reflect the AS economic relationship.  The problem
   with static routing and local routing policy is that, they are not
   propogated to other nodes in the network.  And in some cases, this
   information, like the AS economic relationship, should not be
   disclosed.  So it may not be practical to get it in some scenarios.

3.4.  Fast Reroute

   Fast reroute is used to protect against link or router failure.  On
   link or router failure, the router immediately switch the exit of the
   packets to another locally computed next hop.  Fast reroute challeges
   SAVI-BF in two dimensions.  First, the backup route is computed
   locally without propogated to the network.  Second, the time to
   switch to the backup route is very short, and the other routers
   couldn't react that fast.  So some packets may be dropped since they
   suddenly arrive from an unexpected direction, which offsets the
   effect of fast reroute.






Bi & Liu                 Expires August 2, 2012                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft        SAVI Problem Beyond First Hop         January 2012


3.5.  Inter-domain Route Aggregation

   Although inter-domain route aggregation has a lot benefits, it is not
   worthwhile for a provider to aggregate the prefixes of its customers.
   Because if the customers are multi-homed, the inbound traffic will be
   attracted by the other providers.  Besides this economic concern, the
   provider should reserve the orgin AS for the prefix in the BGP
   advertisement.  That is to say, we suggest inter-domain route
   aggregation not be implemented, especially when it may cause troubles
   to SAVI-BF.


4.  Deployment Incentive

   In the previous sections, we have discussed the technical problems
   and challenges of SAVI-BF.  However, in practice, technical barrier
   is not the only barrier that suppresses the deployment of SAVI-BF.
   Another barrier is the economic incentive, i.e. how can an ISP
   promote its bussiness or make more money by deploying SAVI-BF.  For
   example, if a SAVI-BF mechanism costs too much but cannot improve an
   ISP's business, the ISP won't deploy it even if it is technically
   practical.  Hence, depolyment incentive is also an important concern
   when designing a SAVI-BF mechanism.  In this section, we discuss the
   deployment incentive for ISPs in the intra-domain scenario and inter-
   domain scenario respectively.

4.1.  Intra-Domain

   In the intra-domain scenario, an ISP may want to deploy SAVI-BF for
   better security, accountability and manageability.  Most of the
   benefit, or outcome from deploying the intra-domain SAVI-BF is gained
   by the ISP itself.  So an intra-domain SAVI-BF is deployable if it is
   technically practical, and secuirty, accountability and manageability
   are important concerns to the ISP.

4.2.  Inter-Domain

   In the context of the inter-domain scenario, SAVI-BF is implemented
   in the AS border routers (ASBR) to filter spoofing packets before
   their leaving or entering the AS.  In this scenario, accountability
   and manageability are not the top concern of the ISPs, and the top
   concern is security, i.e. reducing the inbound spoofing packets.

   First, we define the "benefit" of an AS as the reduction of its
   inbound spoofing packets.  For instance, assume that the amount of
   global spoofing packets targeting AS T is t, and a portion of the
   spoofing packets is filtered because some other ASes have deployed
   some inter-domain SAVI-BF (e.g.  RPF), then the amount of T's



Bi & Liu                 Expires August 2, 2012                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft        SAVI Problem Beyond First Hop         January 2012


   received inbound spoofing packets is r.  We define the benefit of T
   as (t-r)/t, i.e. the reduction of T's received inbound spoofing
   packets.

   Then we define "incentive" of T as the additional benefit if T also
   deploys the inter-domain SAVI-BF.  More precisely, denoting T's
   benefit before T deploys the inter-domain SAVI-BF as ben(T, D), where
   D is the set of ASes who have already deployed the SAVI-BF, and T's
   benefit after T's deployment as ben(T, D+T), then T's incentive is
   formulated as inc(T, D) = ben(T, D+T) - ben(T, D).

   This definition of incentive emphasizes two properties.  First, an
   inter-domain SAVI-BF should protect the deployers, in term of
   reducing the deployers' received spoofing packets.  Second, the
   SAVI-BF should prevent "free-ride", i.e. the late deployers should
   gain enough additional benefit; otherwise they just enjoy the "free-
   ride" and won't deploy by itself.

   We observe that the ISPs always want to maximize their own profits,
   not the public welfare.  If an ISP already benefits a lot from other
   ISPs' deployment, and it can only get very trivial additional benefit
   by its own deployment, then perhaps this ISP won't deploy it.  Take
   RPF for example.  All ASes who have already deployed RPF try to
   filter out all the spoofing packets that they can detect, not only
   those spoofing packets targeting themselves.  RPF, instead of
   maximizing the deployers' benefit, tries to maximize the public
   welfare.  The drawback of it is that if a portion of ASes have
   deployed RPF, other ASes can get a "free-ride" and may not want to
   deploy by themselves because the additional benefit is low.  Research
   [Spoofer] shows that the deployment progress of RPF is slower than
   the growth of the Internet.  The lack of deployment incentive may be
   the essential reason.

   However maximizing deployment incentive does not necessarily mean
   sacrificing the public welfare.  Research [DIA] shows that high
   incentive can motivates more ASes to deploy, and with more deployment
   the public welfare gets higher.  So we claim that maximizing
   deployment incentive is a key issue in the designing of inter-domian
   SAVI-BF.


5.  Discussion

   In this section, we discuss the philosophy on designing a SAVI-BF
   mechanism.






Bi & Liu                 Expires August 2, 2012                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft        SAVI Problem Beyond First Hop         January 2012


5.1.  Distributing Routing Information or Routing Decisions

   In the previous sections, we presented the challenges to SAVI-BF.
   Although better utilizing the routing information in link-state
   routing protocols can solve the "asymmetric link metrics" issue, it
   cannot solve the other four issues.  That is because some routing
   decisions are made locally and not propogated to the network, and
   other routers cannot predict the routing decisions.

   Rather than distributing all the routing information (including the
   local routing policy) and let the other routers to compute and
   "guess" the routing decisions of each router, another methodology is
   to directly distribute the routing decisions, i.e.  FIB, to the
   network, so that other routers can straightforward generate the
   routing graph of the network.

   We also observe that in some scenarios, like inter-domain routing,
   the routing decision, which reflects the economic relationship,
   should not be disclosed.  In this case, we should respect the ISP's
   privacy and put SAVI-BF in the second place.

5.2.  Distributed or Centralized

   Whether a SAVI-BF mechanism should be ditributed or centralized
   depends on the application environment.  A centralized mechanism may
   be suitable to a small scale intra-domain environment.  In the inter-
   domain scenario, a distributed mechanism is perferred because of
   there is not a natural center in the inter-domain system.

   Ingress Filtering is an example of distributed mechanism, where all
   ASes or routers enforce source address validation in a distributed
   way without a center to control them.  In a small scale intra-domain
   environment, however, a central server can be used to collecing
   routing decisions (FIBs) of all the routers, compute the filtering
   tables and load them to the routers.  In this way, the routers don't
   need to collecting the routing information or compute the reverse
   paths.  All they need is running Simple Network Management Protocol
   (SNMP) and available Access Control Lists (ACL).

5.3.  Routing Protocol Dependent or Independent

   In the previous section, we show that better utilizing routing
   protocol information can improve SAVI-BF in link-state routing
   protocols, but not in distance-vector routing protocols.  So the
   utility of this method is routing protocol dependent.  In contrast,
   the method proposed in the last subsecion (i.e. using a central
   server to collect FIBs, generate ACLs and download ACLs to routers)
   is routing protocol independent.  The risks of routing protocol



Bi & Liu                 Expires August 2, 2012                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft        SAVI Problem Beyond First Hop         January 2012


   dependent method are two fold.  First, if the routing information is
   incomplete, the method fails.  Second, if the routing protocol
   evolves or upgrades, the method may need to upgrade as well.

   Another question about routing protocol is that whether to update or
   extend the rouing prototols to help with SAVI-BF.  Well, updating
   routing protocols is out of the scope of SAVI WG.  However, designing
   a new routing protocol may consider SAVI-BF issues.

5.4.  Deployment Incentive or Regulation

   The lesson from the deployment of RPF shows that providing incentive
   to ISPs to deploy SAVI-BF could be very challenging.  "Free-riders"
   may not deploy.  ISPs that don't have DDoS threats may not deploy.
   And the methods that cost too much won't get deployed.  Another
   methodology is to regulate the industry.  Let the government or the
   industrial association to make SAVI-BF a "must".


6.  Acknowledgment

   The authors would like to thank Fred Baker for his review, comments,
   and suggestions on anti-spoofing with SPF-based protocols.  We also
   thank Joel M. Halper for his comments on fast reroute.

   This document was generated using the xml2rfc tool.


7.  IANA Considerations

   This memo asks the IANA for no new parameters.

   Note to RFC Editor:  This section will have served its purpose if it
   correctly tells IANA that no new assignments or registries are
   required, or if those assignments or registries are created during
   the RFC publication process.  From the authors' perspective, it may
   therefore be removed upon publication as an RFC at the RFC Editor's
   discretion.


8.  Security Considerations


9.  Informative References

   [ARBOR]    McPherson, D., Dobbins, R., Hollyman, M., Labovitz, C.,
              and J. Nazario, "Network Infrastructure Security Report",
              February 2009.



Bi & Liu                 Expires August 2, 2012                [Page 14]

Internet-Draft        SAVI Problem Beyond First Hop         January 2012


   [ASPP]     Chang, R. and M. Lo, "Inbound traffic engineering for
              multihomed ASs using AS path prepending", March 2005.

   [Aggregation]
              Chen, E. and J. Stewart, "A Framework for Inter-Domain
              Route Aggregation", RFC 2519, February 1999.

   [BCP38]    Paul, P. and D. Senie, "Network Ingress Filtering:
              Defeating Denial of Service Attacks which employ IP Source
              Address Spoofing", RFC 2827, BCP 38, May 2000.

   [BCP84]    Baker, F. and P. Savola, "Ingress Filtering for Multihomed
              Networks", RFC 3704, BCP 84, March 2004.

   [BGP-Table]
              Huston, G., "AS6447 BGP Routing Table Analysis Report",
              November 2011.

   [DIA]      Liu, B., Bi, J., and Y. Zhu, "A Deployable Approach for
              Inter-AS Anti-spoofing", October 2011.

   [ECMP]     Thaler, D. and C. Hopps, "Multipath Issues in Unicast and
              Multicast Next-Hop Selection", RFC 2991, November 2000.

   [Fast-Reroute-Framework]
              Shand, M. and S. Bryant, "IP Fast Reroute Framework",
              RFC 5714, January 2010.

   [Fast-Reroute-MPLS]
              Pan, P., Swallow, G., and A. Atlas, "Fast Reroute
              Extensions to RSVP-TE for LSP Tunnels", RFC 4090,
              May 2005.

   [Hot-Potato]
              Teixeira, R., Shaikh, A., Griffin, T., and J. Rexford,
              "Dynamics of Hot-Potato Routing in IP Networks",
              June 2004.

   [Spoofer]  Beverly, R., Berger, A., Hyun, Y., and k. claffy,
              "Understanding the Efficacy of Deployed Internet Source
              Address Validation Filtering", August 2009.










Bi & Liu                 Expires August 2, 2012                [Page 15]

Internet-Draft        SAVI Problem Beyond First Hop         January 2012


Authors' Addresses

   Jun Bi
   Tsinghua University
   Network Research Center, Tsinghua University
   Beijing  100084
   China

   Email:  junbi@tsinghua.edu.cn


   Bingyang Liu
   Tsinghua University
   Computer Science, Tsinghua University
   Beijing  100084
   China

   Email:  liuby@netarchlab.tsinghua.edu.cn

































Bi & Liu                 Expires August 2, 2012                [Page 16]

