


Benchmarking Working Group                                    R. Papneja
Internet-Draft                                       Huawei Technologies
Intended status: Standards Track                               B. Parise
Expires: April 22, 2012                                    Cisco Systems
                                                                S. Hares
                                                     Huawei Technologies
                                                           I. Varlashkin
                                                 Easynet Global Services
                                                        October 20, 2011


     Basic BGP Convergence Benchmarking Methodology for Data Plane
                              Convergence
             draft-papneja-bgp-basic-dp-convergence-02.txt

Abstract

   BGP is widely deployed and used by several service providers as the
   default Inter AS routing protocol.  It is of utmost importance to
   ensure that when a BGP peer or a downstream link of a BGP peer fails,
   the alternate paths are rapidly used and routes via these alternate
   paths are installed.  This document provides the basic BGP
   Benchmarking Methodology using existing BGP Convergence Terminology,
   RFC 4098.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 22, 2012.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal



Papneja, et al.          Expires April 22, 2012                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft   draft-papneja-bgp-basic-dp-convergence     October 2011


   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

   This document may contain material from IETF Documents or IETF
   Contributions published or made publicly available before November
   10, 2008.  The person(s) controlling the copyright in some of this
   material may not have granted the IETF Trust the right to allow
   modifications of such material outside the IETF Standards Process.
   Without obtaining an adequate license from the person(s) controlling
   the copyright in such materials, this document may not be modified
   outside the IETF Standards Process, and derivative works of it may
   not be created outside the IETF Standards Process, except to format
   it for publication as an RFC or to translate it into languages other
   than English.































Papneja, et al.          Expires April 22, 2012                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft   draft-papneja-bgp-basic-dp-convergence     October 2011


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     1.1.  Precise Benchmarking Definition  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     1.2.  Purpose of BGP FIB (Data Plane) Convergence  . . . . . . .  5
     1.3.  Control Plane Convergence  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     1.4.  Benchmarking Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   2.  Existing Definitions and Requirements  . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   3.  Test Topologies  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.1.  General Reference Topologies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   4.  Test Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     4.1.  Number of Peers  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     4.2.  Number of Routes per Peer  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     4.3.  Policy Processing/Reconfiguration  . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     4.4.  Configured Parameters (Timers, etc..)  . . . . . . . . . .  9
     4.5.  Interface Types  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     4.6.  Measurement Accuracy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     4.7.  Measurement Statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     4.8.  Authentication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     4.9.  Convergence Events . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     4.10. High Availability  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   5.  Test Cases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     5.1.  Basic Convergence Tests  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
       5.1.1.  RIB-IN Convergence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
       5.1.2.  RIB-OUT Convergence  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
       5.1.3.  eBGP Convergence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
       5.1.4.  iBGP Convergence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
       5.1.5.  eBGP Multihop Convergence  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
     5.2.  BGP Failure/Convergence Events . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
       5.2.1.  Physical Link Failure on DUT End . . . . . . . . . . . 17
       5.2.2.  Physical Link Failure on Remote/Emulator End . . . . . 18
       5.2.3.  ECMP Link Failure on DUT End . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
     5.3.  BGP Adjacency Failure (Non-Physical Link Failure) on
           Emulator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
     5.4.  BGP Hard Reset Test Cases  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
       5.4.1.  BGP Non-Recovering Hard Reset Event on DUT . . . . . . 20
     5.5.  BGP Soft Reset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
     5.6.  BGP Route Withdrawal Convergence Time  . . . . . . . . . . 22
     5.7.  BGP Path Attribute Change Convergence Time . . . . . . . . 24
     5.8.  BGP Graceful Restart Convergence Time  . . . . . . . . . . 26
   6.  Reporting Format . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
   7.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
   8.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
   9.  Acknowledgments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
   10. References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
     10.1. Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
     10.2. Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31



Papneja, et al.          Expires April 22, 2012                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft   draft-papneja-bgp-basic-dp-convergence     October 2011


1.  Introduction

   This document defines the methodology for benchmarking data plane FIB
   convergence performance of BGP in router and switches for simple
   topologies of 3 or 4 nodes.  The methodology proposed in this
   document applies to both IPv4 and IPv6 and if a particular test is
   unique to one version, it is marked accordingly.  For IPv6
   benchmarking the device under test will require the support of Multi-
   Protocol BGP (MP-BGP) [RFC4760, RFC2545].

   The scope of this companion document is limited to basic BGP protocol
   FIB convergence measurements.  BGP extensions outside of carrying
   IPv6 in (MP-BGP) [RFC4760, RFC2545] are outside the scope of this
   document.  Interaction with IGPs (IGP interworking) is outside the
   scope of this document.

   This document makes assumption that ability of a router to forward
   packets implies that BGP has converged.  Some modern routers may have
   an optimisation which results in forwarding ability is restored
   before BGP converges.  Such optimisation MUST be disabled before
   applying benchmarking methodology described here.  If that is not
   possible or if it's not known whether or not router has such
   optimisation alternative approach described in
   [draft-varlashkin-router-conv-bench] should be used instead.

1.1.  Precise Benchmarking Definition

   Since benchmarking is science of precision, let us restate the
   purpose of this document in benchmarking terms.  This document
   defines methodology to test

   - data plane convergence on a single BGP device that supports the BGP
   [RFC4271] functionality

   - in test topology of 3 or 4 nodes

   - using Basic BGP

   Data plane convergence is defined as the completion of all FIB
   changes so that all forwarded traffic now takes the new proposed
   route.  RFC 4098 defines the terms BGP device, FIB and the forwarded
   traffic.  Data plane convergence is different than control plane
   convergence within a node.

   Basic BGP is defined as RFC 4271 functional with Multi-Protocol BGP
   (MP-BGP) [RFC4760, RFC2545] for IPv6.  The use of other extensions of
   BGP to support layer-2, layer-3 virtual private networks (VPN) are
   out of scope of this document.



Papneja, et al.          Expires April 22, 2012                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft   draft-papneja-bgp-basic-dp-convergence     October 2011


   The terminology used in this document is defined in [RFC4098].  One
   additional term is defined in this draft: FIB (Data plane) BGP
   Convergence.

1.2.  Purpose of BGP FIB (Data Plane) Convergence

   In the current Internet architecture the Inter-Autonomous System
   (inter-AS) transit is primarily available through BGP.  To maintain a
   reliable connectivity within intra-domains or across inter-domains,
   fast recovery from failures remains most critical.  To ensure minimal
   traffic losses, many service providers are requiring BGP
   implementations to converge the entire Internet routing table within
   sub-seconds at FIB level.

   Furthermore, to compare these numbers amongst various devices,
   service providers are also looking at ways to standardize the
   convergence measurement methods.  This document offers test methods
   for simple topologies.  These simple tests will provide a quick high-
   level check, of the BGP data plane convergence across multiple
   implementations.

1.3.  Control Plane Convergence

   The convergence of BGP occurs at two levels: RIB and FIB convergence.
   RFC 4098 defines terms for BGP control plane convergence.
   Methodologies which test control plane convergence are out of scope
   for this draft.

1.4.  Benchmarking Testing

   In order to ensure that the results obtained in tests are repeatable,
   careful setup of initial conditions and exact steps are required.

   This document proposes these initial conditions, test steps, and
   result checking.  To ensure uniformity of the results all optional
   parameters SHOULD be disabled and all settings SHOULD be changed to
   default, these may include BGP timers as well.


2.  Existing Definitions and Requirements

   RFC 1242, "Benchmarking Terminology for Network Interconnect Devices"
   [RFC1242] and RFC 2285, "Benchmarking Terminology for LAN Switching
   Devices" [RFC2285] SHOULD be reviewed in conjunction with this
   document.  WLAN-specific terms and definitions are also provided in
   Clauses 3 and 4 of the IEEE 802.11 standard [802.11].  Commonly used
   terms may also be found in RFC 1983 [RFC1983].




Papneja, et al.          Expires April 22, 2012                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft   draft-papneja-bgp-basic-dp-convergence     October 2011


   For the sake of clarity and continuity, this document adopts the
   general template for benchmarking terminology set out in Section 2 of
   RFC 1242.  Definitions are organized in alphabetical order, and
   grouped into sections for ease of reference.  The following terms are
   assumed to be taken as defined in RFC 1242 [RFC1242]: Throughput,
   Latency, Constant Load, Frame Loss Rate, and Overhead Behavior.  In
   addition, the following terms are taken as defined in [RFC2285]:
   Forwarding Rates, Maximum Forwarding Rate, Loads, Device Under Test
   (DUT), and System Under Test (SUT).

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].


3.  Test Topologies

   This section describes simple test setups for use in BGP benchmarking
   tests measuring convergence of the FIB (data plane) after the BGP
   updates has been received.

   These simple test nodes have 3 or 4 nodes with the following
   configuration:

   1.  Basic Test Setup

   2.  Three node setup for iBGP or eBGP convergence

   3.  Setup for eBGP multihop test scenario

   4.  Four node setup for iBGP or eBGP convergence

   Individual tests refer to these topologies.

   Figures 1-4 use the following conventions

   o  AS-X: Autonomous System X

   o  Loopback Int: Loopback interface on the BGP enabled device

   o  R2: Helper router

3.1.  General Reference Topologies

   Emulator acts as 1 or more BGP peers for different testcases.






Papneja, et al.          Expires April 22, 2012                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft   draft-papneja-bgp-basic-dp-convergence     October 2011


           +----------+                             +------------+
           |          |   traffic interfaces        |            |
           |          |-----------------------1---- | tx         |
           |          |-----------------------2---- | tr1        |
           |          |-----------------------3-----| tr2        |
           |    DUT   |    routing interfaces       | Emulator   |
           |          |                             |            |
           |      Drr1|---------------------------  |Err1        |
           |          |      BGP Peering            |            |
           |      Drr2|---------------------------- |Err2        |
           |          |      BGP Peering            |            |
           +----------+                             +------------+




                         Figure 1 Basic Test Setup



           +------------+        +-----------+           +-----------+
           |            |        |           |           |           |
           |            |        |           |           |           |
           |   HLP      |        |  DUT      |           | Emulator  |
           |  (AS-X)    |--------| (AS-Y)    |-----------|  (AS-Z)   |
           |            |        |           |           |           |
           |            |        |           |           |           |
           |            |        |           |           |           |
           +------------+        +-----------+           +-----------+



          Figure 2 Three Node Setup for eBGP and iBGP Convergence



           +------------+        +-----------+           +-----------+
           |            |        |           |           |           |
           |            |        |           |           |           |
           |    R1      |        |  DUT      |           | Emulator  |
           |  (AS-X)    |--------| (AS-Y)    |-----------|  (AS-Z)   |
           |            |        |           |           |           |
           |            |        |           |           |           |
           |            |        |           |           |           |
           +------------+        +-----------+           +-----------+
                |Loopback-Int         |Loopback-Int
                |                     |
                +                     +



Papneja, et al.          Expires April 22, 2012                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft   draft-papneja-bgp-basic-dp-convergence     October 2011


            Figure 3  BGP Convergence for eBGP Multihop Scenario



           +---------+     +--------+     +--------+     +---------+
           |         |     |        |     |        |     |         |
           |         |     |        |     |        |     |         |
           |    R1   |     |  DUT2  |     |  DUT1  |     |Emulator |
           | (AS-X)  |-----| (AS-X) |-----| (AS-Y) |-----| (AS-Z)  |
           |         |     |        |     |        |     |         |
           |         |     |        |     |        |     |         |
           |         |     |        |     |        |     |         |
           +---------+     +--------+     +--------+     +---------+




          Figure 4  Four Node Setup for EBGP and IBGP Convergence


4.  Test Considerations

   The test cases for measuring convergence for iBGP and eBGP are
   different.  Both iBGP and eBGP use different mechanisms to advertise,
   install and learn the routes.  Typically, an iBGP route on the DUT is
   installed and exported only when the next-hop is reachable.  For eBGP
   the route is installed on the DUT with the remote interface address
   as the next-hop with the exception of the multihop case.

4.1.  Number of Peers

   Number of Peers is defined as the number of BGP neighbors or sessions
   the DUT has at the beginning of the test.  The peers are established
   before the tests begin.  The relationship could be either, iBGP or
   eBGP peering depending upon the test case requirement.

   The DUT establishes one or more BGP sessions with one more emulated
   routers or helper nodes.  Additional peers can be added based on the
   testing requirements.  The number of peers enabled during the testing
   should be well documented in the report matrix.

4.2.  Number of Routes per Peer

   It Number of Routes per Peer is defined as the number of routes
   advertized or learnt by the DUT per session or through neighbor
   relationship with an emulator or helper node.  The tester, emulating
   as neighbor MUST advertise at least one route per peer.




Papneja, et al.          Expires April 22, 2012                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft   draft-papneja-bgp-basic-dp-convergence     October 2011


   Each test must run must identify the route stream in terms of route
   packing, route mixture, and number of routes.  This route stream must
   be well documented in the reporting stream.  RFC 4098 defines these
   terms.

   It is RECOMMENDED that the user may consider advertizing the entire
   current Internet routing table per peering session using an Internet
   route mixture with unique or non-unique routes.  If multiple peers
   are used, it is important to precisely document the timing sequence
   between the peer sending routes (as defined in RFC 4098).

4.3.  Policy Processing/Reconfiguration

   The DUT MUST run one baseline test where policy is Minimum policy as
   defined in RFC 4098.  Additional runs may be done with policy set-up
   before the tests begin.  Exact policy settings should be documented
   as part of the test.

4.4.  Configured Parameters (Timers, etc..)

   There are configured parameters and timers that may impact the
   measured BGP convergence times.

   The benchmark metrics MAY be measured at any fixed values for these
   configured parameters.

   It is RECOMMENDED these configure parameters have two settings: a)
   basic-test, and b)values as expected in the operational network.  All
   optional BGP settings MUST be kept consistent across iterations of
   any specific tests

   Examples of the configured parameters that may impact measured BGP
   convergence time include, but are not limited to:



         1.  Interface failure detection timer

         2.  BGP Keepalive timer

         3.  BGP Holdtime

         4.  BGP update delay timer

         5.  ConnectRetry timer

         6.  TCP Segment Size




Papneja, et al.          Expires April 22, 2012                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft   draft-papneja-bgp-basic-dp-convergence     October 2011


         7.  Minimum Route Advertisement Interval (MRAI)

         8.  MinASOriginationInterval (MAOI)

         9.  Route Flap Dampening parameters

         10.  TCP MD5

   The basic-test settings for the parameters should be:



         1.  Interface failure detection timer (0 ms)

         2.  BGP Keepalive timer (1 min)

         3.  BGP Holdtime (3 min)

         4.  BGP update delay timer (0 s)

         5.  ConnectRetry timer (1 s)

         6.  TCP Segment Size (4096)

         7.  Minimum Route Advertisement Interval (MRAI) (0 s)

         8.  MinASOriginationInterval (MAOI)(0 s)

         9.  Route Flap Dampening parameters (off)

         10.  TCP MD5 (off)

4.5.  Interface Types

   The type of media dictate which test cases may be executed, each
   interface type has unique mechanism for detecting link failures and
   the speed at which that mechanism operates will influence the
   measurement results.  All interfaces MUST be of the same media and
   throughput for each test case.

4.6.  Measurement Accuracy

   Since observed packet loss is used to measure the route convergence
   time, the time between two successive packets offered to each
   individual route is the highest possible accuracy of any packet-loss
   based measurement.  When packet jitter is much less than the
   convergence time, it is a negligible source of error and hence it
   will be treated as within tolerance.



Papneja, et al.          Expires April 22, 2012                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft   draft-papneja-bgp-basic-dp-convergence     October 2011


   An exterior measurement on the input media (such Ethernet)is defined
   by this specification.

4.7.  Measurement Statistics

   The benchmark measurements may vary for each trial, due to the
   statistical nature of timer expirations, CPU scheduling, etc.  It is
   recommended to repeat the test multiple times.  Evaluation of the
   test data must be done with an understanding of generally accepted
   testing practices regarding repeatability, variance and statistical
   significance of a small number of trials.

   For any repeated tests that are averaged to remove variance, all
   parameters MUST remain the same.

4.8.  Authentication

   Authentication in BGP is done using the TCP MD5 Signature Option
   [RFC5925].  The processing of the MD5 hash, particularly in devices
   with a large number of BGP peers and a large amount of update
   traffic, can have an impact on the control plane of the device.  If
   authentication is enabled, it SHOULD be documented correctly in the
   reporting format

4.9.  Convergence Events

   Convergence events or triggers are defined as abnormal occurrences in
   the network, which initiate route flapping in the network, and hence
   forces the re-convergence of a steady state network.  In a real
   network, a series of convergence events may cause convergence latency
   operators desire to test.

   These convergence events must be defined in terms of the sequences
   defined in RFC 4098.  This basic document begins all tests with a
   router initial set-up.  Additional documents will define BGP data
   plane convergence based on peer initialization.

   The convergence events may or may not be tied to the actual failure A
   Soft Reset (RFC 4098) does not clear the RIB or FIB tables.  A Hard
   reset clears the BGP peer sessions, the RIB tables, and FIB tables.

4.10.  High Availability

   Due to the different Non-Stop-Routing (sometimes referred to High-
   Availability) solutions available from different vendors, it is
   RECOMMENDED that any redundancy available in the routing processors
   should be disabled during the convergence measurements.




Papneja, et al.          Expires April 22, 2012                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft   draft-papneja-bgp-basic-dp-convergence     October 2011


5.  Test Cases

   All tests defined under this section assume the following:

   a.  BGP peers should be brought to BGP Peer established state

   b.  Furthermore the traffic generation and routing should be verified
       in the topology

5.1.  Basic Convergence Tests

   These test cases measure characteristics of a BGP implementation in
   non-failure scenarios like:



      1.  RIB-IN Convergence

      2.  RIB-OUT Convergence

      3.  eBGP Convergence

      4.  iBGP Convergence



5.1.1.  RIB-IN Convergence

   Objective:

      This test measures the convergence time taken to receive and
      install a route in RIB using BGP

   Reference Test Setup:

      This test uses the setup as shown in figure 1

   Procedure:



      A.  All variables affecting Convergence should be set to a basic
          test state (as defined in section 4-4).

      B.  Establish BGP adjacency between DUT and peer x of Emulator.

      C.  To ensure adjacency establishment, wait for 3 KeepAlives from
          the DUT or a configurable delay before proceeding with the



Papneja, et al.          Expires April 22, 2012                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft   draft-papneja-bgp-basic-dp-convergence     October 2011


          rest of the test.

      D.  Start the traffic from the Emulator peer-x towards the DUT
          targeted at a routes specified in route mixture (ex. route A)
          Initially no traffic SHOULD be observed on the egress
          interface as the route A is not installed in the forwarding
          database of the DUT.

      E.  Advertise route A from the Peer-x to the DUT and record the
          time.

             This is Tup(EMx,Rt-A) also named 'XMT-Rt-time'.

      F.  Record the time when the route-A from Peer-x is received at
          the DUT.

             This Tup(DUT,Rt-A) also named 'RCV-Rt-time'.

      G.  Record the time when the traffic targeted towards route A is
          received by Emulator on appropriate traffic egress interface.

             This is TR(TDx,Rt-A).  This is also named DUT-XMT-Data-
             Time.

      H.  The difference between the Tup(TDx,RT-A) and traffic received
          time (TR (TDr, Rt-A) is the FIB Convergence Time for route-A
          in the route mixture.A full convergence for the route update
          is the measurement between the 1st route (Route-A) and the
          last route (Rt-last)

             Route update convergence is

             TR(TDr, RT-last)- Tup(DUT, Rt-A) or

             (DUT-XMT-Data-Time - RCV-Rt-Time)(rt-A)

   Note: It is recommended that a single test with the same route
   mixture be repeated several times.  A report should provide the Stand
   Deviation of all tests and the Average.

   Running tests with a varying number of routes and route mixtures is
   important to get a full characterization of a single peer.

5.1.2.  RIB-OUT Convergence

   Objective:





Papneja, et al.          Expires April 22, 2012                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft   draft-papneja-bgp-basic-dp-convergence     October 2011


      This test measures the convergence time taken by an implementation
      to receive, install and advertise a route using BGP

   Reference Test Setup:

      This test uses the setup as shown in figure 2

   Procedure:



      A.  The Helper node (HLP) run same version of BGP as DUT.

      B.  All devices MUST be synchronized using NTP or some local
          reference clock.

      C.  All configuration variables for HLP, DUT, and Emulator SHOULD
          be set to the same values.  These values MAY be basic-test or
          a unique set completely described in the test set-up.

      D.  Establish BGP adjacency between DUT and Emulator.

      E.  Establish BGP adjacency between DUT and Helper Node.

      F.  To ensure adjacency establishment, wait for 3 KeepAlives from
          the DUT or a configurable delay before proceeding with the
          rest of the test

      G.  Start the traffic from the Emulator towards the Helper Node
          targeted at a specific route say route A. Initially no traffic
          SHOULD be observed on the egress interface as the route-A is
          not installed in the forwarding database of the DUT.

      H.  Advertise routeA from the Emulator to the DUT and note the
          time.

             This is Tup(EMx, Route-A). (also named EM-XMT-Rt-Time

      I.  Record when Route-A is received by DUT.

             This is Tup(DUTr, Route-A). (also named DUT-RCV-Rt-Time)

      J.  Record the time when the ROUTE forward by DUT toward the
          Helper node.

             This is Tup(DUTx, Rt-A). (also named DUT-XMT-Rt-Time)





Papneja, et al.          Expires April 22, 2012                [Page 14]

Internet-Draft   draft-papneja-bgp-basic-dp-convergence     October 2011


      K.  Record the time when the traffic targeted towards route-A is
          received on the Route Egress Interface toward peer-X.  This is
          TR(EMr, Route-A). (also named DUT-XMT-Data Time).

             FIB convergence = (DUT-RCV-Rt-Time - DUT-XMT-Data-Time)

             RIB convergence = (DUT-RCV-Rt-Time - DUT-XMT-Rt-Time)



             Convergence for a route stream is characterized by

             a) Individual route convergence for FIB, RIB

             b) All route convergence of

             FIB-convergence =DUT-RCV-Rt-Time(A)-DUT-XMT-Data-Time(last)

             RIB-convergence =DUT-RCV-Rt-Time(A)-DUT-XMT-Rt-Time(last)

5.1.3.  eBGP Convergence

   Objective:

      This test measures the convergence time taken by an implementation
      to receive, install and advertise a route in an eBGP Scenario

   Reference Test Setup:

      This test uses the setup as shown in figure 2 and the scenarios
      described in RIB-IN and RIB-OUT are applicable to this test case.

5.1.4.  iBGP Convergence

   Objective:

      This test measures the convergence time taken by an implementation
      to receive, install and advertise a route in an iBGP Scenario

   Reference Test Setup:

      This test uses the setup as shown in figure 2 and the scenarios
      described in RIB-IN and RIB-OUT are applicable to this test case.








Papneja, et al.          Expires April 22, 2012                [Page 15]

Internet-Draft   draft-papneja-bgp-basic-dp-convergence     October 2011


5.1.5.  eBGP Multihop Convergence

   Objective:

      This test measures the convergence time taken by an implementation
      to receive, install and advertise a route in an eBGP Multihop
      Scenario

   Reference Test Setup:

      This test uses the setup as shown in figure 3.Two DUTs are used
      along with a helper node.

   Procedure:



      A.  The DUT2 is the same model as DUT and runs the same BGP
          implementation as DUT

      B.  All devices to be synchronized using NTP

      C.  All variables affecting Convergence like authentication,
          policies, timers should be set to basic-settings

      D.  All 3 devices, DUT, Emulator and Helper Node are configured as
          different Autonomous Systems

      E.  Loopback Interfaces configured on DUT and Helper Node and
          connectivity is established between them using any config
          options available on the DUT

      F.  Establish BGP adjacency between DUT1 and Emulator

      G.  Establish BGP adjacency between DUT2 and Helper Node

      H.  Establish BGP adjacency between DUT 1 and DUT 2

      I.  To ensure adjacency establishment, wait for 3 KeepAlives from
          the DUT1 and DUT2 or a configurable delay before proceeding
          with the rest of the test

      J.  Start the traffic from the Emulator towards the Helper Node
          targeted at a specific route say routeA

      K.  Initially no traffic SHOULD be observed on the egress
          interface as the routeA is not installed in the forwarding
          database of the DUT



Papneja, et al.          Expires April 22, 2012                [Page 16]

Internet-Draft   draft-papneja-bgp-basic-dp-convergence     October 2011


      L.  Advertise routeA from the Emulator to the DUT and note the
          time.  (Tup(EMx,RouteA) - This is also named (Route-Rec-time)

      M.  Record the time when the traffic targeted towards routeA is
          received from Egress Interface of DUT on emulator This is
          TR(EMr,DUT), nicknamed (Data Receive time)

      N.  The following equation represents the FIB Convergence multi-
          node

             eBGP Multihop Convergence Time = (Rt-RecTime - Data-
             RcvTime)

   Note: It is recommended that the test be repeated with varying number
   of routes and route mixtures.  With each set route mixture, the test
   should be repeated multiple times.  The results should record
   average, mean, Standard Deviation

5.2.  BGP Failure/Convergence Events

5.2.1.  Physical Link Failure on DUT End

   Objective:

      This test measures the route convergence time due to local link
      failure event at DUT's Local Interface

   Reference Test Setup:

      This test uses the setup as shown in figure 1.  Shutdown event is
      defined as an administrative shutdown event on the DUT

   Procedure:



      A.  All variables affecting Convergence like authentication,
          policies, timers should be set to basic-test policy

      B.  Establish 2 BGP adjacencies from DUT to Emulator, one over the
          peer interface and the other using a second peer interface

      C.  Advertise the same route, route A over both the adjacencies
          and (Tx1)Interface to be the preferred next hop

      D.  To ensure adjacency establishment, wait for 3 KeepAlives from
          the DUT or a configurable delay before proceeding with the
          rest of the test



Papneja, et al.          Expires April 22, 2012                [Page 17]

Internet-Draft   draft-papneja-bgp-basic-dp-convergence     October 2011


      E.  Start the traffic from the Emulator towards the DUT targeted
          at a specific route say route A. Initially traffic would be
          observed on the best egress route (Err1) instead of Trr2

      F.  Trigger the shutdown event of Best Egress Interface on DUT
          (Drr1)

      G.  Measure the Convergence Time for the event to be detected and
          traffic to be forwarded to Next-Best Egress Interface (rr2)

             Time = Data-detect(rr2) - Shutdown time

      H.  Stop the offered load and wait for the queues to drain and
          Restart

      I.  Bring up the link on DUT Best Egress Interface

      J.  Measure the convergence time taken for the traffic to be
          rerouted from (rr2) to Best Interface (rr1)

             Time = Data-detect(rr1) - Shutdown time

      K.  It is recommended that the test be repeated with varying
          number of routes and route mixtures or with number of routes
          and route mixtures closer to what is deployed in operational
          networks

5.2.2.  Physical Link Failure on Remote/Emulator End

   Objective:

      This test measures the route convergence time due to local link
      failure event at Tester's Local Interface

   Reference Test Setup:

      This test uses the setup as shown in figure 1.  Shutdown event is
      defined as shutdown of the local interface of Tester via logical
      shutdown event.  The procedure used in 5.2.1 is used for the
      termination

5.2.3.  ECMP Link Failure on DUT End

   Objective:

      This test measures the route convergence time due to local link
      failure event at ECMP Member.  The FIB configuration and BGP is
      set to allow two ECMP routes to be installed.  However, policy



Papneja, et al.          Expires April 22, 2012                [Page 18]

Internet-Draft   draft-papneja-bgp-basic-dp-convergence     October 2011


      directs the routes to be sent only over one of the paths

   Reference Test Setup:

      This test uses the setup as shown in figure 1 and the procedure
      uses 5.2.1

5.3.  BGP Adjacency Failure (Non-Physical Link Failure) on Emulator

   Objective:

      This test measures the route convergence time due to BGP Adjacency
      Failure on Emulator

   Reference Test Setup:

      This test uses the setup as shown in figure 1

   Procedure:



      A.  All variables affecting Convergence like authentication,
          policies, timers should be basic-policy set

      B.  Establish 2 BGP adjacencies from DUT to Emulator, one over the
          Best Egress Interface and the other using the Next-Best Egress
          Interface

      C.  Advertise the same route, routeA over both the adjacencies and
          make Best Egress Interface to be the preferred next hop

      D.  To ensure adjacency establishment, wait for 3 KeepAlives from
          the DUT or a configurable delay before proceeding with the
          rest of the test

      E.  Start the traffic from the Emulator towards the DUT targeted
          at a specific route say routeA.  Initially traffic would be
          observed on the Best Egress interface

      F.  Remove BGP adjacency via a software adjacency down on the
          Emulator on the Best Egress Interface.  This time is called
          BGPadj-down-time also termed BGPpeer-down

      G.  Measure the Convergence Time for the event to be detected and
          traffic to be forwarded to Next-Best Egress Interface.This
          time is Tr-rr2 also called TR2-traffic-on




Papneja, et al.          Expires April 22, 2012                [Page 19]

Internet-Draft   draft-papneja-bgp-basic-dp-convergence     October 2011


             Convergence = TR2-traffic-on - BGPpeer-down

      H.  Stop the offered load and wait for the queues to drain and
          Restart

      I.  Bring up BGP adjacency on the Emulator over the Best Egress
          Interface.  This time is BGP-adj-up also called BGPpeer-up

      J.  Measure the convergence time taken for the traffic to be
          rerouted to Best Interface.  This time is BGP-adj-up also
          called BGPpeer-up

5.4.  BGP Hard Reset Test Cases

5.4.1.  BGP Non-Recovering Hard Reset Event on DUT

   Objective:

      This test measures the route convergence time due to Hard Reset on
      the DUT

   Reference Test Setup:

      This test uses the setup as shown in figure 1

   Procedure:



      A.  The requirement for this test case is that the Hard Reset
          Event should be non-recovering and should affect only the
          adjacency between DUT and Emulator on the Best Egress
          Interface

      B.  All variables affecting SHOULD be set to basic-test values

      C.  Establish 2 BGP adjacencies from DUT to Emulator, one over the
          Best Egress Interface and the other using the Next-Best Egress
          Interface

      D.  Advertise the same route, routeA over both the adjacencies and
          make Best Egress Interface to be the preferred next hop

      E.  To ensure adjacency establishment, wait for 3 KeepAlives from
          the DUT or a configurable delay before proceeding with the
          rest of the test





Papneja, et al.          Expires April 22, 2012                [Page 20]

Internet-Draft   draft-papneja-bgp-basic-dp-convergence     October 2011


      F.  Start the traffic from the Emulator towards the DUT targeted
          at a specific route say routeA.  Initially traffic would be
          observed on the Best Egress interface

      G.  Trigger the Hard Reset event of Best Egress Interface on DUT

      H.  Measure the Convergence Time for the event to be detected and
          traffic to be forwarded to Next-Best Egress Interface

             Time of convergence = time-traffic flow - time-reset

      I.  Stop the offered load and wait for the queues to drain and
          Restart

      J.  It is recommended that the test be repeated with varying
          number of routes and route mixtures or with number of routes
          and route mixtures closer to what is deployed in operational
          networks

      K.  When varying number of routes are used, convergence Time is
          measured using the Loss Derived method [IGPData]

      L.  Convergence Time in this scenario is influenced by Failure
          detection time on Tester, BGP Keep Alive Time and routing,
          forwarding table update time

5.5.  BGP Soft Reset

   Objective:

      This test measures the route convergence time taken by an
      implementation to service a BGP Route Refresh message and
      advertise a route

   Reference Test Setup:

      This test uses the setup as shown in figure 2

   Procedure:



      A.  The BGP implementation on DUT and Helper Node needs to support
          BGP Route Refresh Capability [RFC2918]

      B.  All devices to be synchronized using NTP





Papneja, et al.          Expires April 22, 2012                [Page 21]

Internet-Draft   draft-papneja-bgp-basic-dp-convergence     October 2011


      C.  All variables affecting Convergence like authentication,
          policies, timers should be set to basic-test defaults

      D.  DUT and Helper Node are configured in the same Autonomous
          System whereas Emulator is configured under a different
          Autonomous System

      E.  Establish BGP adjacency between DUT and Emulator

      F.  Establish BGP adjacency between DUT and Helper Node

      G.  To ensure adjacency establishment, wait for 3 KeepAlives from
          the DUT or a configurable delay before proceeding with the
          rest of the test

      H.  Configure a policy under BGP on Helper Node to deny routes
          received from DUT

      I.  Advertise routeA from the Emulator to the DUT

      J.  The DUT will try to advertise the route to Helper Node will be
          denied

      K.  Wait for 3 KeepAlives

      L.  Start the traffic from the Emulator towards the Helper Node
          targeted at a specific route say routeA.  Initially no traffic
          would be observed on the Egress interface, as routeA is not
          present

      M.  Remove the policy on Helper Node and issue a Route Refresh
          request towards DUT.  Note the timestamp of this event.  This
          is the RefreshTime

      N.  Record the time when the traffic targeted towards routeA is
          received on the Egress Interface.  This is RecTime

      O.  The following equation represents the Route Refresh
          Convergence Time per route

             Route Refresh Convergence Time = (RecTime - RefreshTime)

5.6.  BGP Route Withdrawal Convergence Time

   Objective:






Papneja, et al.          Expires April 22, 2012                [Page 22]

Internet-Draft   draft-papneja-bgp-basic-dp-convergence     October 2011


      This test measures the route convergence time taken by an
      implementation to service a BGP Withdraw message and advertise the
      withdraw

   Reference Test Setup:

      This test uses the setup as shown in figure 2

   Procedure:



      A.  This test consists of 2 steps to determine the Total Withdraw
          Processing Time

      B.  Step 1:

          (1)   All devices to be synchronized using NTP

          (2)   All variables should be set to basic-test parameters

          (3)   DUT and Helper Node are configured in the same
                Autonomous System whereas Emulator is configured under a
                different Autonomous System

          (4)   Establish BGP adjacency between DUT and Emulator

          (5)   To ensure adjacency establishment, wait for 3 KeepAlives
                from the DUT or a configurable delay before proceeding
                with the rest of the test

          (6)   Start the traffic from the Emulator towards the DUT
                targeted at a specific route say routeA.  Initially no
                traffic would be observed on the Egress interface as the
                routeA is not present on DUT

          (7)   Advertise routeA from the Emulator to the DUT

          (8)   The traffic targeted towards routeA is received on the
                Egress Interface

          (9)   Now the Tester sends request to withdraw routeA to DUT,
                TRx(Awith) also called WdrawTime1

          (10)  Record the time when no traffic is observed on the
                Egress Interface.  This is the RouteRemoveTime1(A)





Papneja, et al.          Expires April 22, 2012                [Page 23]

Internet-Draft   draft-papneja-bgp-basic-dp-convergence     October 2011


                   WdrawConvTime1 = RouteRemoveTime1(A)

          (11)  The difference between the RouteRemoveTime1 and
                WdrawTime1 is the WdrawConvTime1

      C.  Step 2:

          (1)  Continuing from Step 1, re-advertise routeA back to DUT
               from Tester

          (2)  The DUT will try to advertise the routeA to Helper Node
               (assumption there exists a session between DUT and helper
               node

          (3)  Start the traffic from the Emulator towards the Helper
               Node targeted at a specific route say routeA.  Traffic
               would be observed on the Egress interface after routeA is
               received by the Helper Node

                  WATime=time traffic first flows

          (4)  Now the Tester sends a request to withdraw routeA to DUT.
               This is the WdrawTime2

                  WAWtime-TRx(RouteA) = WdrawTime2

          (5)  DUT processes the withdraw and sends it to Helper Node

          (6)  Record the time when no traffic is observed on the Egress
               Interface of Helper Node.  This is

                  TR-WAW(DUT,RouteA) = RouteRemoveTime2

          (7)  Total withdraw processing time is

                  TotalWdrawTime = ((RouteRemoveTime2 - WdrawTime2) -
                  WdrawConvTime1)

5.7.  BGP Path Attribute Change Convergence Time

   Objective:

      This test measures the convergence time taken by an implementation
      to service a BGP Path Attribute Change

   Reference Test Setup:





Papneja, et al.          Expires April 22, 2012                [Page 24]

Internet-Draft   draft-papneja-bgp-basic-dp-convergence     October 2011


      This test uses the setup as shown in figure 1

   Procedure:



      A.  This test only applies to Well-Known Mandatory Attributes like
          Origin, AS Path, Next Hop

      B.  In each iteration of test only one of these mandatory
          attributes need to be varied whereas the others remain the
          same

      C.  All devices to be synchronized using NTP

      D.  All variables should be set to basic-test parameters

      E.  Advertise the route, routeA over the Best Egress Interface
          only, making it the preferred next hop

      F.  To ensure adjacency establishment, wait for 3 KeepAlives from
          the DUT or a configurable delay before proceeding with the
          rest of the test

      G.  Start the traffic from the Emulator towards the DUT targeted
          at the specific route say routeA.  Initially traffic would be
          observed on the Best Egress interface

      H.  Now advertise the same route routeA on the Next-Best Egress
          Interface but by varying one of the well-known mandatory
          attributes to have a preferred value over that interface.  The
          other values need to be same as what was advertised on the
          Best-Egress adjacency

             TRx(Path-Change) = Path Change Event Time

      I.  Measure the Convergence Time for the event to be detected and
          traffic to be forwarded to Next-Best Egress Interface

             DUT(Path-Change, RouteA) = Path-switch time

             Convergence = Path-switch time - Path Change Event Time

      J.  Stop the offered load and wait for the queues to drain and
          Restart






Papneja, et al.          Expires April 22, 2012                [Page 25]

Internet-Draft   draft-papneja-bgp-basic-dp-convergence     October 2011


5.8.  BGP Graceful Restart Convergence Time

   Objective:

      This test measures the route convergence time taken by an
      implementation during a Graceful Restart Event

   Reference Test Setup:

      This test uses the setup as shown in figure 4

   Procedure:



      A.  It measures the time taken by an implementation to service a
          BGP Graceful Restart Event and advertise a route

      B.  The Helper Nodes are the same model as DUT and run the same
          BGP implementation as DUT

      C.  The BGP implementation on DUT and Helper Node needs to support
          BGP Graceful Restart Mechanism [RFC4724]

      D.  All devices to be synchronized using NTP

      E.  All variables are set to basic-test values

      F.  DUT and Helper Node-1 are configured in the same Autonomous
          System whereas Emulator and Helper Node-2 are configured under
          different Autonomous Systems

      G.  Establish BGP adjacency between DUT and Helper Nodes

      H.  Establish BGP adjacency between Helper Node-2 and Emulator

      I.  To ensure adjacency establishment, wait for 3 KeepAlives from
          the DUT or a configurable delay before proceeding with the
          rest of the test

      J.  Configure a policy under BGP on Helper Node-1 to deny routes
          received from DUT

      K.  Advertise routeA from the Emulator to Helper Node-2

      L.  Helper Node-2 advertises the route to DUT and DUT will try to
          advertise the route to Helper Node-1 which will be denied




Papneja, et al.          Expires April 22, 2012                [Page 26]

Internet-Draft   draft-papneja-bgp-basic-dp-convergence     October 2011


      M.  Wait for 3 KeepAlives

      N.  Start the traffic from the Emulator towards the Helper Node-1
          targeted at the specific route say routeA.  Initially no
          traffic would be observed on the Egress interface as the
          routeA is not present

      O.  Perform a Graceful Restart Trigger Event on DUT and note the
          time.  This is the GREventTime

      P.  Remove the policy on Helper Node-1

      Q.  Record the time when the traffic targeted towards routeA is
          received on the Egress Interface

             TRr(DUT, routeA).  This is also called RecTime

      R.  The following equation represents the Graceful Restart
          Convergence Time

             Graceful Restart Convergence Time = ((GREventTime -
             RecTime) - RIB-IN)

      S.  It is assumed in this test case that after a Switchover is
          triggered on the DUT, it will not have any cycles to process
          BGP Refresh messages.  The reason for this assumption is that
          there is a narrow window of time where after switchover when
          we remove the policy from Helper Node -1, implementations
          might generate Route-Refresh automatically and this request
          might be serviced before the DUT actually switches over and
          reestablishes BGP adjacencies with the peers


6.  Reporting Format

   For each test case, it is recommended that the reporting tables below
   are completed and all time values SHOULD be reported with resolution
   as specified in [RFC4098]













Papneja, et al.          Expires April 22, 2012                [Page 27]

Internet-Draft   draft-papneja-bgp-basic-dp-convergence     October 2011


       Parameter                        Units
       Test case                        Test case number
       Test topology                    1,2,3 or 4
       Parallel links                   Number of parallel links
       Interface type                   GigE, POS, ATM, other
       Convergence Event                Hard reset, Soft reset, link
                                        failure, or other defined
       eBGP sessions                    Number of eBGP sessions
       iBGP sessions                    Number of iBGP sessions
       eBGP neighbor                    Number of eBGP neighbors
       iBGP neighbor                    Number of iBGP neighbors
       Routes per peer                  Number of routes
       Total unique routes              Number of routes
       Total non-unique routes          Number of routes
       IGP configured                   ISIS, OSPF, static, or other
       Route Mixture                    Description of Route mixture
       Route Packing                    Number of routes in an update
       Policy configured                Yes, No
       Packet size offered to the DUT   Bytes
       Offered load                     Packets per second
       Packet sampling interval on      Seconds
        tester
       Forwarding delay threshold       Seconds
       Timer Values configured on DUT
         Interface failure indication   Seconds
          delay
         Hold time                      Seconds
         MinRouteAdvertisementInterval  Seconds
          (MRAI)
         MinASOriginationInterval       Seconds
          (MAOI)
         Keepalive Time                 Seconds
         ConnectRetry                   Seconds
       TCP Parameters for DUT and tester
         MSS                                      Bytes
         Slow start threshold           Bytes
         Maximum window size            Bytes


   Test Details:

   a.  If the Offered Load matches a subset of routes, describe how this
       subset is selected

   b.  Describe how the Convergence Event is applied; does it cause
       instantaneous traffic loss or not





Papneja, et al.          Expires April 22, 2012                [Page 28]

Internet-Draft   draft-papneja-bgp-basic-dp-convergence     October 2011


   c.  If there is any policy configured, describe the configured policy

   Complete the table below for the initial Convergence Event and the
   reversion Convergence Event


           Parameter                        Unit
           Convergence Event                Initial or reversion
           Traffic Forwarding Metrics
             Total number of packets        Number of packets
              offered to DUT
             Total number of packets        Number of packets
              forwarded by DUT
             Connectivity Packet Loss       Number of packets
             Convergence Packet Loss        Number of packets
             Out-of-order packets           Number of packets
             Duplicate packets              Number of packets
           Convergence Benchmarks
             Rate-derived Method[IGP-
              Data]:
              First route convergence       Seconds
               time
              Full convergence time         Seconds
             Loss-derived Method [IGP-
              Data]:
              Loss-derived convergence      Seconds
               time
             Route-Specific Loss-Derived
              Method:
              Minimum R-S convergence       Seconds
               time
              Maximum R-S convergence       Seconds
               time
              Median R-S convergence        Seconds
               time
              Average R-S convergence       Seconds
               time

           Loss of Connectivity Benchmarks
             Loss-derived Method:
              Loss-derived loss of          Seconds
               connectivity period
             Route-Specific loss-derived
              Method:
              Minimum LoC period [n]        Array of seconds
              Minimum Route LoC period      Seconds
              Maximum Route LoC period      Seconds
              Median Route LoC period       Seconds



Papneja, et al.          Expires April 22, 2012                [Page 29]

Internet-Draft   draft-papneja-bgp-basic-dp-convergence     October 2011


              Average Route LoC period      Seconds



7.  IANA Considerations

   This draft does not require any new allocations by IANA.


8.  Security Considerations

   Benchmarking activities as described in this memo are limited to
   technology characterization using controlled stimuli in a laboratory
   environment, with dedicated address space and the constraints
   specified in the sections above.

   The benchmarking network topology will be an independent test setup
   and MUST NOT be connected to devices that may forward the test
   traffic into a production network, or misroute traffic to the test
   management network.

   Further, benchmarking is performed on a "black-box" basis, relying
   solely on measurements observable external to the DUT/SUT.

   Special capabilities SHOULD NOT exist in the DUT/SUT specifically for
   benchmarking purposes.  Any implications for network security arising
   from the DUT/SUT SHOULD be identical in the lab and in production
   networks.


9.  Acknowledgments

   The following people made textual contributions to this document: Jay
   Karthik (Cisco Systems), Eric Brendel (AT&T), and Mohan Nanduri
   (Microsoft) The authors would like to thank them for the helpful
   discussions and their contributions to the document.


10.  References

10.1.  Normative References

   [I-D.ietf-bmwg-igp-dataplane-conv-term]
              Poretsky, S., Imhoff, B., and K. Michielsen, "Terminology
              for Benchmarking Link-State IGP Data Plane Route
              Convergence", draft-ietf-bmwg-igp-dataplane-conv-term-23
              (work in progress), February 2011.




Papneja, et al.          Expires April 22, 2012                [Page 30]

Internet-Draft   draft-papneja-bgp-basic-dp-convergence     October 2011


   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC2918]  Chen, E., "Route Refresh Capability for BGP-4", RFC 2918,
              September 2000.

   [RFC4271]  Rekhter, Y., Li, T., and S. Hares, "A Border Gateway
              Protocol 4 (BGP-4)", RFC 4271, January 2006.

10.2.  Informative References

   [RFC1242]  Bradner, S., "Benchmarking terminology for network
              interconnection devices", RFC 1242, July 1991.

   [RFC1983]  Malkin, G., "Internet Users' Glossary", RFC 1983,
              August 1996.

   [RFC2285]  Mandeville, R., "Benchmarking Terminology for LAN
              Switching Devices", RFC 2285, February 1998.

   [RFC2545]  Marques, P. and F. Dupont, "Use of BGP-4 Multiprotocol
              Extensions for IPv6 Inter-Domain Routing", RFC 2545,
              March 1999.

   [RFC4098]  Berkowitz, H., Davies, E., Hares, S., Krishnaswamy, P.,
              and M. Lepp, "Terminology for Benchmarking BGP Device
              Convergence in the Control Plane", RFC 4098, June 2005.

   [RFC4724]  Sangli, S., Chen, E., Fernando, R., Scudder, J., and Y.
              Rekhter, "Graceful Restart Mechanism for BGP", RFC 4724,
              January 2007.

   [RFC4760]  Bates, T., Chandra, R., Katz, D., and Y. Rekhter,
              "Multiprotocol Extensions for BGP-4", RFC 4760,
              January 2007.

   [RFC5925]  Touch, J., Mankin, A., and R. Bonica, "The TCP
              Authentication Option", RFC 5925, June 2010.


Authors' Addresses

   Rajiv Papneja
   Huawei Technologies 

   Email: rajiv.papneja@huawei.com





Papneja, et al.          Expires April 22, 2012                [Page 31]

Internet-Draft   draft-papneja-bgp-basic-dp-convergence     October 2011


   Bhavani Parise
   Cisco Systems

   Email: bhavani@cisco.com


   Susan Hares
   Huawei Technologies 

   Email: shares@huawei.com


   Ilya Varlashkin
   Easynet Global Services

   Email: ilya.varlashkin@easynet.com


   Eric Brendel
   Independent Consultant

   Email: brendel@pektel.com 


   Mohan Nanduri
   Microsoft

   Email: mnanduri@microsoft.com 


   Jay Karthik
   Cisco Systems

   Email: jkarthik@cisco.com































Papneja, et al.          Expires April 22, 2012                [Page 32]

