 



ALTO                                                       Fabio Picconi
Internet-Draft                                         Laurent Massoulie
Intended Status: Informational                               Technicolor
Expires: September 2, 2010                                 March 1, 2010


               ISP-friendly peer-to-peer live streaming 
                  draft-picconi-alto-p2p-streaming-00


Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as
   Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.

Abstract

   The Application-Layer Traffic Optimization (ALTO) service aims at
   providing applications with information about the network to optimize
   their traffic. Peer-to-peer (P2P) live streaming is one of such
 


Picconi                Expires September 2, 2010                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft      ISP-friendly P2P live streaming        March 1, 2010


   applications which can benefit from ALTO. We have recently designed a
   new scheme to minimize inter-domain traffic in P2P live streaming
   applications without impacting video quality. In this draft we
   briefly describe our solution, and we discuss the implications of the
   type of information provided by the ALTO service on overlay
   construction.


Table of Contents

   1  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
   2  Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   3  Generalized cost models  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   4  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   5  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   Author's Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6


1  Introduction

   A lot of attention has been recently devoted to optimizing the
   traffic generated by peer-to-peer applications. The Application-Layer
   Traffic Optimization (ALTO) working group is defining a service that
   will provide applications with information about the underlying
   network. For instance, peer-to-peer applications will be able to
   obtain a list of other peers located in the same Internet Service
   Provider (ISP).

   Recent research efforts have studied how such information can be used
   by peer-to-peer algorithms to reduce cross-ISP traffic
   [Aggarwal][Xie][Choffnes]. However, these studies have focused on
   file download applications such as BitTorrent, with little or no
   attention given to live video streaming [Huang]. In fact, reducing
   cross-ISP traffic in live streaming is more difficult than in file
   download due to the real-time constraints of video delivery. Care
   make be taken so that locality optimizations do not increase
   diffusion delay or decrease download rates beyond the levels required
   for continuous playback.

   We have recently proposed a new scheme that aims at minimizing cross-
   ISP traffic in peer-to-peer live streaming without impacting video
   quality. The scheme constructs a two-layer overlay (local and
   global), and dynamically adjusts the download rate on costly links.
   The algorithm is completely distributed: each peer makes decisions
   based on its local state and peerwise exchanges with other peers. The
   only global information are the network costs provided by an ISP-
   controlled server (e.g., the ALTO service). We give more details of
   our solution in the next section.
 


Picconi                Expires September 2, 2010                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft      ISP-friendly P2P live streaming        March 1, 2010


   Our scheme assumes that any two peers use the same cost for the path
   between them, and that this cost is the same for traffic sent in
   either direction. In practice, peers may use different costs (e.g.,
   if they belong to different ISPs), and the cost may depend on the
   direction of traffic. Moreover, peers may not have access to
   numerical costs, but only to ordinal information (i.e., rankings or
   preferences between peers). In this draft we also discuss how our
   scheme can be extended to consider such generalized cost scenarios.

2  Design

   We now provide a brief description of our scheme for ISP-friendly P2P
   live streaming. More details on the algorithm as well as the
   experimental evaluation can be found in our paper [Picconi].

 2.1  Overlay construction

   Each peer mantains two sets of overlay neighbors, with which it
   exchanges video chunks. The primary neighbor set contains peers with
   low network cost, while the secondary neighbor set contains peers
   chosen at random. The cost of a neighbor corresponds to the cost of
   the network path to it, which is a assumed to be the same for both
   endpoints and both traffic directions.

   A peer's primary set is further divided into two subsets: download
   neighbors (from which chunks are received) and upload neighbors (to
   whick chunks are sent). Both subsets are populated independently, so
   they may contain different neighbors. Moreover, the maximum number of
   primary upload neighbors is proportional to the local peer's upload
   capacity. This gives fast peers a large out-degree, and ensures that
   all primary connections throughout the overlay use roughly the same
   bandwidth (assuming an equal-split allocation). The maximum number of
   download neighbors is the same for every peer, and is given a low
   value to minimize signaling overhead.

   Primary neighbor sets are populated as follows. A peer periodically
   attempts to establish an outgoing connection to a peer with low
   network cost (picked from a list provided by a network-aware
   tracker). If its upload neighbor set is already full, the peer
   attempts to replace existing upload neighbors with lower-cost ones. A
   peer accepts an incoming connection if its download neighbor set is
   not full, or if the new neighbor would replace a higher-cost one.

   The secondary neighbor set is handled in a much simpler fashion. A
   peer connects to other peers chosen at random among the entire
   overlay population. A distinction between upload and download peers
   is not necessary.

 


Picconi                Expires September 2, 2010                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft      ISP-friendly P2P live streaming        March 1, 2010


 2.2  Dynamic secondary rate

   The mechanism presented above constructs a highly localized overlay
   (primary neighbors) augmented by random links (secondary neighbors)
   that connect distant peers. While most traffic should go through
   primary connections, a few chunks must still be sent through 
   secondary ones to ensure that each chunk reaches the entire overlay.

   Our scheme uses a simple receiver-driven mechanism to limit the
   traffic sent through secondary links. Each peer continuously adjusts
   the maximum rate at which it accepts chunks from secondary neighbors.
   This rate is modified according to the contents of the local chunk
   buffer: whenever a chunk is close to the deadline and is still
   missing in the buffer, the rate is increased; conversely, the rate is
   periodically decreased while the buffer is full.

   The intuition behind this scheme is that increasing the connectivity
   between remote portions of the overlay decreases the average chunk
   diffusion delay, and vice-versa. Therefore, a chunk received near the
   deadline indicates that the diffusion delay may be too high, and that
   connectivity between remote peers should be increased.

 2.3 Discussion

   The scheme presented above has several nice properties. First, the
   algorithms are simple, and do not require strong synchronization
   among peers. All decisions (overlay construction, chunk scheduling,
   secondary download rate) are based on local or one-hop information.
   Second, peers react before playback deadlines, when there is still
   time to download missing chunks and avoid disruptions in video
   playback. Third, it exhibits a trade-off between ISP-friendliness and
   chunk diffusion delay (see paper for more details [Picconi]).

   Our experimental evaluation shows that the primary overlay quickly
   converges towards a near-optimal configuration: the sum of the cost
   of all primary links is close to the achievable minimum (assuming all
   download neighbor sets are full). Since all overlay connections use
   roughly the same bandwidth, constructing a minimum-cost overlay
   effectively minimizes the network cost of the system.

   Moreover, experiments show that once the overlay stabilizes, most
   traffic is sent through primary connections, thus achieving a
   significant reduction of cross-ISP traffic compared to a network-
   agnostic scheme. Finally, experiments under high churn also show that
   keeping multiple secondary neighbors per peer increases robustness
   compared to a highly localized overlay with few random connections.

3  Generalized cost models
 


Picconi                Expires September 2, 2010                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft      ISP-friendly P2P live streaming        March 1, 2010


   Our original scheme presented in our paper makes several assumptions
   about network costs: 1) the cost on a given path is the same for both
   traffic directions, 2) both endpoints agree on the path cost, 3) the
   path's numerical cost is known. We now discuss how these assumptions
   can be relaxed.

   Relaxing the first assumption (bidirectional costs) requires no
   modifications to our system, as we already construct a directed
   overlay (i.e., peers can connect as uploaders, downloaders, or both).
   Therefore, a peer will use the path cost corresponding to the
   outgoing direction when it connects as an uploader, and the incoming
   cost when it connects as a downloader.

   The second assumption (peers agree on path cost) is also easily
   relaxed. As described earlier, a new primary connection is created
   when it is beneficial for both endpoints (i.e., each endpoint is
   either still filling its neighbor set, or willing to replace an
   existing higher-cost neighbor). Thus, each endpoint can use its own
   path cost to determine whether it should accept the neighbor or not.
   However, we need to define a new way to compute the global cost of
   the primary overlay. One solution is to obtain the link cost as the
   mean of the two costs (i.e., according to each endpoint), and to
   proceed as in the single-cost case.

   Relaxing the third assumption (numerical costs) means that peers only
   obtain peer rankings from the tracker. Again, we can still use the
   overlay construction described above: a peer replaces its neighbors
   only if they are ranked higher in the preference list. However, the
   absence of numerical costs means that we can no longer compute the
   minimim-cost overlay and use it as a benchmark for our system.

   If only ordinal costs are available, one approach would be to
   converge to overlay configurations which are stable (assuming a
   static peer population). In a stable configuration (or matching), all
   peers are satisfied with their neighbors, i.e., there are no two
   peers that would replace one of their neighbors with each other. This
   is known in the research literature as the stable allocation problem
   [Baiou]. Moreover, there exists a greedy algorithm thats find stable
   matchings. The application of such algorithms to our a peer-to-peer
   system, as well as their behavior under dynamic populations, could be
   an interesting subject for future work.

4  Security Considerations

   No security considerations are discussed in this memo.


5  References 
 


Picconi                Expires September 2, 2010                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft      ISP-friendly P2P live streaming        March 1, 2010


   [Aggarwal]  V. Aggarwal, A. Feldmann, and C. Scheideler. Can ISPs and
               P2P systems cooperate for improved performance? ACM CCR,
               July 2007.

   [Choffnes]  D.R. Choffnes and F. E. Bustamante. Taming the Torrent: A
               Practical Approach to Reducing Cross-ISP Traffic in Peer-
               to-peer Systems. In Proc. of SIGCOMM, 2008.

   [Huang]     G. Huang. Experiencies with PPLive. Keynote at ACM.
               SIGCOMM P2P-TV, Aug. 2007.

   [Picconi]   F. Picconi and L. Massoulie. ISP-friend or foe? Making
               P2P live streaming ISP-aware. In Proc. of ICDCS, 2009.

   [Xie]       H. Xie, Y. R. Yang, A. Krishnamurthy, Y. Liu, and A.
               Silberschatz. P4P: Provider Portal for Applications. In
               Proc. of SIGCOMM, 2008.

   [Baiou]     M. Baiou and M. Balinski. Erratum: The Stable Allocation
               (or Ordinal Transportation) Problem. In Mathematics of
               Operations Research, Vol. 27, N. 4, March - May, pp. 662-
               680.

Author's Addresses


   Fabio Picconi
   Technicolor
   1 rue Jeanne d'Arc
   92130 Issy-les-moulineaux
   France

   EMail: fabio.picconi@technicolor.com



   Laurent Massoulie
   Technicolor
   1 rue Jeanne d'Arc
   92130 Issy-les-moulineaux
   France

   EMail: laurent.massoulie@technicolor.com








Picconi                Expires September 2, 2010                [Page 6]
