 



ALTO                                                       Fabio Picconi
Internet-Draft                                               Technicolor
Intended Status: Informational                                          
Expires: April 23, 2012                                 October 21, 2011


                            ALTO home proxy
                    draft-picconi-alto-home-proxy-00


Abstract

   This documents discusses the use of ALTO proxies running on home
   devices such as gateways or home NAS servers. An ALTO home proxy
   caches ALTO information obtained from an origin ALTO server, and uses
   that information to serve queries originating from the home network.
   ALTO home proxies reduce ALTO traffic and query latency, improve
   scalability, and enhance user privacy.


Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as
   Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html


Copyright and License Notice

   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors. All rights reserved.


 


Fabio Picconi            Expires April 23, 2012                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft         Gateway-based distribution       October 21, 2011


   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document. Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document. Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.



Table of Contents

   1  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  2
   2. Devices to run home proxies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3. Proxy configuration and discovery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     3.1. Configuration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     3.2. Proxy discovery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   4. Proxy behavior  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     4.1. Transparent vs. non-transparent . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     4.2. Caching proxies vs. local ALTO servers  . . . . . . . . . .  6
   5. Obtaining ALTO information  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   6  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   7  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   8  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     8.1 Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8


1  Introduction

   The ALTO service allows applications to obtain information about the
   network cost between two peers. Applications use this information to
   optimize their traffic (e.g., through proximity-based neighbor
   selection), leading to better performance for end users, and
   potentially lower operational costs for network operators. See
   [RFC5693] for the ALTO problem statement.

   The ALTO protocol [I-D.ietf-alto-protocol] defines communications
   between an ALTO client (requesting cost information) and an ALTO
   server (providing such information). Clients are typically peer-to-
   peer applications run by users, while servers are typically run by
   network operators. Peer-to-peer trackers may also behave as ALTO
   clients, using the retrieved ALTO information to return localized
   peer sets. This document considers only the first scenario, in which
   peers contact an ALTO server directly to obtain ALTO information.

 


Fabio Picconi            Expires April 23, 2012                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft         Gateway-based distribution       October 21, 2011


   To improve scalability, peers may exchange the cost information
   retrieved from an ALTO server, thus reducing server load. This is
   known as ALTO information redistribution, and is discussed in [I-
   D.ietf-alto-protocol] and [I-D.gu-alto-redistribution]. The ALTO
   protocol does not make redistribution mandatory, and does not define
   how it should be performed. It is up to each application to decide
   whether to implement redistribution, and how (e.g., by using DHT or a
   gossip-based protocol).

   In this document we argue that distribution of ALTO information can
   be enhanced by employing home proxies. An ALTO home proxy caches ALTO
   information obtained from an origin ALTO server, and uses it to
   respond to ALTO queries originating from the local home network. This
   presents several advantages compared to using a remotely located ALTO
   server:

   1) Reduced ALTO traffic. Application-dependent redistribution might
   result in unnecessary ALTO traffic. Consider, for instance, a home
   network with two different active applications (e.g., a file sharing
   application and a streaming application) which both implement
   redistribution but using different mechanisms. The network and cost
   maps downloaded by one application cannot be shared with the other.
   If both applications use the ALTO home proxy, the ALTO information
   will be fetched only once.

   2) Increased redistribution. ALTO home proxies may redistribute
   information to the home proxies of other peers. Therefore,
   applications which do not implement redistribution may still generate
   little or no load on the ALTO server if they use an ALTO home proxy
   that implements redistribution.

   3) Reduced latency. In case of a cache hit, the ALTO home proxy can
   serve queries quickly given the low RTT and high bandwidth of home
   networks. This may improve the performance of delay-sensitive
   applications.

   4) Background updates. If the home proxy is executed in a device that
   is always on and connected to the network (such as a home gateway or
   a home NAS), ALTO information updates can be pushed to the proxy
   during off-peak hours, when there is plenty of available bandwidth
   and ALTO servers are lightly loaded.

   5) Discovery. If the home proxy has been configured to use a default
   origin ALTO server, then applications using the proxy do not need to
   use ALTO discovery to select an ALTO server. Moreover, applications
   may easily discover the home proxy using protocols such as SLP
   [RFC2608], uPnP, or Bonjour.

 


Fabio Picconi            Expires April 23, 2012                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft         Gateway-based distribution       October 21, 2011


   6) User privacy. Serving ALTO queries within the home makes it more
   difficult for a third party (e.g., a remote ALTO server) to infer the
   user's communications patterns by analyzing ALTO traffic.

   The following sections discuss in more detail several aspects of
   using ALTO home proxies.


2. Devices to run home proxies

   ALTO home proxies may run on any home device which is connected to
   the home network and has Internet access. This includes PCs, home NAS
   servers, home gateways, etc. However, it may be preferable to run
   home proxies on devices which are always on, such as a home gateway
   or a NAS. This allows the proxy to optimize traffic (e.g., download
   ALTO information updates during off-peak hours), and to maximize the
   number of queries that can be served locally.

   Many users employ home gateways which are owned and managed by their
   Internet Service Provider (ISP). Typically, the ISP ships the gateway
   to the user when he or she signs up for the Internet access plan. The
   gateway is remotely configured by the ISP, which retains control on
   the firmware, and in particular all the services, that run on the
   gateway. This is typically the case for triple-play subscriptions,
   where the gateway runs VoIP and IPTV services in addition to Internet
   access.

   ISPs that deploy ALTO servers in their network will probably consider
   implementing ALTO home proxies as well. The computing power of
   current gateways should easily support the small increase in CPU load
   caused by the ALTO proxy service, especially given that the service
   only replies to queries originating from the local network. Moreover,
   the home proxy can be added to already deployed gateways by means of
   a remote firmware upgrade.

   Some users employ gateways which are not managed by their ISP. In
   this case, gateway vendors may provide firmware upgrades which can be
   installed by the user. Similarly, vendors or home NAS servers or
   other networked home devices may provide firmware upgrades which
   include an ALTO home proxy.


3. Proxy configuration and discovery

   Two steps must be executed before applications can use an ALTO home
   proxy: configuration and discovery.


 


Fabio Picconi            Expires April 23, 2012                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft         Gateway-based distribution       October 21, 2011


3.1. Configuration

   This step involves configuring the ALTO home proxy parameters. One
   important parameter is the default origin ALTO server, i.e., the
   server from which ALTO information will be fetched and cached, and
   which will be used by default to answer queries. This can be obtained
   using the mechanisms described in [I-D.ietf-alto-server-discovery].
   If the ALTO home proxy runs on an ISP-managed gateway, the ISP may
   also provide a default origin ALTO proxy (the ISP's own).

   Another important parameter is whether the proxy will behave as a
   caching proxy or a local server (see Section 3.1 for more details).

   Other parameters may specify the maximum amount of data that can be
   cached, the expiration time, etc. The user may be able to configure
   these parameters through a local management interface (e.g., a web
   page).

3.2. Proxy discovery

   Applications running on the home can discover a local ALTO home proxy
   by employing protocols such as SLP [RFC2608], uPnP, or Bonjour. An
   important point is that application need not apply the discovery
   mechanisms that are needed to use a remote ALTO server [I-D.ietf-
   alto-server-discovery], as the home proxy has already been configured
   with a default origin ALTO server.


4. Proxy behavior

   Similarly to HTTP proxies, ALTO home proxies may be transparent or
   non-transparent. Also, ALTO home proxies may behave as caching
   proxies or local ALTO servers.

4.1. Transparent vs. non-transparent

   A non-transparent proxy requires ALTO clients to be aware of their
   presence, and direct ALTO queries to them instead of remote ALTO
   servers. ALTO clients must be configured, either manually or
   automatically, to use the home proxy. Manual configuration is
   typically achieved by prompting the user for an IP address belonging
   to the home network (e.g., 192.168.0.x). Automatic configuration can
   be achieved by using a discovery protocol such as SLP, uPnP, or
   Bonjour.

   A transparent proxy intercepts ALTO requests directed to a remote
   ALTO server. Therefore, they do not require ALTO clients to be aware
   of their presence, or to discover them using protocols such as SLP,
 


Fabio Picconi            Expires April 23, 2012                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft         Gateway-based distribution       October 21, 2011


   uPnP, or Bonjour. Transparent proxies would typically run in home
   gateways so that they can intercept requests originating from
   multiple devices of the home network.

4.2. Caching proxies vs. local ALTO servers

   ALTO home proxies may behave as simple HTTP caching proxies. The main
   advantage of this is caching large responses from ALTO servers, such
   as full network and cost maps. A caching proxy may also use
   redistribution to fetch cacheable responses from other caching
   proxies, thus reducing the load on the ALTO server. Caching proxies
   may also prefetch ALTO information (e.g., an updated version of the
   cost map) to reduce latency.

   The disadvantage of caching proxies is that client-specific requests,
   such as filtered maps, will probably result in a cache miss. To
   counter this limitation, a home proxy may behave as a local ALTO
   server. In this case, it uses the entire cost and network maps
   previously downloaded from the remote ALTO server to produce,
   whenever possible, a valid response to the client. A proxy acting as
   a local server may return filtered maps even though such response has
   not been previously cached.

   The main limitation of proxies acting as local ALTO server is that
   not all the functionalities of the origin ALTO server may be
   available, e.g., generating signed data, or obtaining information
   based on non-standard cost models which are not publicly known.


5. Obtaining ALTO information

   Besides from caching responses from ALTO servers, home proxies may
   obtain ALTO information from wide variety of sources. Update
   dissemination may be pull-based or push-based [I-D.gu-alto-
   redistribution], and peer-to-peer protocols such as BitTorrent may be
   used for redistribution between home proxies.

   An important issue is deciding which information to obtain, i.e.,
   which resources and from which ALTO servers. Some users may manually
   configure their applications to use an ALTO server different from
   that obtained through the standard ALTO discovery mechanism. Home
   proxies should be aware of such scenarios, and obtain the appropriate
   ALTO information to maximize their hit ratio.


6  Security Considerations

   ALTO home proxying loses its benefits when clients employ SSL/TLS to
 


Fabio Picconi            Expires April 23, 2012                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft         Gateway-based distribution       October 21, 2011


   verify the identity of the remote ALTO server. Clients may switch
   back to HTTP to use the home proxy, but should be aware of the
   possibility of integrity attacks on non-signed data. In the case of
   ALTO home proxies running on ISP-managed gateways, the ISP may
   provide SSL/TLS certificates for each gateway, thus supporting
   SSL/TLS communications between clients and proxies. In this scenario,
   clients may reasonably assume that home proxies acting as local ALTO
   servers provides authoritative responses equivalent to those of the
   ISP's remote ALTO server.

   As mentioned before, serving ALTO queries within the home reduces the
   amount of user-sensitive information that leaks to external parties
   (e.g., a remote ALTO server). Therefore, ALTO home proxies should
   enhance user privacy.


7  IANA Considerations

   This document does not mandate any IANA actions.


8  References

8.1 Informative References

   [RFC5693]  Seedorf, J. and E. Burger, "Application-Layer Traffic
              Optimization (ALTO) Problem Statement", RFC 5693, October
              2009.

   [RFC2608]  Guttman, E., Perkins, C., Veizades, J., and M. Day,
              "Service Location Protocol, Version 2", RFC 2608, June
              1999.

   [I-D.gu-alto-redistribution]
              Yingjie, G., Alimi, R., and R. Even, "ALTO Information
              Redistribution", draft-gu-alto-redistribution-03 (work in
              progress), July 2010.

   [I-D.ietf-alto-server-discovery]
              Kiesel, S., Siemerling, M., Schwan, N., Scharf, M., and H.
              Song, "ALTO Server Discovery", draft-ietf-alto-server-
              discovery-02 (work in progress), September 2011.

   [I-D.ietf-alto-protocol]
              Alimi, R., Penno, R. and Y. Yang, "ALTO Protocol", draft-
              ietf-alto-protocol-09 (work in progress), June 2011.


 


Fabio Picconi            Expires April 23, 2012                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft         Gateway-based distribution       October 21, 2011


Authors' Addresses


   Fabio Picconi
   Technicolor
   1 rue Jeanne d'Arc
   92443 Issy les Moulineaux cedex
   France

   EMail: fabio.picconi@technicolor.com









































Fabio Picconi            Expires April 23, 2012                 [Page 8]
