


Network Working Group                                         L. Iannone
Internet-Draft                                         Telecom ParisTech
Intended status: Informational                         February 15, 2013
Expires: August 19, 2013


                  LISP EID Block Management Guidelines
               draft-iannone-lisp-eid-block-mgmnt-00.txt

Abstract

   This document proposes an allocation framework for the management of
   the LISP EID address prefix (requested in a separate document).  Such
   framework relies on hierarchical distribution of the address space to
   RIRs (Regional Internet Registries), who will allocate on a temporary
   basis sub-prefixes to requesting organizations.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 19, 2013.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.



Iannone                  Expires August 19, 2013                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft          LISP EID Block Management          February 2013


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Definition of Terms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   3.  EID Block Allocation Policy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   4.  RIRs and Internet Experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   5.  Next Steps  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   6.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   7.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   8.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
     8.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
     8.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9






































Iannone                  Expires August 19, 2013                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft          LISP EID Block Management          February 2013


1.  Introduction

   The Locator/ID Separation Protocol (LISP - [RFC6830]) and related
   mechanisms ([RFC6831], [RFC6832], [RFC6833], [RFC6834], [RFC6835],
   [RFC6836], [RFC6837]) separates the IP addressing space in two
   logical spaces, the End-point IDentifier (EID) space and the Routing
   LOCator (RLOC) space.  The first is used to identify communication
   end-points, while the second is used to locate them in the Internet
   routing infrastructure topology.

   More particularly, for IPv6, an address block has been requested to
   IANA to be reserved for exclusive use for EID prefix allocation and
   assignment [I-D.ietf-lisp-eid-block].

   This document proposes an allocation framework for the EID address
   block based on allocation of sub parts of the block to the different
   RIR, which in turn will grant temporary allocation to requesting
   organizations.

   Rationale, Intent, size, and usage of the EID address block is
   described in [I-D.ietf-lisp-eid-block].


2.  Definition of Terms

   LISP operates on two name spaces and introduces several new network
   elements.  This section provides high-level definitions of the LISP
   name spaces and network elements and as such, it must not be
   considered as an authoritative source.  The reference to the
   authoritative document for each term is included in every term
   description.

   Legacy Internet:  The portion of the Internet that does not run LISP
      and does not participate in LISP+ALT or any other mapping system.

   LISP site:  A LISP site is a set of routers in an edge network that
      are under a single technical administration.  LISP routers that
      reside in the edge network are the demarcation points to separate
      the edge network from the core network.  See [RFC6830] for more
      details.

    Endpoint ID (EID):  An EID is a 32-bit (for IPv4) or 128-bit (for
      IPv6) value used in the source and destination address fields of
      the first (most inner) LISP header of a packet.  A packet that is
      emitted by a system contains EIDs in its headers and LISP headers
      are prepended only when the packet reaches an Ingress Tunnel
      Router (ITR) on the data path to the destination EID.  The source
      EID is obtained via existing mechanisms used to set a host's



Iannone                  Expires August 19, 2013                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft          LISP EID Block Management          February 2013


      "local" IP address.  An EID is allocated to a host from an EID-
      prefix block associated with the site where the host is located.
      See [RFC6830] for more details.

   EID-prefix:  A power-of-two block of EIDs that are allocated to a
      site by an address allocation authority.  See [RFC6830] for more
      details.

   EID-Prefix Aggregate:  A set of EID-prefixes said to be aggregatable
      in the [RFC4632] sense.  That is, an EID-Prefix aggregate is
      defined to be a single contiguous power-of-two EID-prefix block.
      A prefix and a length characterize such a block.  See [RFC6830]
      for more details.

   Routing LOCator (RLOC):  A RLOC is an IPv4 or IPv6 address of an
      egress tunnel router (ETR).  A RLOC is the output of an EID-to-
      RLOC mapping lookup.  An EID maps to one or more RLOCs.
      Typically, RLOCs are numbered from topologically aggregatable
      blocks that are assigned to a site at each point to which it
      attaches to the global Internet; where the topology is defined by
      the connectivity of provider networks, RLOCs can be thought of as
      Provider Aggregatable (PA) addresses.  See [RFC6830] for more
      details.

    EID-to-RLOC Mapping:  A binding between an EID-Prefix and the RLOC-
      set that can be used to reach the EID-Prefix.  The general term
      "mapping" always refers to an EID-to-RLOC mapping.  See [RFC6830]
      for more details.

   Ingress Tunnel Router (ITR):  An Ingress Tunnel Router (ITR) is a
      router that accepts receives IP packets from site end-systems on
      one side and sends LISP-encapsulated IP packets toward the
      Internet on the other side.  The router treats the "inner" IP
      destination address as an EID and performs an EID-to-RLOC mapping
      lookup.  The router then prepends an "outer" IP header with one of
      its globally routable RLOCs in the source address field and the
      result of the mapping lookup in the destination address field.
      See [RFC6830] for more details.

   Egress Tunnel Router (ETR):  An Egress Tunnel Router (ETR) receives
      LISP-encapsulated IP packets from the Internet on one side and
      sends decapsulated IP packets to site end-systems on the other
      side.  An ETR router accepts an IP packet where the destination
      address in the "outer" IP header is one of its own RLOCs.  The
      router strips the "outer" header and forwards the packet based on
      the next IP header found.  See [RFC6830] for more details.





Iannone                  Expires August 19, 2013                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft          LISP EID Block Management          February 2013


   Proxy ITR (PITR):  A Proxy-ITR (PITR) acts like an ITR but does so on
      behalf of non-LISP sites which send packets to destinations at
      LISP sites.  See [RFC6832] for more details.

   Proxy ETR (PETR):  A Proxy-ETR (PETR) acts like an ETR but does so on
      behalf of LISP sites which send packets to destinations at non-
      LISP sites.  See [RFC6832] for more details.

   Map Server (MS):  A network infrastructure component that learns EID-
      to-RLOC mapping entries from an authoritative source (typically an
      ETR).  A Map Server publishes these mappings in the distributed
      mapping system.  See [RFC6833] for more details.

   Map Resolver (MR):  A network infrastructure component that accepts
      LISP Encapsulated Map-Requests, typically from an ITR, quickly
      determines whether or not the destination IP address is part of
      the EID namespace; if it is not, a Negative Map-Reply is
      immediately returned.  Otherwise, the Map Resolver finds the
      appropriate EID-to-RLOC mapping by consulting the distributed
      mapping database system.  See [RFC6833] for more details.

   The LISP Alternative Logical Topology (ALT):  The virtual overlay
      network made up of tunnels between LISP+ALT Routers.  The Border
      Gateway Protocol (BGP) runs between ALT Routers and is used to
      carry reachability information for EID-prefixes.  The ALT provides
      a way to forward Map-Requests toward the ETR that "owns" an EID-
      prefix.  See [RFC6836] for more details.

   ALT Router:  The device on which runs the ALT.  The ALT is a static
      network built using tunnels between ALT Routers.  These routers
      are deployed in a roughly-hierarchical mesh in which routers at
      each level in the topology are responsible for aggregating EID-
      Prefixes learned from those logically "below" them and advertising
      summary prefixes to those logically "above" them.  Prefix learning
      and propagation between ALT Routers is done using BGP.  When an
      ALT Router receives an ALT Datagram, it looks up the destination
      EID in its forwarding table (composed of EID-Prefix routes it
      learned from neighboring ALT Routers) and forwards it to the
      logical next-hop on the overlay network.  The primary function of
      LISP+ALT routers is to provide a lightweight forwarding
      infrastructure for LISP control-plane messages (Map-Request and
      Map-Reply), and to transport data packets when the packet has the
      same destination address in both the inner (encapsulating)
      destination and outer destination addresses ((i.e., a Data Probe
      packet).  See [RFC6830] for more details.






Iannone                  Expires August 19, 2013                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft          LISP EID Block Management          February 2013


3.  EID Block Allocation Policy

   IANA will allocate EID prefix space to the different RIR according to
   the allocation forecast provided by the RIR.  To bootstrap the
   process it is suggested to allocate a /24 to every RIR.

   RIRs make available EID addressing prefixes in the reserved space on
   a temporary basis and for experimental uses.  The requester of the
   experimental prefix has to provide a short description of the
   intended use or experiment that will be carried out.  If the prefix
   will be used for activities not documented in the original
   description, the RIR issuing the allocation reserves the right to
   revoke the allocation.

   EID prefixes are allocated on a lease/license basis for a limited
   period of time (which can be renewed).  The details of the allocation
   request and the allocated prefix will be published by RIRs according
   to their current existing policy (e.g., public RIR database).

   The size of the minimum allocated prefix will follow existing RIR
   minimum allocation policy.

   When (and if) the LISP technology will change status, not being
   "experimental" anymore, and following the policies outlined in
   [RFC5226], the EID block will change status as well and converted in
   a permanent allocation.  RIRs will accept request to convert existing
   temporary allocations (without renumbering) in permanent allocation.
   The request will respect with RIRs policy for new IPv6 address
   allocations.  New (not previously existing) allocations in the EID
   block space will as well follow RIRs policy for normal IPv6 address
   allocation request.


4.  RIRs and Internet Experiments

   The Regional Internet Registries have already policies dealing
   Internet Experiments:

   o  RIPE NCC [RIPE]: Allocations and assignments of Internet resources
      for Internet experiments are available.  Such allocations or
      assignments are temporary.  They are intended to support
      experimental Internet activities.

   o  AfriNIC [AfriNIC]: Allocations and assignments of Internet
      resources for Internet experiments are available.  Such
      allocations or assignments are temporary.  They are intended to
      support experimental Internet activities.  Results of experiments
      should be made freely available to the public.



Iannone                  Expires August 19, 2013                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft          LISP EID Block Management          February 2013


   o  ARIN [ARIN]: Allocations and assignments of Internet resources for
      Internet experiments are available.  Such allocations or
      assignments are temporary.  They are intended to support
      experimental Internet activities.  Results of experiments should
      be made freely available to the public.

   o  APNIC [APNIC]: Allocations and assignments of Internet resources
      for Internet experiments are available.  Such allocations or
      assignments are temporary for a duration of one year, which can be
      extended according to the proposed experiment.  They are intended
      to support experimental Internet activities.  Results of
      experiments should be made freely available to the public.  APNIC
      reserves the right to publish archives of all experiments that
      receive an allocation.

   o  LACNIC [LACNIC]: Allocations and assignments of Internet resources
      for Internet experiments are available.  Such allocations or
      assignments are temporary for a duration of one year, renwable for
      the same duration.  They are intended to support experimental
      Internet activities.  Results of experiments should be made freely
      available to the public.  LACNIC reserves the right ot public
      archives of all experiments that receive an allocation.

   The policy proposed in Section 3 is compatible with the existing RIRs
   policy.


5.  Next Steps

   The document aims at starting discussion in order to address the
   concerns raised during the IETF Review of [I-D.ietf-lisp-eid-block],
   more specifically the lack of guidelines about the EID Block
   allocation and management.

   Discussion will be started with the different RIRs to verify
   compatibility of the proposed policy and agree on the process for EID
   prefix allocation and managament.


6.  Security Considerations

   This document does not introduce new security threats in the LISP
   architecture nor in the Legacy Internet architecture.


7.  IANA Considerations

   This document provides only management guidelines for the reserved



Iannone                  Expires August 19, 2013                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft          LISP EID Block Management          February 2013


   LISP EID prefix and does not make any direct request to IANA.


8.  References

8.1.  Normative References

   [I-D.ietf-lisp-eid-block]
              Iannone, L., Lewis, D., Meyer, D., and V. Fuller, "LISP
              EID Block", draft-ietf-lisp-eid-block-03 (work in
              progress), November 2012.

   [RFC4632]  Fuller, V. and T. Li, "Classless Inter-domain Routing
              (CIDR): The Internet Address Assignment and Aggregation
              Plan", BCP 122, RFC 4632, August 2006.

   [RFC5226]  Narten, T. and H. Alvestrand, "Guidelines for Writing an
              IANA Considerations Section in RFCs", BCP 26, RFC 5226,
              May 2008.

8.2.  Informative References

   [APNIC]    APNIC, "http://www.apnic.net/policy/experimental-alloc".

   [ARIN]     ARIN,
              "https://www.arin.net/resources/request/
              experimental.html".

   [AfriNIC]  AfriNIC, "https://my.afrinic.net/help/policies/
              afpol-tmpal200504.htm".

   [LACNIC]   LACNIC, "http://lacnic.net/en/politicas/manual10.html".

   [RFC6830]  Farinacci, D., Fuller, V., Meyer, D., and D. Lewis, "The
              Locator/ID Separation Protocol (LISP)", RFC 6830,
              January 2013.

   [RFC6831]  Farinacci, D., Meyer, D., Zwiebel, J., and S. Venaas, "The
              Locator/ID Separation Protocol (LISP) for Multicast
              Environments", RFC 6831, January 2013.

   [RFC6832]  Lewis, D., Meyer, D., Farinacci, D., and V. Fuller,
              "Interworking between Locator/ID Separation Protocol
              (LISP) and Non-LISP Sites", RFC 6832, January 2013.

   [RFC6833]  Fuller, V. and D. Farinacci, "Locator/ID Separation
              Protocol (LISP) Map-Server Interface", RFC 6833,
              January 2013.



Iannone                  Expires August 19, 2013                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft          LISP EID Block Management          February 2013


   [RFC6834]  Iannone, L., Saucez, D., and O. Bonaventure, "Locator/ID
              Separation Protocol (LISP) Map-Versioning", RFC 6834,
              January 2013.

   [RFC6835]  Farinacci, D. and D. Meyer, "The Locator/ID Separation
              Protocol Internet Groper (LIG)", RFC 6835, January 2013.

   [RFC6836]  Fuller, V., Farinacci, D., Meyer, D., and D. Lewis,
              "Locator/ID Separation Protocol Alternative Logical
              Topology (LISP+ALT)", RFC 6836, January 2013.

   [RFC6837]  Lear, E., "NERD: A Not-so-novel Endpoint ID (EID) to
              Routing Locator (RLOC) Database", RFC 6837, January 2013.

   [RIPE]     RIPE NCC, "http://www.ripe.net/ripe/docs/ripe-526".


Author's Address

   Luigi Iannone
   Telecom ParisTech

   Email: luigi.iannone@telecom-paristech.fr




























Iannone                  Expires August 19, 2013                [Page 9]

