


Network Working Group                                        B. Williams
Internet-Draft                                              Akamai, Inc.
Intended status: Standards Track                         September  2012
Expires: March 5, 2013


                   Overlay Path Option for IP and TCP
                draft-williams-overlaypath-ip-tcp-rfc-02

Abstract

   Data transport through overlay networks often uses either connection
   termination or network address translation (NAT) in such a way that
   the public IP addresses of the true endpoint machines involved in the
   data transport are invisible to each other.  This document describes
   IPv4, IPv6, and TCP options for communicating this information from
   the overlay network to the endpoint machines.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on March 5, 2013.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2012 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as



Williams                  Expires March 5, 2013                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft     Overlay Path Option for IP and TCP    September  2012


   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Detailed Use Case  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   3.  Option Format  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.1.  Version 1  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.2.  Version 2  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   4.  Network Traversal  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   5.  Option Use . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   6.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   7.  Forward Compatibility Support  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   8.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   9.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15


































Williams                  Expires March 5, 2013                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft     Overlay Path Option for IP and TCP    September  2012


1.  Introduction

   An overlay network is a network of machines distributed throughout
   multiple autonomous systems within the public Internet that can be
   used to improve the performance of data transport.  IP packets from
   the sender are delivered first to one of the machines that make up
   the overlay network.  That machine will relay the IP packets via one
   or more other machines in the overlay network, applying various
   performance enhancement methods and eventually delivering the packets
   to the real intended receiver.  Such overlay networks are used to
   improve the performance of content delivery [IEEE1344002].  Overlay
   networks are also used for peer-to-peer data transport [RFC5694], and
   they have been suggested for use in improved scalability for the
   internet routing infrastructure [RFC6179].

   Data transport through such an overlay network will often use network
   address translation for the source (SNAT) or destination (DNAT)
   addresses [RFC2663] in such a way that the public IP addresses of the
   true endpoint machines involved in the data transport are invisible
   to each other.  For example, the actual sender and receiver may use
   two completely different pairs of source and destination addresses to
   identify the connection on the sending and receiving networks.

   ---------------------------------------------------------------------

             ip hdr contains:               ip hdr contains:
   SENDER -> src = sender   --> OVERLAY --> src = overlay2  --> RECEIVER
             dst = overlay1                 dst = receiver

   ---------------------------------------------------------------------

                                 Figure 1

   This can be problematic for network security and diagnostics, since
   the source and destination IP addresses used by the sender are not
   accessible by the receiver.

   Some application layer protocols provide functionality that allows
   the overlay network to communicate the sender's public IP address to
   the receiver, such as the HTTP X-FORWARDED-FOR header field.
   However, use of such application specific options requires both the
   overlay network and the receiver to perform application layer
   processing with associated overhead.  It also requires separate
   implementations for each supported application type.

   Some proprietary implementations use IP-in-IP or UDP tunneling in
   order to communicate the information in question, but these solutions
   require continuous network overhead throughout the life of the



Williams                  Expires March 5, 2013                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft     Overlay Path Option for IP and TCP    September  2012


   connection.

   In order to limit the network and processing overhead associated with
   the other commonly used approaches, the mechanism described herein
   uses an internet or transport layer protocol option to communication
   the required address(es).

   Theoretically, the existing IP Record Route option could be used to
   provide the required information, but there are a few problems
   associated with this approach.  First, this use would be a re-
   purposing of the option, and thus existing implementations of support
   for the option would quite possibly conflict with this new use.  More
   importantly, many IP-layer devices are configured to drop packets
   that include IP protocol options.  Allowing the information to be
   transmitted at either the internet layer or the transport layer
   allows for more reliable packet delivery in a broad range of network
   configurations.

   This document describes IPv4 [RFC0791], IPv6 [RFC2460], and TCP
   [RFC0793] options for communicating this information from the overlay
   to the destination network/machine.  The list of addresses specified
   in the option may include any addresses that might be useful to the
   eventual receiver for security and/or diagnostic purposes, including
   but not limited to the source and destination addresses as seen by
   the sender.

   The IPv4 and TCP protocol options described herein provide limited
   support for IPv6 addresses.  It should be noted that inclusion of
   even a single IPv6 address would require the option to consume nearly
   half of the total option space provided by TCP and IPv4, which means
   that the entire TCP option space would be consumed for SYN packets
   that include the most commonly used options (i.e.  MSS, WSOPT, SACK
   permitted, and TSOPT).  This may prevent effective use of the IPv4
   and TCP protocol options for communicating IPv6 addresses in some
   circumstances.
















Williams                  Expires March 5, 2013                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft     Overlay Path Option for IP and TCP    September  2012


2.  Detailed Use Case

   An example use case that is satisfied by this design is as follows.

   1.  The sending endpoint host performs a DNS lookup that returns the
       IP address of a machine on the overlay network.  The sending
       endpoint addresses its packets with its own public IP address as
       the source and the provided overlay IP address as the
       destination.

   2.  The overlay ingress host receives the packet on its public IP
       address, and forwards the packet through the overlay to the
       egress host.  The overlay egress host performs SNAT, replacing
       the source IP address of the sending endpoint with its own IP
       address in order to ensure that return traffic will also use the
       overlay network.  This use of SNAT hides the client's public IP
       address for the receiving network.

   3.  For load balancing and diagnostic purposes, it is important for
       one or more machines on the receiver's network to be able to
       determine the public IP address associated with the sending host
       (i.e. the address that was hidden due to the use of SNAT by the
       overlay).

   4.  The overlay egress host is located on the receiver's network,
       which means there is a relatively small set of addresses for
       machines that may be producing packets that include the overlay
       path option.

   Under these circumstances, the overlay path option will contain a
   single IP address: the public IP address of the sending host.  If the
   receiving network must use the IP address included in the option for
   a purpose that requires trust, the fact that the overlay egress host
   is under the receiver's administrative control allows the receiver to
   apply the necessary limitations to the network configuration.  For
   example, under these circumstances, the receiver's firewall device
   could be configured to drop packets from external hosts if they
   contain the overlay path option.













Williams                  Expires March 5, 2013                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft     Overlay Path Option for IP and TCP    September  2012


3.  Option Format

   Some implementations already exist for version 1 of the overlay path
   option.  However, version 1 of the option does not provide support
   for communicating IPv6 addresses in either the IPv4 or TCP option.
   Both version 1 and version 2 of the option are described here in
   order to reflect the requirements of current and future implementors.

   It is up to the implementor whether version 1 is supported or both
   versions are supported.  A receiving implementation that supports
   version 2 MUST also support version 1.  The format changes defined
   for version 2 directly support the required backward compatibility.

   When a receiving implementation encounters the overlay path option
   with an unsupported version number, the receiver MAY either ignore
   the option or drop the packet.  The appropriate response will be
   dependent upon how the overlay path option's value is used by the
   receiver.

3.1.  Version 1

   Version 1 of the option supports only IPv4 addresses.  The option
   format for both IPv4 and TCP is identical.

   +---------+---------+---------+--------------------------------+
   |Type/Kind| Length  | Version | Addresses ...
   +---------+---------+---------+--------------------------------+
        1         1         1            4 x Address Count
   ----------------------------------------------------------------

                                 Figure 2

   IPv4 Type:  The type value for IPv4 is TBD-IP4-FULL (see also IANA
      Considerations (Section 8)).

      Copied flag:  1 (All fragments must carry the option.)

      Option class:  2 (debugging/measurement)

      Option number:  TBD-IP4 (decimal)

   TCP Kind:  The option kind value for TCP is TBD-TCP (see also IANA
      Considerations (Section 8)).

   Length:  The length of the option is variable, based on the number of
      addresses provided.  The minimum value is 7 (3 1-octet fields plus
      one 4-octet address).  The option MUST be ignored if the length
      value cannot represent 3 octets plus a list of 4-octet address



Williams                  Expires March 5, 2013                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft     Overlay Path Option for IP and TCP    September  2012


      value.

   Version:  The version number is 1.

   Addresses:  Version 1 of the option supports only IPv4 addresses.
      The remainder of the option space is filled with standard 32-bit
      IPv4 addresses.  In practice, the first address will be the public
      source address used by the sender and the second address (if
      present) will be the public destination address used by the
      sender.  However, the nature of the addresses provided may vary
      depending on the nature of the overlay network in question and is
      not required to include every IP address used for the connection.
      The list of IP addresses MUST be provided in order of traversal
      from sender to receiver.

3.2.  Version 2

   Version 2 of the options supports either IPv4 addresses or IPv6
   addresses, but it does not support a mix of IPv4 and IPv6 options
   within the same option value.  Version 2 provides not only IPv4 and
   TCP options, but also an IPv6 option for inclusion in the IPv6 Hop-
   by-hop Options header.  When IPv6 address support is required, the
   implementation SHOULD use the IPv6 header option whenever possible in
   order to avoid exhaustion of the TCP option space.  The option format
   for all three protocols is identical.

   +---------------+---------------+---------------+-------------------\
   |   Type/Kind   |    Length     |Fmly| Version  |  Addresses ...
   +---------------+---------------+---------------+-------------------\
          8b              8b       | 3b     5b     |
                                   -----------------
           1               1              1          Addr Size x Count
   ---------------------------------------------------------------------

                                 Figure 3

   IPv4 Type:  Identical to Version 1.

   TCP Kind:  Identical to Version 1.

   IPv6 Type:  The Type value for IPv6 is TBD-IP6 (see also IANA
      Considerations (Section 8)).

      act flag:  00 (skip over option)







Williams                  Expires March 5, 2013                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft     Overlay Path Option for IP and TCP    September  2012


      chg flag:  0 (option data does not change en-route)

      rest:  TBD-IP6 (decimal)

   Length:  The length of the option is variable, based on the address
      family and the number of addresses provided.  The minimum value is
      7 (3 1-octet fields plus one 4-octet IPv4 address).  The option
      MUST be ignored if the length value cannot represent 3 octets plus
      a list of addresses of the correct address family.

   Family/Version:  The third octet is comprised of two fields: family
      and version.Note that the possible family values have been
      selected to support backward compatibility with the 8-bit version
      field in version 1 of the option format.

   Family:  The high order 3 bits of the third octet indicate the
      address family for all IP addresses represented in the variable-
      length Addresses field.  The allowed values are:

      0: Address family is IPv4.

      1: Address family is IPv6.

   Version:  The low order 5 bits of the third octet indicate the
      protocol version number.  The version number is 2.

   Addresses:  The remainder of the option space is filled with either
      32-bit IPv4 or 128-bit IPv6 addresses, as indicated by the Family
      field.  In practice, the first address will be the public source
      address used by the sender and the second address (if present)
      will be the public destination address used by the sender.
      However, the nature of the addresses provided may vary depending
      on the nature of the overlay network in question and is not
      required to include every IP address used for the connection.  The
      list of IP addresses MUST be provided in order of traversal from
      sender to receiver.















Williams                  Expires March 5, 2013                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft     Overlay Path Option for IP and TCP    September  2012


4.  Network Traversal

   The following block diagram illustrates the use of addresses in the
   IPv4 header and the overlay path option as a packet traverses the
   network from sender to receiver.  The diagram assumes that the
   overlay network uses separate addresses (overlay1 and overlay2) for
   ingress and egress.

   -----------------------------------------------------------------

                                SENDER
                                  |
                                  V
                          +----------------+
                          |                |
                          | src: sender    |
                          | dst: overlay1  |
                          | opt: none      |
                          |                |
                          +----------------+
                                  |
                                  V
                               OVERLAY
                               NETWORK
                                  |
                                  V
                          +----------------+
                          |                |
                          | src: overlay2  |
                          | dst: receiver  |
                          | opt: sender    |
                          |                |
                          +----------------+
                                  |
                                  V
                               RECEIVER

   -----------------------------------------------------------------

                                 Figure 4











Williams                  Expires March 5, 2013                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft     Overlay Path Option for IP and TCP    September  2012


5.  Option Use

   Use of the TCP option allows an implementation to minimize the impact
   of this option on bandwidth utilization.  Due to the connection-
   oriented nature of TCP, the addresses used by the overlay network
   cannot change throughout the life of the connection.  For this
   reason, it is not necessary for the overlay network to include the
   overlay path option on every packet.  On the other hand, it is not
   enough for the option to be provided exclusively in the TCP SYN
   packet because the use of SYN cookies, for example, would mean that
   connection state is not stored until completion of the three-way
   handshake.  For this reason, the overlay network MUST include the TCP
   overlay path option in every outgoing packet until the receiver has
   either acknowledged or transmitted at least one byte of real data.
   The overlay network SHOULD discontinue inclusion of the TCP overlay
   path option after the first byte is either received or acknowledged.
   The receiver MAY ignore the TCP overlay path option on subsequent
   packets after successfully processing one instance of the option
   attached to a single in-order TCP packet.

   IP is not connection oriented, which means that the above described
   optimization is not possible.  In order to make effective use of the
   TCP optimization, an overlay network SHOULD only send the IP option
   on packets that do not use TCP as the transport layer protocol.  When
   the IP option is in use, the overlay network MUST transmit the option
   with every packet.  The receiver MUST NOT assume that that addresses
   in the IP overlay path option will remain consistent, but instead
   MUST be prepared to handle address changes in an application
   appropriate way.

   Use of the IP option is dependent upon support for IP options in all
   routers between the overlay egress point and the packet receiver.  If
   any router along the path is configured to drop packets with unknown
   IPv4 options (or any IP options, as is sometimes done as part of a
   DoS protection scheme), then use of the IP option will cause
   connections to simply fail.  For this reason, the IP option SHOULD
   only be used in environments where the full path between the overlay
   egress machine and the packet receiver is under common administrative
   control.

   As explained above, the intention of both the TCP and IP options is
   to provide the receiver with public IP addresses that it would
   otherwise have seen if the overlay network were not in use.  There
   are security implications associated with exposing a network's use of
   the private [RFC1918] address space to the public internet, and for
   this reason, the overlay path option SHOULD NOT be used to
   communicate RFC1918 addresses in packets that traverse the public
   internet.



Williams                  Expires March 5, 2013                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft     Overlay Path Option for IP and TCP    September  2012


6.  Security Considerations

   This specification provides no authentication/validity verification
   for the data contained in the address fields.  For this reason, the
   data contained in the addresses field of the new option cannot itself
   be considered inherently secure.  In other words, confidence in the
   validity of the source address of the IPv4/IPv6 packet does not
   translate into confidence in the validity of the addresses in the
   overlay path option.  With this exception, this specification does
   not alter the inherent security of IPv4, IPv6, or TCP.

   The addresses provided in the option SHOULD NOT be used for purposes
   that require a trust relationship between the overlay network and the
   receiver (e.g. billing and/or intrusion prevention) unless a
   mechanism outside the scope of this specification is used to ensure
   the necessary level of trust.  As noted above, one possible example
   of such a mechanism would be to place the overlay egress host on the
   receiver's own network and to configure the receiver's firewall to
   drop any packets from external hosts that provide the overlay path
   option.  When the receiving network uses the values provided by the
   option in a way that does not require trust (e.g. maintaining session
   affinity in a load-balancing system), then use of a mechanism to
   enforce the trust relationship may not be required.




























Williams                  Expires March 5, 2013                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft     Overlay Path Option for IP and TCP    September  2012


7.  Forward Compatibility Support

   The most common use of this option on the internet today will require
   recording IP addresses for a single address family only.  However, it
   may be important in the future to be able to record a mix of IPv4 and
   IPv6 addresses.  Alternatively, future security requirements may
   demand the use of, for example, a keyed hash for data integrity and
   authentication purposes and/or inclusion of additional information
   specific to the sender's connection.

   To balance current-day performance and efficiency against the need
   for future extensibility, the option includes a version field, so
   that future requirements can be met without the need to consume a new
   option number.





































Williams                  Expires March 5, 2013                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft     Overlay Path Option for IP and TCP    September  2012


8.  IANA Considerations

   [Paragraphs below in braces should be removed by the RFC Editor upon
   publication]

   [The TCP Overlay Path Option requires that IANA allocate a value from
   the TCP option kind namespace, to be replaced for TBD-TCP throughout
   this document.]

   [The IPv4 Overlay Path Option requires that IANA allocate a value
   from the IP option number namespace.  The copy flag for this option
   is 1 and the class for this option is 2.  The assigned number will
   replace TBD-IP4 throughout this document, and the full type value
   (representing copy, class, and number) will replace TBD-IP4-FULL
   throughout the document.]

   [The IPv6 Overlay Path Option requires that IANA allocate a value
   from the IPv6 parameters: hop-by-hop options namespace.  The action
   for this option is 00 and the change flag for this option is 0.  The
   assigned number will replace TBD-IP6 throughout this document.]

   This document defines the TCP Overlay Path option, described in
   Section 3.1 and Section 3.2.  This option has been assigned the
   option number TBD-TCP by IANA action.

   This document also defines the IPv4 Overlay Path option, described in
   Section 3.1 and Section 3.2.  This option has been assigned the
   option number TBD-IP4-FULL by IANA action.

   This document also defines the IPv6 Overlay Path hop-by-hop option,
   described in Section 3.2.  This option has been assigned the option
   number TBD-IP6 by IANA action.

   This document defines no new namespaces.

















Williams                  Expires March 5, 2013                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft     Overlay Path Option for IP and TCP    September  2012


9.  Informative References

   [RFC0791]  Postel, J., "Internet Protocol", RFC 791, STD 5,
              September 1981.

   [RFC0793]  Postel, J., "Transmission Control Protocol", RFC 793,
              STD 7, September 1981.

   [RFC1918]  Rekhter, Y., Moskowitz, B., Karrenberg, D., de Groot, G.,
              and E. Lear, "Address Allocation for Private Internets",
              RFC 1918, BCP 5, February 1996.

   [RFC2460]  Deering, S. and R. Hinden, "Internet Protocol, Version 6
              (IPv6)", RFC 2460, December 1998.

   [RFC2663]  Srisuresh, P. and M. Holdrege, "IP Network Address
              Translator (NAT) Terminology and Considerations",
              RFC 2663, August 1999.

   [RFC5694]  Camarillo, G., "Peer-to-Peer (P2P) Architecture:
              Definition, Taxonomies, Examples, and Applicability",
              RFC 5694, November 2009.

   [RFC6179]  Templin, F., "The Internet Routing Overlay Network
              (IRON)", RFC 6179, March 2011.

   [IEEE1344002]
              Byers, J., Considine, J., Mitzenmacher, M., and S. Rost,
              "Informed content delivery across adaptive overlay
              networks: IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking, Vol 12,
              Issue 5, ppg 767-780", October 2004.




















Williams                  Expires March 5, 2013                [Page 14]

Internet-Draft     Overlay Path Option for IP and TCP    September  2012


Author's Address

   Brandon Williams
   Akamai, Inc.
   Cambridge, MA
   USA

   Email: brandon.williams@akamai.com











































Williams                  Expires March 5, 2013                [Page 15]

