


Network Working Group                                 D. Waltermire, Ed.
Internet-Draft                                                      NIST
Intended status: Informational                              A. Montville
Expires: August 15, 2013                                              TW
                                                       February 11, 2013


  Analysis of Security Automation and Continuous Monitoring (SACM) Use
                                 Cases
                   draft-waltermire-sacm-use-cases-04

Abstract

   This document identifies use cases, derived functional capabilities,
   and requirements needed to provide a foundation for creating
   interoperable automation tools and continuous monitoring solutions
   that provide visibility into the state of endpoints, user activities,
   and network behavior.  Stakeholders will be able to use these tools
   to aggregate and analyze relevant security and operational data to
   understand the organizations security posture, quantify business
   risk, and make informed decisions that support organizational
   objectives while protecting critical information.  Organizations will
   be able to use these tools to augment and automate information
   sharing activities to collaborate with partners to identify and
   mitigate threats.  Other automation tools will be able to integrate
   with these capabilities to enforce policies based on human decisions
   to harden systems, prevent misuse and reduce the overall attack
   surface.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 15, 2013.

Copyright Notice




Waltermire & Montville   Expires August 15, 2013                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft               SACM Use Cases                February 2013


   Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.







































Waltermire & Montville   Expires August 15, 2013                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft               SACM Use Cases                February 2013


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     1.1.  Requirements Language  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.  Key Concepts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   3.  Use Cases  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     3.1.  UC1: Endpoint Posture Assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
       3.1.1.  Goals  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
       3.1.2.  Main Success Scenario  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     3.2.  UC2: Enforcement of Acceptable State . . . . . . . . . . .  8
       3.2.1.  Goal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
       3.2.2.  Main Success Scenario  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     3.3.  UC3: Security Control Verification and Monitoring  . . . .  8
       3.3.1.  Goal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
       3.3.2.  Main Success Scenario  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   4.  Functional Capabilities and Requirements . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     4.1.  Capabilities Supporting UC1  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
       4.1.1.  Asset Management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
         4.1.1.1.  Concepts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
         4.1.1.2.  Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
       4.1.2.  Data Collection  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
         4.1.2.1.  Concepts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
         4.1.2.2.  Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
       4.1.3.  Assessment Result Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
         4.1.3.1.  Concepts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
         4.1.3.2.  Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
       4.1.4.  Content Management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
         4.1.4.1.  Concepts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
         4.1.4.2.  Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
     4.2.  Capabilities Supporting UC2  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
       4.2.1.  Assessment Query and Transport . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
       4.2.2.  Acceptable State Enforcement . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
     4.3.  Capabilities Supporting UC3  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
       4.3.1.  Tasking and Scheduling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
       4.3.2.  Data Aggregation and Reporting . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   5.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
   6.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
   7.  Terms and Definitions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
   8.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
   9.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
     9.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
     9.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20








Waltermire & Montville   Expires August 15, 2013                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft               SACM Use Cases                February 2013


1.  Introduction

   This document addresses foundational use cases in security
   automation.  These use cases may be considered when establishing a
   charter for the Security Automation and Continuous Monitoring (SACM)
   working group within the IETF.  This working group will address as
   many of the standards needed to define an interoperable, automation
   infrastructure required to support timely, accurate and actionable
   situational awareness over an organization's IT assets.  This
   document enumerates use cases and breaks down related concepts and
   related requirements for capabilities that cross many IT security
   information domains.

   Sections Section 2, Section 3, and Section 4 of this document
   respectively focus on:

      Defining the key concepts used within the document providing a
      common frame of reference;

      Identifying foundational use cases that represent classes of
      stakeholders, goals, and usage scenarios;

      A set of derived functional capabilities and associated
      requirements that are needed to support the use cases;

   The concepts identified in this document provide a foundation for
   creating interoperable automation tools and continuous monitoring
   solutions that provide visibility into the posture of endpoints, user
   activities, and network behavior.  Stakeholders will be able to use
   these tools to aggregate and analyze relevant security and
   operational data to understand the organizations security posture,
   quantify business risk, and make informed decisions that support
   organizational objectives while protecting critical information.
   Organizations will be able to use these tools to augment and automate
   information sharing activities to collaborate with partners to
   identify and mitigate threats.  Other automation tools will be able
   to integrate with these capabilities to enforce policies based on
   human decisions to harden systems, prevent misuse and reduce the
   overall attack surface.

1.1.  Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].






Waltermire & Montville   Expires August 15, 2013                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft               SACM Use Cases                February 2013


2.  Key Concepts

   The operational methods we use within the bounds of our present
   realities are failing us - we are falling behind.  We have begun to
   recognize that the evolution of threat agents, increasing system
   complexity, rapid situational security change, and scarce resources
   are detrimental to our success.  There have been efforts to remedy
   our circumstance, and these efforts are generally known as "Security
   Automation."

   Security Automation is a general term used to reference
   specifications originally created by the National Institute of
   Standards and Technology (NIST) and/or the MITRE Corporation.
   Security Automation generally includes languages, protocols
   (prescribed ways by which specification collections are used),
   enumerations, and metrics.

   These specifications have provided an opportunity for tool vendors
   and enterprises building customized solutions to take the appropriate
   steps toward enabling Security Automation by defining common
   information expressions.  In effect, common expression of information
   enables interoperability between tools (whether customized,
   commercial, or freely available).  Another important capability
   common expression provides is the ability to automate portions of
   security processes to gain efficiency, react to new threats in a
   timely manner, and free up security personnel to work on more
   advanced problems within the processes in which they participate.
























Waltermire & Montville   Expires August 15, 2013                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft               SACM Use Cases                February 2013


     +---------------------------------------+  +-------------+
     |                                       |  |             |
     |     Operational Risk Management       |  |             |
     |                                       |  |             |
     +---------------------------------------+  |             |
                                                |             |
     +---------------------------------------+  |             |
     |                                       |  |             |
     |     Information Risk Management       |  |   Policy    |
     |                                       |  |   Process   |
     +---------------------------------------+  |   Procedure |
                                                |             |
     +---------------------------------------+  |             |
     |                                       |  |             |
     |     Control Frameworks                |  |             |
     |                                       |  |             |
     +---------------------------------------+  |             |
                                                |             |
     +---------------------------------------+  |             |
     |                                       |  |             |
     |     Controls                          |  |             |
     |                                       |  |             |
     +---------------------------------------+  +-------------+


                                 Figure 1

   The figure above provides some context for our focus area.
   Organizations of all sizes will have a more or less formal risk
   management program, depending upon their maturity and organization-
   specific needs.  A small business with only a few employees may not
   have a formally recognized risk management program, but they still
   lock the doors at night.  Typically, financial entities and
   governments sit at the other end of the spectrum with often large,
   laborious risk frameworks.  The point is that all organizations
   practice, to some degree, Operational Risk Management (ORM).  An
   Information Risk Management (IRM) program is most likely a
   constituent of ORM (another constituent might be Financial Risk
   Management).  In the Information Risk Management domain, we often use
   control frameworks to provide guidance for organizations practicing
   ORM in an information context, and these control frameworks define a
   variety of controls.

   From ORM, IRM, control frameworks, and the controls themselves,
   organizations derive a set of organization-specific policies,
   processes, and procedures.  Such policies, processes, and procedures
   make use of a library of supporting information commonly stipulated
   by the organization (i.e. enterprise acceptable use policies), but



Waltermire & Montville   Expires August 15, 2013                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft               SACM Use Cases                February 2013


   often prescribed by external entities (i.e.  Payment Card Industry
   Data Security Standards, Sarbanes-Oxley, or EU Data Privacy
   Directive).  The focus of this document spans controls, certain
   aspects of policy, process, and procedure, and control frameworks.


3.  Use Cases

   This document addresses three use cases: Endpoint Posture Assessment,
   Enforcement of Acceptable State, Security Control Verification and
   Monitoring.  Currently, the first use case, Endpoint Posture
   Assessment, is being pursued under the SACM charter.  The additional
   use cases are included to provide broader context to this work and
   represents additional work that may be considered by SACM or another
   IETF working group in the future.

3.1.  UC1: Endpoint Posture Assessment

   The Endpoint Posture Assessment use case involves collecting
   information about the posture of a given endpoint.  This posture
   information is gathered and then published to appropriate data
   repositories to make collected information available for further
   analysis supporting organizational security processes.

3.1.1.  Goals

   The primary goals of the endpoint Posture Assessment use case is:

   o  To collect the posture of a given endpoint;

   o  Make that posture available to the enterprise for further analysis
      and action; and

   o  To assess that the endpoint's posture is in compliance with
      enterprise standards and, therefore, ensure alignment with
      enterprise policy.

3.1.2.  Main Success Scenario

   1.  Define a target endpoint to be assessed

   2.  Select acceptable state policies to apply to the defined target

   3.  Identify the endpoint being assessed

   4.  Collect posture attributes from the target





Waltermire & Montville   Expires August 15, 2013                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft               SACM Use Cases                February 2013


   5.  Communicate target identity and collected posture to external
       system for evaluation

   6.  Compare collected posture attributes from the target endpoint
       with expected state values as expressed in acceptable state
       policies

3.2.  UC2: Enforcement of Acceptable State

   Controlling access to a desired resource based on the compliance of
   an endpoint or user with enterprise policy.

3.2.1.  Goal

   Allow or deny access to a desired resource based on the compliance of
   an endpoint or user with enterprise policy.

3.2.2.  Main Success Scenario

   1.  An entity (user on an endpoint or the endpoint itself) requests
       access to a given resource (i.e. network connection, service)

   2.  Assessment of endpoint posture is achieved using UC1: Endpoint
       Posture Assessment

   3.  Based on assessment results (i.e. compliance level with
       enterprise policy)

       A.  Endpoint or user is allowed access to requested resource, or

       B.  Endpoint or user is denied access to requested resource

3.3.  UC3: Security Control Verification and Monitoring

   This use case involves continuous (uninterrupted) and continual
   (periodic) monitoring of a set of target endpoints to determine the
   degree of compliance with acceptable state policies within an
   enterprise.

3.3.1.  Goal

   Continuous assessment of the implementation and effectiveness of
   security controls based on machine processable content.

3.3.2.  Main Success Scenario






Waltermire & Montville   Expires August 15, 2013                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft               SACM Use Cases                February 2013


   1.  Define set of target endpoints to be assessed.

   2.  Select acceptable state policies to apply to set of target
       endpoints

   3.  Define assessment trigger based on either a

       A.  Time period, or

       B.  An event (e.g. endpoint, network, organizational).

   4.  Define result reporting/alerting criteria

   5.  Enable continuous assessment


4.  Functional Capabilities and Requirements

   In general, the activities of managing assets, configurations, and
   vulnerabilities are common between UC1, UC2, and UC3.  UC2 uses these
   activities to either grant or deny an entity access to a requested
   resource.  UC3 uses these activities in support of compliance
   measurement on a periodic basis.

   At the most basic level, an enterprise needing to satisfy these use
   cases will need certain capabilities to be met.  Specifically, we are
   talking about risk management capabilities.  This is the central
   problem domain, so it makes sense to be able to convey information
   about technical and non-technical controls, benchmarks, control
   requirements, control frameworks and other concepts in a common way.

4.1.  Capabilities Supporting UC1

   The capabilities in this section support assessing endpoint posture
   in an automated manner as described in Section Section 3.1.

4.1.1.  Asset Management

   Organizations manage a variety of assets within their enterprise.
   Supporting the use cases in this document requires management of
   assets including: endpoints, the hardware they are composed of,
   installed software, hardware/software licenses used, and any
   appropriate configurations.  Effective Asset Management is a critical
   foundation upon which all else in risk management is based.  There
   are two important facets to asset management: 1) understanding
   coverage (what and how many assets are under control) and, 2)
   understanding specific asset details.  Coverage is fairly
   straightforward - assessing 80% of the enterprise assets is better



Waltermire & Montville   Expires August 15, 2013                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft               SACM Use Cases                February 2013


   than assessing 50% of the enterprise assets.  Getting asset details
   is comparatively subtle - if an enterprise does not have a precise
   understanding of its assets, then all acquired data and consequent
   actions taken based on the data are considered suspect.  Assessing
   assets (managed and unmanaged) requires that we have visibility into
   the posture of endpoints, the ability to understand the composition
   and relationships between different assets types, and the ability to
   properly characterize them at the outset and over time.

4.1.1.1.  Concepts

   Managing endpoints and the different types of assets that compose
   them involves initially discovering and characterizing each asset
   instance, and then identify them in a common way.  Characterization
   may take the form of logical characterization or security
   characterization, where logical characterization may include business
   context not otherwise related to security, but which may be used as
   information in support of decision making later in risk management
   workflows.

   The following list details the requisite Asset Management
   capabilities:

   o  Discover assets in the enterprise

   o  For a given endpoint, understand the composition and relationship
      of its constituent assets

   o  Characterize assets according to security and non-security asset
      properties

   o  Identify and describe assets using a common vocabulary between
      implementations

   o  Reconcile asset representations originating from disparate tools

   o  Manage asset information throughout the asset's life cycle

4.1.1.2.  Requirements

   A method MUST be provided for identifying an endpoint (asset
   identification) as a unique entity within the enterprise.

      The endpoint identifier SHOULD be able to be determined in an
      automated manner.

      The endpoint identifier, as communicated between entities, SHOULD
      be held to a minimal size.



Waltermire & Montville   Expires August 15, 2013               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft               SACM Use Cases                February 2013


   A method MUST be provided for defining an endpoint (asset
   classification) based on a set of organizationally relevant
   properties (e.g. organizational affiliation, criticality, function).

4.1.2.  Data Collection

   Related to managing the assets related to endpoints, and central to
   any automated assessment solution, is the ability to collect data
   from (or related to) an endpoint (some might call this "harvesting").
   Of particular interest is data representing the security state of the
   endpoint and its constituent assets.  The primary interest of the
   activities demanding data collection is centered on policy attribute
   collection related to installed hardware and software configuration
   items, and network device configuration items among others.

4.1.2.1.  Concepts

   There are many valid perspectives to take when considering required
   data collection capabilities.  The nature of data collected relating
   to endpoints supports a variety of information domains including:
   security configuration management (SCM) and vulnerability management.
   SCM deals with the configuration of endpoints (infrastructure devices
   and computing hosts) including the software installed and in use on
   these devices.  Vulnerability management involves identifying the
   patch level of software installed on the device and the
   identification of insecure custom code (e.g. web vulnerabilities).
   All vulnerabilities need to be addressed as part of a comprehensive
   risk management program, which is a superset of software
   vulnerabilities.  Thus, the capability of assessing non-software
   vulnerabilities applicable to the in-scope system is required.
   Additionally, it may be necessary to support non-technical assessment
   of data relating to assets such as aspects related to operational and
   management controls.

   The following assessment capabilities support SCM relative to a
   target asset:

   o  Collect the state of technical controls including, but not
      necessarily limited to:

      *  Software inventory (e.g. operating system, applications,
         patches)

      *  Configuration settings

   o  Collect the state of non-technical controls commonly called
      administrative controls (i.e. policy, process, procedure)




Waltermire & Montville   Expires August 15, 2013               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft               SACM Use Cases                February 2013


4.1.2.2.  Requirements

   One or more data formats MUST be identified to describe instructions,
   data collection methods, to drive data collection (e.g. technical,
   interrogative).

   One or more data formats MUST be identified to instruct what posture
   attributes need to be collected for a specific set of endpoints.

      A method MUST be provided to include OPTIONAL instructions on
      describing what content must be run on the endpoint.

      A method MUST be provided to include OPTIONAL instructions that
      determine how to collect data supporting any particular test for
      that endpoint.

   A method MUST be provided for retrieving data collection instructions
   from a remote host (see Section Section 4.1.4).

   One or more data formats MUST be identified to capture the results of
   data collection.

      This expression MUST be capable of supporting the characterization
      of assets and any related configuration settings that together
      compose an endpoint.

         A mechanism MUST be provided to identify the software and
         hardware asset instances that compose an endpoint.

            An asset identifier SHOULD be able to be determined in an
            automated manner

            An asset identifier, as communicated between entities,
            SHOULD be held to a minimal size.

            An asset identifier SHOULD be able to represented in a
            simple unambiguous manner, such as a reference, so that its
            embedded use in places like applicability clauses for
            individual benchmark tests can be kept from making their
            usage unwieldy.

         A mechanism MUST be provided to associate configuration
         settings values to the installed software.

         A mechanism MUST be provided to identify additional collected
         posture attribute/value pairs related to an endpoint.





Waltermire & Montville   Expires August 15, 2013               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft               SACM Use Cases                February 2013


      A mechanism MUST be provided to identify the endpoint the results
      pertain to (see Section Section 4.1.1.

      A mechanism MUST be provided to associate the data collection
      method with the collected value.

      A mechanism MUST be provided to include provenance information
      describing what sensor of software collected the data.

      A mechanism MUST be provided to include entailment information,
      perhaps by reference, describing the methodology used to collect
      the data.

   A method of communicating data collection results to another system
   for further analysis MUST be identified.

   TODO: Communicate, unambiguously and to the necessary level of
   detail**, the asset details between software components

4.1.3.  Assessment Result Analysis

   At the most basic level, the data collected needs to be analyzed for
   compliance to a standard stipulated by the enterprise.  Analysis
   methods may vary between enterprises, but commonly take a similar
   form.

4.1.3.1.  Concepts

   The following capabilities support the analysis of assessment
   results:

   o  Comparing actual state to expected state

   o  Scoring/weighting individual comparison results

   o  Relating specific comparisons to benchmark-level requirements

   o  Relating benchmark-level requirements to one or more control
      frameworks

4.1.3.2.  Requirements

   A method MUST be provided for selecting acceptable state policy,
   describing how to evaluate collected information, based on
   characteristics of the endpoint and organizational policy.

   A method MUST be provided for comparing collected data to expected
   state values (test evaluation).



Waltermire & Montville   Expires August 15, 2013               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft               SACM Use Cases                February 2013


   Any results produced by analysis processes MUST be capable of being
   transformed into a human-readable format.

4.1.4.  Content Management

   It should be clear by now that the capabilities required to support
   risk management state measurement will yield volumes of content.  The
   efficacy of risk management state measurement depends directly on the
   stability of the driving content, and, subsequently, the ability to
   change content according to enterprise needs.

4.1.4.1.  Concepts

   Capabilities supporting Content Management should provide the ability
   to create/define or modify content, as well as store and retrieve
   said content of at least the following types:

   o  Configuration checklists

   o  Assessment rules

   o  Data collection rules and methods

   o  Scoring models

   o  Vulnerability information

   o  Patch information

   o  Asset characterization data and rules

   Note that the ability to modify content is in direct support of
   tailoring content for enterprise-specific needs.

4.1.4.2.  Requirements

   A protocol MUST be identified for retrieving SACM content from a
   content repository

   A protocol MUST be identified for querying SACM content held in a
   content repository.  The protocol MUST support querying content by
   applicability to asset characteristics.

      TODO: Determine what content can or must be run on the endpoint

   A protocol MUST be identified for curating SACM content in a content
   repository.  Note: This might be an area where we can limit the scope
   of work relative to the initial SACM charter.



Waltermire & Montville   Expires August 15, 2013               [Page 14]

Internet-Draft               SACM Use Cases                February 2013


4.2.  Capabilities Supporting UC2

   UC2 is dependent upon UC1 and, therefore, includes all of the
   capabilities described in Section Section 4.1.  UC2 describes the
   ability to make a resource access decision based on an assessment of
   the requesting system (either by the system itself or on behalf of a
   user operating that system).  There are two chief capabilities
   required to meet the needs expressed in Section Section 3.2:
   Assessment Query and Transport, and Acceptable State Enforcement.

4.2.1.  Assessment Query and Transport

   Under certain circumstances, the system requesting access may be
   unknown, which can make querying the system problematic (consider a
   case where a system is connecting to the network and has no
   assessment software installed).  Note that The Network Endpoint
   Assessment (NEA) protocols (PA-TNC [RFC5792], PB-TNC [RFC5793], PT-
   TLS [I-D.ietf-nea-pt-tls], and PT-EAP [I-D.ietf-nea-pt-eap]) may be
   used to query and transport the things to be measured.

4.2.2.  Acceptable State Enforcement

   Once the assessment has been performed a decision to allow or deny
   access to the requested resource can be made.  Making this decision
   is a necessary but insufficient condition for enforcement of
   acceptable state, and an implementation must have the ability to
   actively allow or deny access to the requested resource.  For
   example, network enforcement may be implemented with RADIUS [RFC2865]
   or DIAMETER [RFC6733].

4.3.  Capabilities Supporting UC3

   Recall that UC3 is dependent upon UC1 and therefore includes all of
   the capabilities described in Section 4.1.  The difference in UC3 is
   the notion of when to assess rather than what to assess.  Therefore,
   the capabilities described in this section are relevant only to the
   "when" and not to the "what."

4.3.1.  Tasking and Scheduling

   The ability to task and schedule assessments is requisite for any
   effective risk management program.  Tasking refers to the ability to
   create a set of instructions to be conveyed at a later time via
   scheduling.  Tasking, therefore, involves selecting a set of
   assessment criteria, assigning that set to a group of assets, and
   expressing that information in a manner that can be consumed by a
   collection tool.  Scheduling comes into play when the enterprise
   determines when to perform a specific assessment task (or set of



Waltermire & Montville   Expires August 15, 2013               [Page 15]

Internet-Draft               SACM Use Cases                February 2013


   tasks).  Scheduling may be expressed in a way that constrains tasks
   to execute only during defined periods, can be ad hoc, or may be
   triggered by the analysis of previous assessment results or events
   detected in the enterprise.

   The following capabilities support Tasking and Scheduling:

   o  Selection of assessment criteria

   o  Defining in-scope assets (i.e. targeting)

   o  Defining periodic assessments for a given set of tasks

   o  Defining assessment triggers for a given set of tasks

4.3.2.  Data Aggregation and Reporting

   Assessment results are produced for every asset assessed, and these
   results must be reported not only individually, but in the aggregate,
   and in accordance with enterprise needs.  Enterprises should be able
   to aggregate and report on the data their assessments produce in a
   number of different ways in order to support different levels of
   decision making.  At times, security operations personnel may be
   interested in understanding where the most critical risks exist in
   their enterprise so as to focus their remediation efforts in the most
   effective way (in terms of cost and return).  At other times, only
   aggregated scores will matter, as might be the case when reporting to
   an information security manager or other executive-level role.

   It is not the position of these capabilities to provide explicit
   details about how reports should be formatted for presentation, but
   only what information they should contain for a particular purpose.
   Furthermore, it is quite easy to imagine the need for a capability
   providing extensibility to aggregation and reporting.

   Aggregating assessment results by the following capabilities supports
   Data Aggregation and Reporting

   o  By asset characterization

   o  By assessment criteria

   o  By control framework

   o  By benchmark

   o  By other attributes/properties of assessment characteristics




Waltermire & Montville   Expires August 15, 2013               [Page 16]

Internet-Draft               SACM Use Cases                February 2013


   o  Extensible aggregation and reporting


5.  IANA Considerations

   This memo includes no request to IANA.

   All drafts are required to have an IANA considerations section (see
   RFC 5226 [RFC5226] for a guide).  If the draft does not require IANA
   to do anything, the section contains an explicit statement that this
   is the case (as above).  If there are no requirements for IANA, the
   section will be removed during conversion into an RFC by the RFC
   Editor.


6.  Security Considerations

   All drafts are required to have a security considerations section.
   See RFC 3552 [RFC3552] for a guide.

   This section needs to be fleshed out to include concerns including:

   o  Authentication

   o  Authorization

   o  Endpoint and user identity management

   o  Encryption of communications

   o  Content signing and validation

   o  etc...

   While not strictly a security concern, network bandwidth and similar
   communications requirements also need to be addressed.


7.  Terms and Definitions

   assessment

      Defined in [RFC5209] as "the process of collecting posture for a
      set of capabilities on the endpoint (e.g., host-based firewall)
      such that the appropriate validators may evaluate the posture
      against compliance policy."





Waltermire & Montville   Expires August 15, 2013               [Page 17]

Internet-Draft               SACM Use Cases                February 2013


      Within this document the use of the term is expanded to support
      other uses of collected posture (e.g. reporting, network
      enforcement, vulnerability detection, license management).  The
      phrase "set of capabilities on the endpoint" includes: hardware
      and software installed on the endpoint."

   asset

      Defined in [RFC4949] as "a system resource that is (a) required to
      be protected by an information system's security policy, (b)
      intended to be protect by a countermeasure, or (c) required for a
      system's mission.

   attribute

      Defined in [RFC5209] as "data element including any requisite
      meta-data describing an observed, expected, or the operational
      status of an endpoint feature (e.g., anti-virus software is
      currently in use)."

   endpoint

      Defined in [RFC5209] as "any computing device that can be
      connected to a network.  Such devices normally are associated with
      a particular link layer address before joining the network and
      potentially an IP address once on the network.  This includes:
      laptops, desktops, servers, cell phones, or any device that may
      have an IP address."

      Network infrastructure devices (e.g. switches, routers,
      firewalls), which fit the definition, are also considered to be
      endpoints within this document.

      Based on the previous definition of an asset, an endpoint is a
      type of asset.

   posture

      Defined in [RFC5209] as "configuration and/or status of hardware
      or software on an endpoint as it pertains to an organization's
      security policy."

      This term is used within the scope of this document to represent
      the state information that is collected from an endpoint (e.g.
      software/hardware inventory, configuration settings).

   posture attributes




Waltermire & Montville   Expires August 15, 2013               [Page 18]

Internet-Draft               SACM Use Cases                February 2013


      Defined in [RFC5209] as "attributes describing the configuration
      or status (posture) of a feature of the endpoint.  For example, a
      Posture Attribute might describe the version of the operating
      system installed on the system."

      Within this document this term represents a specific assertion
      about endpoint state (e.g. configuration setting, installed
      software, hardware).  The phrase "features of the endpoint" refers
      to installed software or software components.

   system resource

      Defined in [RFC4949] as "data contained in an information system;
      or a service provided by a system; or a system capacity, such as
      processing power or communication bandwidth; or an item of system
      equipment (i.e., hardware, firmware, software, or documentation);
      or a facility that houses system operations and equipment.


8.  Acknowledgements

   The author would like to thank Kathleen Moriarty and Stephen Hanna
   for contributing text to this document.  The author would also like
   to acknowledge the members of the SACM mailing list for their keen
   and insightful feedback on the concepts and text within this
   document.


9.  References

9.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

9.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.ietf-nea-pt-eap]
              Cam-Winget, N. and P. Sangster, "PT-EAP: Posture Transport
              (PT) Protocol For EAP Tunnel Methods",
              draft-ietf-nea-pt-eap-06 (work in progress),
              December 2012.

   [I-D.ietf-nea-pt-tls]
              Sangster, P., Cam-Winget, N., and J. Salowey, "PT-TLS: A
              TLS-based Posture Transport (PT) Protocol",
              draft-ietf-nea-pt-tls-08 (work in progress), October 2012.




Waltermire & Montville   Expires August 15, 2013               [Page 19]

Internet-Draft               SACM Use Cases                February 2013


   [RFC2865]  Rigney, C., Willens, S., Rubens, A., and W. Simpson,
              "Remote Authentication Dial In User Service (RADIUS)",
              RFC 2865, June 2000.

   [RFC3552]  Rescorla, E. and B. Korver, "Guidelines for Writing RFC
              Text on Security Considerations", BCP 72, RFC 3552,
              July 2003.

   [RFC4949]  Shirey, R., "Internet Security Glossary, Version 2",
              RFC 4949, August 2007.

   [RFC5209]  Sangster, P., Khosravi, H., Mani, M., Narayan, K., and J.
              Tardo, "Network Endpoint Assessment (NEA): Overview and
              Requirements", RFC 5209, June 2008.

   [RFC5226]  Narten, T. and H. Alvestrand, "Guidelines for Writing an
              IANA Considerations Section in RFCs", BCP 26, RFC 5226,
              May 2008.

   [RFC5792]  Sangster, P. and K. Narayan, "PA-TNC: A Posture Attribute
              (PA) Protocol Compatible with Trusted Network Connect
              (TNC)", RFC 5792, March 2010.

   [RFC5793]  Sahita, R., Hanna, S., Hurst, R., and K. Narayan, "PB-TNC:
              A Posture Broker (PB) Protocol Compatible with Trusted
              Network Connect (TNC)", RFC 5793, March 2010.

   [RFC6733]  Fajardo, V., Arkko, J., Loughney, J., and G. Zorn,
              "Diameter Base Protocol", RFC 6733, October 2012.


Authors' Addresses

   David Waltermire (editor)
   National Institute of Standards and Technology
   100 Bureau Drive
   Gaithersburg, Maryland  20877
   USA

   Phone:
   Email: david.waltermire@nist.gov










Waltermire & Montville   Expires August 15, 2013               [Page 20]

Internet-Draft               SACM Use Cases                February 2013


   Adam W. Montville
   Tripwire, Inc.
   101 SW Main Street, Suite 1500
   Portland, Oregon  97204
   USA

   Phone:
   Email: amontville@tripwire.com











































Waltermire & Montville   Expires August 15, 2013               [Page 21]

