
   Network Working Group                                 Luyuan Fang 
   Internet Draft                                          Dan Frost 
   Intended status: Informational                      Cisco Systems 
   Expires: April 25, 2011                               Nabil Bitar 
                                                             Verizon 
                                                       Raymond Zhang 
                                                                  BT 
                                                     Masahiro DAIKOKU 
                                                                KDDI 
                                                    Jian Ping Zhang 
                                              China Telecom, Shanghai 
                                                             Lei Wang 
                                                              Telenor 
                                                    Mach(Guoyi) Chen 
                                                 Huawei Technologies 
                                                      Nurit Sprecher 
                                              Nokia Siemens Networks 

                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                    October 25, 2010 
    
    
   MPLS-TP Use Cases Studies and Design Considerations 
   draft-fang-mpls-tp-use-cases-and-design-02.txt 
    
 
   Abstract 
    
   This document provides use case studies and network design 
   considerations for Multiprotocol Label Switching Transport Profile 
   (MPLS-TP).  
    
   In the recent years, MPLS-TP has emerged as the technology of choice 
   to meet the needs of transport evolution. Many service providers 
   (SPs) intend to replace SONET/SDH, TDM, ATM traditional transport 
   technologies with MPLS-TP, to achieve higher efficiency, lower 
   operational cost, while maintaining transport characteristics. The 
   use cases for MPLS-TP include Mobile backhaul, Metro Ethernet access 
   and aggregation, and packet optical transport. The design 
   considerations include operational experience, standards compliance, 
   technology maturity, end-to-end forwarding and OAM consistency, 
   compatibility with IP/MPLS networks, and multi-vendor 
   interoperability. The goal is to provide reliable, manageable, and 
   scalable transport solutions. 
     
   The unified MPLS strategy, using MPLS from core to aggregation and 
   access (e.g. IP/MPLS in the core, IP/MPLS or MPLS-TP in aggregation 
   and access) appear to be very attractive to many SPs. It streamlines 
   the operation, many help to reduce the overall complexity and 

     
                                                              [Page 1] 
    
   MPLS-TP Use Cases Studies and Design Considerations     October 2010 
    
   improve end-to-end convergence. It leverages the MPLS experience, 
   and enhances the ability to support revenue generating services. 
    
    
Status of this Memo 
 
   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with 
   the provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.  
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents 
   at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt. 
    
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 12, 2011. 
    
 
    
Copyright Notice 
    
    
   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the 
   document authors.  All rights reserved. 
    
   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal 
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents in effect on the date of 
   publication of this document (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info). 
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your 
   rights and restrictions with respect to this document. 
    
   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal 
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents 
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of 
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents 
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with 
   respect to this document.  Code Components extracted from this 
   document must include Simplified BSD License text as described in 
     
                                                              [Page 2] 
    
    
   MPLS-TP Use Cases Studies and Design Considerations     October 2010 
    
   Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without 
   warranty as described in the Simplified BSD License. 
    
    
    
   Table of Contents 
    
   1. Introduction..................................................4 
   1.1.  Background and Motivation..................................4 
   1.2.  Contributing authors.......................................5 
   2. Terminologies.................................................5 
   3. Overview of MPLS-TP base functions............................6 
   3.1.  MPLS-TP development principles.............................6 
   3.2.  Data Plane.................................................7 
   3.3.  Control Plane..............................................7 
   3.4.  OAM........................................................7 
   3.5.  Survivability..............................................8 
   4. MPLS-TP Use Case Studies......................................8 
   4.1.  Mobile Backhaul............................................8 
   4.2.  Metro Access and Aggregation..............................10 
   4.3.  Packet Optical Transport..................................10 
   5. Network Design Considerations................................11 
   5.1.  IP/MPLS vs. MPLS-TP.......................................11 
   5.2.  Standards compliance......................................11 
   5.3.  End-to-end MPLS OAM consistency...........................12 
   5.4.  Delay and delay variation.................................12 
   5.5.  General network design considerations.....................15 
   6. MPLS-TP Deployment Consideration.............................15 
   6.1.  Network Modes Selection...................................15 
   6.2.  Provisioning Modes Selection..............................16 
   7. Security Considerations......................................16 
   8. IANA Considerations..........................................16 
   9. Normative References.........................................17 
   10.  Informative References......................................17 
   11.  Author's Addresses..........................................17 
    
    
   Requirements Language 
    
   Although this document is not a protocol specification, the key 
   words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in 
   this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC 
   2119]. 
    
     
                                                              [Page 3] 
    
    
   MPLS-TP Use Cases Studies and Design Considerations     October 2010 
    
    
1. Introduction 
    
    
   1.1. Background and Motivation 
    
   This document provides case studies and network design 
   considerations for Multiprotocol Label Switching Transport Profile 
   (MPLS-TP).  
    
   In recent years, the urgency for moving from traditional transport 
   technologies such as SONET/SDH, TDM/ATM to new packet technologies 
   has been rising. This is largely due to the tremendous success of 
   data services, such as IPTV and IP Video for content downloading, 
   streaming, and sharing; rapid growth of mobile services, especially 
   smart phone applications; business VPNs and residential broadband. 
   Continued network convergence effort is another contributing factor 
   for transport moving toward packet technologies. After several years 
   of heated debate, MPLS-TP has emerged as the next generation 
   transport technology of choice for many service providers 
   worldwide.  
    
   MPLS-TP is based on MPLS technologies. MPLS-TP re-use a subset of 
   MPLS base functions, such as MPLS data forwarding, Pseudo-wire 
   encapsulation for circuit emulation, and GMPLS for control plane 
   option; MPLS-TP extended current MPLS OAM functions, such as BFD 
   extension for Connectivity for proactive Connectivity Check (CC) and 
   Connectivity Verification (CV), and Remote Defect Indication (RDI), 
   LSP Ping Extension for on demand Connectivity Check (CC) and 
   Connectivity Verification (CV), fault allocation, and remote 
   integrity check. New tools are being defined for alarm suppression 
   with Alarm Indication Signal (AIS), and trigger of switch over with 
   Link Defect Indication (LDI). The goal is to take advantage of the 
   maturity of MPLS technology, re-use the existing component when 
   possible and extend the existing protocols or create new 
   procedures/protocols when needed to fully satisfy the transport 
   requirements.  
    
   The general requirements of MPLS-TP are provided in MPLS-TP 
   Requirements [RFC 5654], and the architectural framework are defined 
   in MPLS-TP Framework [RFC 5921]. This document intent to provide the 
   use case studies and design considerations from practical point of 
   view based on Service Providers deployments plans and field 
   implementations.  
    
   The most common use cases for MPLS-TP include Mobile Backhaul, Metro 
   Ethernet access and aggregation, and Packet Optical Transport. MPLS-
   TP data plane architecture, path protection mechanisms, and OAM 
   functionalities are used to support these deployment scenarios. 
     
                                                              [Page 4] 
    
    
   MPLS-TP Use Cases Studies and Design Considerations     October 2010 
    
   As part of MPLS family, MPLS-TP complements today's IP/MPLS 
   technologies; it closes the gaps in the traditional access and 
   aggregation transport to provide end-to-end solutions in a cost 
   efficient, reliable, and interoperable manner. 
    
   The unified MPLS strategy, using MPLS from core to aggregation and 
   access (e.g. IP/MPLS in the core, IP/MPLS or MPLS-TP in aggregation 
   and access) appear to be very attractive to many SPs. It streamlines 
   the operation, many help to reduce the overall complexity and 
   improve end-to-end convergence. It leverages the MPLS experience, 
   and enhances the ability to support revenue generating services. 
    
    
   The design considerations discussed in this document are generic. 
   While many design criteria are commonly apply to most of SPs, each 
   individual SP may place the importance of one aspect over another 
   depending on the existing operational environment, the applications 
   need to be supported, the design objective, and the expected 
   duration of the network to be in service for a particular design.  
    
    
   1.2. Contributing authors 
    
   Luyuan Fang, Cisco Systems 
   Nabil Bitar, Verizon 
   Raymond Zhang, BT 
   Masahiro DAIKOKU, KDDI 
   Jian Ping Zhang, China Telecom, Shanghai 
   Mach(Guoyi) Chen, Huawei Technologies 
    
     
    
2. Terminologies 
    
      AIS       Alarm Indication Signal 
      APS       Automatic Protection Switching 
      ATM       Asynchronous Transfer Mode 
      BFD       Bidirectional Forwarding Detection 
      CC        Continuity Check 
      CE Customer Edge device 
      CV        Connectivity Verification 
      CM        Configuration Management 
      DM        Packet delay measurement 
      ECMP      Equal Cost Multi-path 
      FM        Fault Management 
      GAL       Generic Alert Label 
      G-ACH     Generic Associated Channel 
      GMPLS     Generalized Multi-Protocol Label Switching 
      LB        Loopback 
     
                                                              [Page 5] 
    
    
   MPLS-TP Use Cases Studies and Design Considerations     October 2010 
    
      LDP       Label Distribution Protocol   
      LM        Packet loss measurement 
      LSP       Label Switched Path 
      LT        Link trace   
      MEP       Maintenance End Point 
      MIP       Maintenance Intermediate Point 
      MP2MP     Multi-Point to Multi-Point connections 
      MPLS      Multi-Protocol Label Switching 
      MPLS-TP   MPLS transport profile 
      OAM       Operations, Administration, and Management 
      P2P       Point to Multi-Point connections 
      P2MP      Point to Point connections    
      PE Provider-Edge device 
      PHP       Penultimate Hop Popping 
      PM        Performance Management 
      PW Pseudowire 
      RDI       Remote Defect Indication 
      RSVP-TE   Resource Reservation Protocol with Traffic Engineering 
   Extensions 
      SLA       Service Level Agreement 
      SNMP      Simple Network Management Protocol 
      SONET     Synchronous Optical Network 
      S-PE      Switching Provider Edge 
      SRLG      Shared Risk Link Group 
      TDM       Time Division Multiplexing 
      TE Traffic Engineering 
      TTL       Time-To-Live 
      T-PE      Terminating Provider Edge 
      VPN       Virtual Private Network 
    
    
 
3. Overview of MPLS-TP base functions  
    
   The section provides a summary view of MPLS-TP technology, 
   especially in comparison to the base IP/MPLS technologies. For 
   complete requirements and architecture definitions, please refer to 
   [RFC 5654] and [RFC 5921]. 
    
   3.1. MPLS-TP development principles  
    
   The principles for MPLS-TP development are: meeting transport 
   requirements; maintain transport characteristics; re-using the 
   existing MPLS technologies wherever possible to avoid duplicate the 
   effort; ensuring consistency and inter-operability of MPLS-TP and 
   IP/MPLS networks; developing new tools as necessary to fully meet 
   transport requirements.  
    
    
     
                                                              [Page 6] 
    
    
   MPLS-TP Use Cases Studies and Design Considerations     October 2010 
    
   MPLS-TP Technologies include four major areas: Data Plane, Control 
   Plane, OAM, and Survivability. The short summary is provided below. 
    
    
   3.2. Data Plane 
    
   MPLS-TP re-used MPLS and PW architecture; and MPLS forwarding 
   mechanism;  
    
   MPLS-TP extended the LSP support from unidirectional to both bi-
   directional unidirectional support. 
    
   MPLS-TP defined PHP as optional, disallowed ECMP and MP2MP, only P2P 
   and P2MP are allowed. 
    
    
   3.3. Control Plane 
    
   MPLS-TP allowed two control plane options:  
    
   Static: Using NMS for static provisioning;  
   Dynamic Control Plane using GMPLS, OSPF-TE, RSVP-TE for full 
   automation 
   ACH concept in PW is extended to GACH for MPLS-TP LSP to support in-
   band OAM. 
    
   Both Static and dynamic control plane options must allow control 
   plane and data plane separation. 
    
    
   3.4. OAM 
    
   OAM received most attention in MPLS-TP development; Many OAM 
   functions require protocol extensions or new development to meet 
   the transport requirements. 
     
   1) Continuity Check (CC), Continuity Verification (CV), and 
   Remote Integrity: 
   - Proactive CC and CV: Extended BFD 
   - On demand CC and CV: Extended LSP Ping 
   - Proactive Remote Integrity: Extended BFD 
   - On demand Remote Integrity: Extended LSP Ping 
    
   2) Fault Management:  
   - Fault Localization: Extended LSP Ping  
   - Alarm Suppression: create AIS  
   - Remote Defect Indication (RDI): Extended BFD 
   - Lock reporting: Create Lock Instruct 
   - Link defect Indication: Create LDI 
     
                                                              [Page 7] 
    
    
   MPLS-TP Use Cases Studies and Design Considerations     October 2010 
    
   - Static PW defect indication: Use Static PW status 
    
   Performance Management:  
   - Loss Management: Create MPLS-TP loss/delay measurement 
   - Delay Measurement: Create MPLS-TP loss/delay measurement 
    
    
   3.5. Survivability 
    
   - Deterministic path protection 
   - Switch over within 50ms 
   - 1:1, 1+1, 1:N protection 
   - Linear protection 
   - Ring protection 
    
4. MPLS-TP Use Case Studies 
    
    
   4.1. Mobile Backhaul 
    
   Mobility is one of the fastest growing areas in communication world 
   wide. For some regions, the tremendous rapid mobile growth is fueled 
   with lack of existing land-line and cable infrastructure. For other 
   regions, the introduction of Smart phones quickly drove mobile data 
   traffic to become the primary mobile bandwidth consumer, some SPs 
   have already seen 85% of total mobile traffic are data traffic.  
    
   MPLS-TP has been viewed as a suitable technology for Mobile 
   backhaul. 

  4.1.1. 2G and 3G Mobile Backhaul Support  
    
   MPLS-TP is commonly viewed as a very good fit for 2G)/3G Mobile 
   backhaul.  
    
   2G (GSM/CDMA) and 3G (UMTS/HSPA/1xEVDO) Mobile Backhaul Networks are 
   dominating mobile infrastructure today. 
    
   The connectivity for 2G/3G networks are Point to point. The logical 
   connections are hub-and-spoke. The physical construction of the 
   networks can be star topology or ring topology. In the Radio Access 
   Network (RAN), each mobile base station (BTS/Node B) is 
   communicating with one Radio Controller (BSC/RNC) only. These 
   connections are often statically set up.  
    
   Hierarchical Aggregation Architecture / Centralized Architecture are 
   often used for pre-aggregation and aggregation layers. Each 
   aggregation networks inter-connects with multiple access networks. 
     
                                                              [Page 8] 
    
    
   MPLS-TP Use Cases Studies and Design Considerations     October 2010 
    
   For example, single aggregation ring could aggregate traffic for 10 
   access rings with total 100 base stations.   
    
   The technology used today is largely ATM based. Mobile providers are 
   replacing the ATM RAN infrastructure with newer packet technologies. 
   IP RAN networks with IP/MPLS technologies are deployed today by many 
   SPs with great success. MPLS-TP is another suitable choice for 
   Mobile RAN. The P2P connection from base station to Radio Controller 
   can be set statically to mimic the operation today in many RAN 
   environments, in-band OAM and deterministic path protection would 
   support the fast failure detection and switch over to satisfy the 
   SLA agreement. Bidirectional LSP may help to simplify the 
   provisioning process. The deterministic nature of MPLS-TP LSP set up 
   can also help packet based synchronization to maintain predictable 
   performance regarding packet delay and jitters. 

  4.1.2. LTE Mobile Backhaul 
 
   One key difference between LTE and 2G/3G Mobile networks is that the 
   logical connection in LTE is mesh while 2G/3G is P2P star 
   connections.  
    
   In LTE, the base stations eNB/BTS can communicate with multiple 
   Network controllers (PSW/SGW or ASNGW), and each Radio element can 
   communicate with each other for signal exchange and traffic offload 
   to wireless or Wireline infrastructures. 
    
   IP/MPLS may have a great advantage in any-to-any connectivity 
   environment. The use of mature IP or L3VPN technologies is 
   particularly common in the design of SP's LTE deployment plan. 
    
   MPLS-TP can also bring advantages with the in-band OAM and path 
   protection mechanism. MPLS-TP dynamic control-plane with GMPLS 
   signaling may bring additional advantages in the mesh environment 
   for real time adaptivities, dynamic topology changes, and network 
   optimization.  
    
   Since MPLS-TP is part of the MPLS family. Many component already 
   shared by both IP/MPLS and MPLS-TP, the line can be further blurred 
   by sharing more common features. For example, it is desirable for 
   many SPs to introduce the in-band OAM developed for MPLS-TP back 
   into IP/MPLS networks as an enhanced OAM option. Today's MPLS PW can 
   also be set statically to be deterministic if preferred by the SPs 
   without going through full MPLS-TP deployment. 
    



     
                                                              [Page 9] 
    
    
   MPLS-TP Use Cases Studies and Design Considerations     October 2010 
    
  4.1.3. WiMAX Backhaul 
   WiMAX Mobile backhaul shares the similar characteristics as LTE, 
   with mesh connections rather than P2P, star logical connections.  
    
   4.2. Metro Access and Aggregation 
    
   Some SPs are building new Access and aggregation infrastructure, 
   while others plan to upgrade/replace of existing transport 
   infrastructure with new packet technologies such as MPLS-TP. The 
   later is of course more common than the former.  
    
   The access and aggregation networks today can be based on ATM, TDM, 
   MSTP, or Ethernet technologies as later development. 
    
   Some SPs announced their plans for replacing their ATM or TDM 
   aggregation networks with MPLS-TP technologies, because the ATM / 
   TDM aggregation networks are no longer suited to support the rapid 
   bandwidth growth, and they are expensive to maintain or may also be 
   and impossible expand due to End of Sale and End of Life legacy 
   equipments. The statistical muxing in MPLS-TP helps to achieve 
   higher efficiency comparing with the time division scheme in the 
   legacy technologies.  
    
   The unified MPLS strategy, using MPLS from core to aggregation and 
   access (e.g. IP/MPLS in the core, IP/MPLS or MPLS-TP in aggregation 
   and access) appear to be very attractive to many SPs. It streamlines 
   the operation, many help to reduce the overall complexity and 
   improve end-to-end convergence. It leverages the MPLS experience, 
   and enhances the ability to support revenue generating services. 
    
   The current requirements from the SPs for ATM/TDM aggregation 
   replacement often include maintaining the current operational model, 
   with the similar user experience in NMS, supports current access 
   network (e.g. Ethernet, ADSL, ATM, STM, etc.), support the 
   connections with the core networks, support the same operational 
   feasibility even after migrating to MPLS-TP from ATM/TDM and 
   services (OCN, IP-VPN, E-VLAN, Dedicated line, etc.). MPLS-TP 
   currently defined in IETF are meeting these requirements to support 
   a smooth transition. 
    
   The green field network deployment is targeting using the state of 
   art technology to build most stable, scalable, high quality, high 
   efficiency networks to last for the next many years. IP/MPLS and 
   MPLS-TP are both good choices, depending on the operational model.    
    
   4.3. Packet Optical Transport 
    
   (to be added) 
     
                                                             [Page 10] 
    
    
   MPLS-TP Use Cases Studies and Design Considerations     October 2010 
    
    
 
5. Network Design Considerations  
    
   5.1. IP/MPLS vs. MPLS-TP 
    
   Questions we often hear: I have just built a new IP/MPLS network to 
   support multi-services, including L2/L3 VPNs, Internet service, 
   IPTV, etc. Now there is new MPLS-TP development in IETF. Do I need 
   to move onto MPLS-TP technology to state current with technologies? 
    
   The answer is no generally speaking. MPLS-TP is developed to meet 
   the needs of traditional transport moving towards packet. It is 
   geared to support the transport behavior coming with the long 
   history. IP/MPLS and MPLS-TP both are state of art technologies. 
   IP/MPLS support both transport (e.g. PW, RSVP-TE, etc.) and services 
   (e.g L2/L3 VPNs, IPTV, Mobile RAN, etc.), MPLS-TP provides transport 
   only. The new enhanced OAM features built in MPLS-TP should be share 
   in both flavors through future implementation.  
    
   Another question: I need to evolve my ATM/TDM/SONET/SDH networks 
   into new packet technologies, but my operational force is largely 
   legacy transport, not familiar with new data technologies, and I 
   want to maintain the same operational model for the time being, what 
   should I do? The answer would be: MPLS-TP may be the best choice 
   today for the transition. 
    
   A few important factors need to be considered for IP/MPLS or MPLS-TP 
   include: 
    
   - Technology maturity (IP/MPLS is much more mature with 12 years 
   development)  
   - Operation experience (Work force experience, Union agreement, how 
   easy to transition to a new technology? how much does it cost?) 
   - Needs for Multi-service support on the same node (MPLS-TP provide 
   transport only, does not replace many functions of IP/MPLS) 
   - LTE, IPTV/Video distribution considerations (which path is the 
   most viable for reaching the end goal with minimal cost? but it also 
   meet the need of today's support) 
    
   5.2. Standards compliance 
    
   It is generally recognized by SPs that standards compliance are 
   important for driving the cost down and product maturity up, multi-
   vendor interoperability, also important to meet the expectation of 
   the business customers of SP's. 
    
   MPLS-TP is a joint work between IETF and ITU-T. In April 2008, IETF 
   and ITU-T jointly agreed to terminate T-MPLS and progress MPLS-TP as 
     
                                                             [Page 11] 
    
    
   MPLS-TP Use Cases Studies and Design Considerations     October 2010 
    
   joint work [RFC 5317]. The transport requirements would be provided 
   by ITU-T, the protocols would be developed in IETF.  
    
   T-MPLS is not MPLS-TP. T-MPLS solution would not inter-op with 
   IP/MPLS, it would not be compatible with MPLS-TP defined in IETF.  
    
   5.3. End-to-end MPLS OAM consistency 
    
   In the case Service Providers deploy end-to-end MPLS solution with 
   the combination of dynamic IP/MPLS and static or dynamic MPLS-TP 
   cross core, service edge, and aggregation/access networks, end-to-
   end MPLS OAM consistency becomes an essential requirements from many 
   Service Provider. The end-to-end MPLS OAM can only be achieved 
   through implementation of IETF MPLS-TP OAM definitions. 
 
   5.4. Delay and delay variation  
    
   Background/motivation: Telecommunication Carriers plan to replace 
   the aging TDM Services (e.g. legacy VPN services) provided by Legacy 
   TDM technologies/equipments to new VPN services provided by MPLS-TP 
   technologies/equipments with minimal cost. The Carriers cannot allow 
   any degradation of service quality, service operation Level, and 
   service availability when migrating out of Legacy TDM 
   technologies/equipments to MPLS-TP transport. The requirements from 
   the customers of these carriers are the same before and after the 
   migration.   
    

  5.4.1. Network Delay 
    
   From our recent observation, more and more Ethernet VPN customers 
   becoming very sensitive to the network delay issues, especially the 
   financial customers. Many of those customers has upgraded their 
   systems in their Data Centers, e.g., their accounting systems.  Some 
   of the customers built the special tuned up networks, i.e. Fiber 
   channel networks, in their Data Centers, this tripped more strict 
   delay requirements to the carriers. 
    
   There are three types of network delay: 
    
   1. Absolute Delay Time 
    
   Absolute Delay Time here is the network delay within SLA contract.  
   It means the customers have already accepted the value of the 
   Absolute Delay Time as part of the contract before the Private Line 
   Service is provisioned. 
    

     
                                                             [Page 12] 
    
    
   MPLS-TP Use Cases Studies and Design Considerations     October 2010 
    
   2. Variation of Absolute Delay Time (without network configuration 
   changes).  
    
   The variation under discussion here is mainly induced by the 
   buffering in network elements. 
    
   Although there is no description of Variation of Absolute Delay Time 
   on the contract, this has no practical impact on the customers who 
   contract for the highest quality of services available. The 
   bandwidth is guaranteed for those customers' traffic. 
    
   3. Relative Delay Time  
    
   Relative Delay Time is the difference of the Absolute Delay Time 
   between using working and protect path. 
    
   Ideally, Carriers would prefer the Relative Delay Time to be zero, 
   for the following technical reasons and network operation 
   feasibility concerns.  
    
   The following are the three technical reasons:  
    
   Legacy throughput issue 
    
   In the case that Relative Delay Time is increased between FC 
   networks or TCP networks, the effective throughput is degraded.  The 
   effective throughput, though it may be recovered after revert back 
   to the original working path in revertive mode.   
    
   On the other hand, in that case that Relative Delay Time is 
   decreased between FC networks or TCP networks, buffering over flow 
   may occur at receiving end due to receiving large number of busty 
   packets.  As a consequence, effective throughput is degraded as 
   well.  Moreover, if packet reordering is occurred due to RTT 
   decrease, unnecessary packet resending is induced and effective 
   throughput is also further degraded.  Therefore, management of 
   Relative Delay Time is preferred, although this is known as the 
   legacy TCP throughput issue. 
    
   Locating Network Acceralators at CE 
    
   In order to improve effective throughput between customer's FC 
   networks over Ethernet private line service, some customer put "WAN 
   Accelerator" to increase throughput value.  For example, some WAN 
   Accelerators at receiving side may automatically send back "R_RDY" 
   in order to avoid decreasing a number of BBcredit at sending side, 
   and the other WAN Accelerators at sending side may have huge number 
   of initial BB credit. 
    
     
                                                             [Page 13] 
    
    
   MPLS-TP Use Cases Studies and Design Considerations     October 2010 
    
   When customer tunes up their CE by locating WAN Accelerator, for 
   example, when Relative Delay Time is changes, there is a possibility 
   that effective throughput is degraded.  This is because a lot of 
   packet destruction may be occurred due to loss of synchronization, 
   when change of Relative delay time induces packet reordering.  And, 
   it is difficult to re-tune up their CE network element automatically 
   when Relative Delay Time is changed, because only less than 50 ms 
   network down detected at CE. 
    
   Depending on the tuning up method, since Relative Delay Time affects 
   effective throughput between customer's FC networks, management of 
   Relative Delay Time is preferred. 
    
   c) Use of synchronized replication system 
    
   Some strict customers, e.g. financial customers, implement 
   "synchronized replication system" for all data back-up and load 
   sharing.  Due to synchronized replication system, next data 
   processing is conducted only after finishing the data saving to both 
   primary and replication DC storage.  And some tuning function could 
   be applied at Server Network to increase throughput to the 
   replication DC and Client Network. Since Relative Delay Time affects 
   effective throughput, management of Relative Delay Time is 
   preferred. 
    
   The following are the network operational feasibility issues. 
    
   Some strict customers, e.g., financial customer, continuously 
   checked the private line connectivity and absolute delay time at 
   CEs.  When the absolute delay time is changed, that is Relative 
   delay time is increased or decreased, the customer would complain. 
    
   From network operational point of view, carrier want to minimize the 
   number of customers complains, MPLS-TP LSP provisioning with zero 
   Relative delay time is preferred and management of Relative Delay 
   Time is preferred. 
    
   Obviously, when the Relative Delay Time is increased, the customer 
   would complain about the longer delay. When the Relative Delay Time 
   is decreased, the customer expects to keep the lesser Absolute Delay 
   Time condition and would complain why Carrier did not provide the 
   best solution in the first place. Therefore, MPLS-TP LSP 
   provisioning with zero Relative Delay Time is preferred and 
   management of Relative Delay Time is preferred. 
    
   More discussion will be added on how to manage the Relative delay 
   time. 
    
    
     
                                                             [Page 14] 
    
    
   MPLS-TP Use Cases Studies and Design Considerations     October 2010 
    
   5.5. General network design considerations 
    
    - Migration considerations 
    - Resilency 
    - Scalability 
    - Performance 
    

6. MPLS-TP Deployment Consideration 

   6.1. Network Modes Selection 
   When considering deployment of MPLS-TP in the network, possibly 
   couple of questions will come into mind, for example, where should 
   the MPLS-TP be deployed? (e.g., access, aggregation or core 
   network?) Should IP/MPLS be deployed with MPLS-TP simultaneously? If 
   MPLS-TP and IP/MPLS is deployed in the same network, what is the 
   relationship between MPLS-TP and IP/MPLS (e.g., peer or overlay?) 
   and where is the demarcation between MPLS-TP domain and IP/MPLS 
   domain? The results for these questions depend on the real 
   requirements on how MPLS-TP and IP/MPLS are used to provide 
   services. For different services, there could be different choice.  
   According to the combination of MPLS-TP and IP/MPLS, here are some 
   typical network modes: 
   Pure MPLS-TP as the transport connectivity (E2E MPLS-TP), this 
   situation more happens when the network is a totally new constructed 
   network. For example, a new constructed packet transport network for 
   Mobile Backhaul, or migration from ATM/TDM transport network to 
   packet based transport network. 
    
   Pure IP/MPLS as transport connectivity (E2E IP/MPLS), this is the 
   current practice for many deployed networks. 
   MPLS-TP combines with IP/MPLS as the transport connectivity (Hybrid 
   mode) 
   Peer mode, some domains adopt MPLS-TP as the transport connectivity; 
   other domains adopt IP/MPLS as the transport connectivity. MPLS-TP 
   domains and IP/MPLS domains are interconnected to provide transport 
   connectivity. Considering there are a lot of IP/MPLS deployments in 
   the field, this mode may be the normal practice in the early stage 
   of MPLS-TP deployment.  
   Overlay mode 
   b-1: MPLS-TP as client of IP/MPLS, this is for the case where MPLS-
   TP domains are distributed and IP/MPLS do-main/network is used for 
   the connection of the distributed MPLS-TP domains. For examples, 
   there are some service providers who have no their own Backhaul 
   network, they have to rent the Backhaul network that is IP/MPLS 
   based from other service providers. 
    

     
                                                             [Page 15] 
    
    
   MPLS-TP Use Cases Studies and Design Considerations     October 2010 
    
   b-2: IP/MPLS as client of MPLS-TP, this is for the case where 
   transport network below the IP/MPLS network is a MPLS-TP based 
   network, the MPLS-TP network provides transport connectivity for the 
   IP/MPLS routers, the usage is analogous as today's ATM/TDM/SDH based 
   transport network that are used for providing connectivity for 
   IP/MPLS routers.  
    
   6.2. Provisioning Modes Selection 
   As stated in MPLS-TP requirements [RFC5654], MPLS-TP network MUST be 
   possible to work without using Control Plane. And this does not mean 
   that MPLS-TP network has no control plane. Instead, operators could 
   deploy their MPLS-TP with static provisioning (e.g., CLI, NMS etc.), 
   dynamic control plane signaling (e.g., OSPF-TE/ISIS-TE, GMPLS, LDP, 
   RSVP-TE etc.), or combination of static and dynamic provisioning 
   (Hybrid mode). Each mode has its own pros and cons and how to 
   determine the right mode for a specific network mainly depends on 
   the operators' preference. For the operators who are used to operate 
   traditional transport network and familiar with the Transport-
   Centric operational model (e.g., NMS configuration without control 
   plane) may prefer static provisioning mode. The dynamic provisioning 
   mode is more suitable for the operators who are familiar with the 
   operation and maintenance of IP/MPLS network where a fully dynamic 
   control plane is used. The hybrid mode may be used when parts of the 
   network are provisioned with static way and the other parts are 
   controlled by dynamic signaling. For example, for big SP, the 
   network is operated and maintained by several different departments 
   who prefer to different modes, thus they could adopt this hybrid 
   mode to support both static and dynamic modes hence to satisfy 
   different requirements. Another example is that static provisioning 
   mode is suitable for some parts of the network and dynamic 
   provisioning mode is suitable for other parts of the networks (e.g., 
   static for access network, dynamic for metro aggregate and core 
   network).   
    
    
    
    
   Note: This draft is work in progress, more would be filled in the 
   following revision. 
    
    
7. Security Considerations 
    
   Reference to [RFC 5920]. More will be added. 
    
    
8. IANA Considerations 
    
   This document contains no new IANA considerations. 
     
                                                             [Page 16] 
    
    
   MPLS-TP Use Cases Studies and Design Considerations     October 2010 
    
    
9. Normative References 
    
   [RFC 5317]: Joint Working Team (JWT) Report on MPLS Architectural 
   Considerations for a Transport Profile, Feb. 2009.  
    
   [RFC 5654], Niven-Jenkins, B., et al, "MPLS-TP Requirements," RFC 
   5654, September 2009. 
    
   (More to be added) 
    
 
10.Informative References 
    
   [RFC 5921] Bocci, M., ED.,  Bryant, S., ED., et al., Frost, D. ED.,  
   Levrau, L., Berger., L., "A Framework for MPLS in Transport," July 
   2010. 
    
   [RFC 5920] L. Fang, ED., et al, "Security Framework for MPLS and 
   GMPLS Networks, " July 2010. 
    
    
   (More to be added) 
    
    
11.Author's Addresses 
    
   Luyuan Fang 
   Cisco Systems, Inc. 
   111 Wood Ave. South 
   Iselin, NJ 08830 
   USA 
   Email: lufang@cisco.com 
    
   Dan Frost 
   Cisco Systems, Inc. 
   Email: danfrost@cisco.com 
    
                                                                        
   Nabil Bitar 
   Verizon 
   40 Sylvan Road 
   Waltham, MA 02145 
   USA 
   Email: nabil.bitar@verizon.com 
    
   Raymond Zhang 
   British Telecom 
     
                                                             [Page 17] 
    
    
   MPLS-TP Use Cases Studies and Design Considerations     October 2010 
    
   BT Center 
   81 Newgate Street 
   London, EC1A 7AJ 
   United Kingdom 
   Email: raymond.zhang@bt.com 
    
   Masahiro DAIKOKU 
   KDDI corporation 
   3-11-11.Iidabashi, Chiyodaku, Tokyo 
   Japan 
   Email: ms-daikoku@kddi.com 
    
   Jian Ping Zhang 
   China Telecom, Shanghai 
   Room 3402, 211 Shi Ji Da Dao 
   Pu Dong District, Shanghai 
   China 
   Email: zhangjp@shtel.com.cn 
    
   Lai Wang 
   Telenor  
   Telenor Norway 
   Office Snaroyveien 
   1331 Fornedbu 
   Email: Lai.wang@telenor.com 
    
   Mach(Guoyi) Chen 
   Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd. 
   No. 3 Xinxi Road 
   Shangdi Information Industry Base 
   Hai-Dian District, Beijing 100085 
   China 
   Email: mach@huawei.com 
    
   Nurit Sprecher  
   Nokia Siemens Networks 
   3 Hanagar St. Neve Ne'eman B 
   Hod Hasharon, 45241 
   Israel 
   Email: nurit.sprecher@nsn.com 
    
    
    
    





     
                                                             [Page 18] 
    
