
   Network Working Group                                 Luyuan Fang 
   Internet Draft                                      Cisco Systems 
   Intended status: Informational                        Nabil Bitar 
   Expires: January 5, 2011                                  Verizon 
                                                       Raymond Zhang 
                                                                  BT 
                                                        Masa DAIKOKU 
                                                                KDDI 
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                        July 5, 2010 
 
 
            MPLS-TP Use Cases Studies and Design Considerations 
              draft-fang-mpls-tp-use-cases-and-design-00.txt 
    
 
Abstract 
 
   This document provides use case studies and network design 
   considerations for Multiprotocol Label Switching Transport Profile 
   (MPLS-TP).  
    
   In the recent years, MPLS-TP has emerged as the technology of 
   choice to meet the needs of transport evolution. Many service 
   providers (SPs) intend to replace SONET/SDH, TDM, ATM traditional 
   transport technologies with MPLS-TP, to achieve higher efficiency, 
   low operational cost, while maintaining transport characteristics. 
   The use cases for MPLS-TP include Mobile backhaul, Metro Ethernet 
   access and aggregation, packet optical transport. The design 
   considerations include operational experience, standards 
   compliance, technology maturity, end-to-end design and OAM 
   consistency, compatibility with IP/MPLS networks, and multi-vendor 
   interoperability. The goal is to provide reliable, manageable, and 
   scalable transport solutions. 
     
   The unified MPLS strategy - using MPLS from core to aggregation and 
   access (e.g. IP/MPLS in the core, IP/MPLS or MPLS-TP in aggregation 
   and access) appear to be very attractive for many SPs. It 
   streamlines the operation, reduce the overall complexity and 
   convergence issues, leveraging MPLS experience, and improve the 
   ability to support revenue generating services. 
 
 
Status of this Memo 
 
   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with 
   the provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.  
    

     
                                                              [Page 1] 
    
   MPLS-TP Use Cases Studies and Design Considerations       July 2010 
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents 
   at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt. 
    
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 5, 2011. 
    
 
    
Copyright Notice 
    
    
   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the 
   document authors.  All rights reserved. 
    
   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal 
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents in effect on the date of 
   publication of this document (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info). 
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your 
   rights and restrictions with respect to this document. 
    
   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal 
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents 
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of 
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents 
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with 
   respect to this document.  Code Components extracted from this 
   document must include Simplified BSD License text as described in 
   Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without 
   warranty as described in the Simplified BSD License. 
    
    
 
Table of Contents 
 
   1. Introduction..................................................3 
   1.1.  Background and Motivation..................................3 
     
                                                              [Page 2] 
    
    
   MPLS-TP Use Cases Studies and Design Considerations       July 2010 
    
   1.2.  Contributing authors.......................................5 
   2. Terminologies.................................................5 
   3. Overview of MPLS-TP base functions............................6 
   3.1.  MPLS-TP development principles.............................6 
   3.2.  Data Plane.................................................6 
   3.3.  Control Plane..............................................6 
   3.4.  OAM........................................................7 
   3.5.  Survivability..............................................7 
   4. MPLS-TP Use Case Studies......................................7 
   4.1.  Mobile Backhaul............................................7 
   4.2.  Metro Access and Aggregation...............................9 
   4.3.  Packet Optical Transport..................................10 
   5. Network Design Considerations................................10 
   5.1.  IP/MPLS vs. MPLS-TP.......................................10 
   5.2.  Standards compliance......................................11 
   5.3.  General network design considerations.....................11 
   6. Security Considerations......................................12 
   7. IANA Considerations..........................................12 
   8. Normative References.........................................12 
   9. Informative References.......................................12 
   10.  Author's Addresses..........................................12 
    
    
Requirements Language 
 
   Although this document is not a protocol specification, the key 
   words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in 
   this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC 
   2119]. 
 
    
1. Introduction 
    
    
   1.1. Background and Motivation 
    
   This document provides case studies and network design 
   considerations for Multiprotocol Label Switching Transport Profile 
   (MPLS-TP).  
    
   In recent years, the urgency for moving from traditional transport 
   technologies such as SONET/SDH, TDM/ATM to new packet technologies 
   has been rising. This is largely due to the tremendous success of 
   data services, such as IPTV and IP Video for content downloading, 
   streaming, and sharing; rapid growth of mobile services, especially 
     
                                                              [Page 3] 
    
    
   MPLS-TP Use Cases Studies and Design Considerations       July 2010 
    
   smart phone applications; business VPNs and residential broadband. 
   Continued network convergence effort is another contributing factor 
   for transport moving toward packet technologies. After several 
   years of heated debate, MPLS-TP has emerged as the next generation 
   transport technology of choice for many service providers 
   worldwide.  
    
   MPLS-TP is based on MPLS technologies. MPLS-TP re-use a subset of 
   MPLS base functions, such as MPLS data forwarding, Pseudo-wire 
   encapsulation for circuit emulation, and GMPLS for control plane 
   option; MPLS-TP extended current MPLS OAM functions, such as BFD 
   extension for Connectivity for proactive Connectivity Check (CC) 
   and Connectivity Verification (CV), and Remote Defect Indication 
   (RDI), LSP Ping Extension for on demand Connectivity Check (CC) and 
   Connectivity Verification (CV), fault allocation, and remote 
   integrity check. New tools are being defined for alarm suppression 
   with Alarm Indication Signal (AIS), and trigger of switch over with 
   Link Defect Indication (LDI). The goal is to take advantage of the 
   maturity of MPLS technology, re-use the existing component when 
   possible and extend the existing protocols or create new 
   procedures/protocols when needed to fully satisfy the transport 
   requirements.  
    
   The general requirements of MPLS-TP are provided in MPLS-TP 
   Requirements [RFC 5654], and the architectural framework are 
   defined in  MPLS-TP Framework [MPLS-TP FW]. This document intent to 
   provide the use case studies and design considerations from 
   practical point of view based on Service Providers deployments 
   plans and field implementations.  
    
   The most common use cases for MPLS-TP include Mobile Backhaul, 
   Metro Ethernet access and aggregation, and Packet Optical 
   Transport. MPLS-TP data plane architecture, path protection 
   mechanisms, and OAM functionalities are used to support these 
   deployment scenarios. As part of MPLS family, MPLS-TP complements 
   today's IP/MPLS technologies, it closes the gaps in the traditional 
   access and aggregation transport to provide end-to-end solutions in 
   a cost efficient, reliable, and interoperable manner. 
    
   The design considerations discussed here are generic. Many design 
   criteria are common, while individual SP may place the importance 
   of one aspect over another depending on the existing operational 
   environment, the applications need to be supported, the design 
   philosophy, and the expected duration of the network to be in 
   service.  
    
   The unified MPLS strategy - using MPLS from core to aggregation and 
   access (e.g. IP/MPLS in the core, IP/MPLS or MPLS-TP in aggregation 
   and access) appear to be very attractive for many SPs. It streamlines 
     
                                                              [Page 4] 
    
    
   MPLS-TP Use Cases Studies and Design Considerations       July 2010 
    
   the operation, reduce the overall complexity and convergence 
   issues, leveraging MPLS experience, and improve the ability to 
   support revenue generating services. 
    
    
   1.2. Contributing authors 
    
   Luyuan Fang, Cisco Systems 
   Nabil Bitar, Verizon 
   Raymond Zhang, BT 
   Masa DAIKOKU, KDDI  
      
    
2. Terminologies 
    
      AIS       Alarm Indication Signal 
      APS       Automatic Protection Switching 
      ATM       Asynchronous Transfer Mode 
      BFD       Bidirectional Forwarding Detection 
      CC        Continuity Check 
      CE        Customer-Edge device 
      CV        Connectivity Verification 
      CM        Configuration Management 
      DM        Packet delay measurement 
      ECMP      Equal Cost Multi-path 
      FM        Fault Management 
      GAL       Generic Alert Label 
      G-ACH     Generic Associated Channel 
      GMPLS     Generalized Multi-Protocol Label Switching 
      LB        Loopback 
      LDP       Label Distribution Protocol   
      LM        Packet loss measurement 
      LSP       Label Switched Path 
      LT        Link trace   
      MEP       Maintenance End Point 
      MIP       Maintenance Intermediate Point 
      MP2MP     Multi-Point to Multi-Point connections 
      MPLS      Multi-Protocol Label Switching 
      MPLS-TP   MPLS transport profile 
      OAM       Operations, Administration, and Management 
      P2P       Point to Multi-Point connections 
      P2MP      Point to Point connections    
      PE        Provider-Edge device 
      PHP       Penultimate Hop Popping 
      PM        Performance Management 
      PW        Pseudowire 
      RDI       Remote Defect Indication 
      RSVP-TE   Resource Reservation Protocol with Traffic Engineering 
                     Extensions 
     
                                                              [Page 5] 
    
    
   MPLS-TP Use Cases Studies and Design Considerations       July 2010 
    
      SNMP      Simple Network Management Protocol 
      SONET     Synchronous Optical Network 
      S-PE      Switching Provider Edge 
      SRLG      Shared Risk Link Group 
      TDM       Time Division Multiplexing 
      TE        Traffic Engineering 
      TTL       Time-To-Live 
      T-PE      Terminating Provider Edge 
      VPN       Virtual Private Network 
 
    
 
3. Overview of MPLS-TP base functions  
    
   The section provides a summary view of MPLS-TP technology, 
   especially in comparison to the base IP/MPLS technologies. For 
   complete requirements and architecture definitions, please refer to 
   [RFC 5654] and [MPLS-TP FW]. 
    
   3.1. MPLS-TP development principles  
    
   The principles for MPLS-TP development are: meeting transport 
   requirements; maintain transport characteristics; re-using the 
   existing MPLS technologies wherever possible to avoid duplicate the 
   effort; ensuring consistency and inter-operability of MPLS-TP and 
   IP/MPLS networks; developing new tools as necessary to fully meet 
   transport requirements.  
 
    
   MPLS-TP Technologies include four major areas: Data Plane, Control 
   Plane, OAM, and Survivability. The short summary is provided below. 
    
    
   3.2. Data Plane 
    
   MPLS-TP re-used MPLS and PW architecture; and MPLS forwarding 
   mechanism;  
    
   MPLS-TP extended the LSP support from unidirectional to both bi-
   directional unidirectional support. 
    
   MPLS-TP defined PHP as optional, disallowed ECMP and MP2MP, only 
   P2P and P2MP are allowed. 
    
    
   3.3. Control Plane 
    
   MPLS-TP allowed two control plane options:  
    
     
                                                              [Page 6] 
    
    
   MPLS-TP Use Cases Studies and Design Considerations       July 2010 
    
   1) Static: Using NMS for static provisioning;  
   2) Dynamic Control Plane using GMPLS, OSPF-TE, RSVP-TE for full 
      automation 
   3) ACH concept in PW is extended to GACH for MPLS-TP LSP to support 
      in-band OAM. 
 
   Both Static and dynamic control plane options must allow control 
   plane and data plane separation. 
 
    
   3.4. OAM 
    
   OAM received most attention in MPLS-TP development; Many OAM 
   functions require protocol extensions or new development to meet 
   the transport requirements. 
     
   1) Continuity Check (CC), Continuity Verification (CV), and 
   Remote Integrity: 
        - Proactive CC and CV: Extended BFD 
        - On demand CC and CV: Extended LSP Ping 
        - Proactive Remote Integrity: Extended BFD 
        - On demand Remote Integrity: Extended LSP Ping 
         
   2) Fault Management:  
        - Fault Localization: Extended LSP Ping  
        - Alarm Suppression: create AIS  
        - Remote Defect Indication (RDI): Extended BFD 
        - Lock reporting: Create Lock Instruct 
        - Link defect Indication: Create LDI 
        - Static PW defect indication: Use Static PW status 
         
   3) Performance Management:  
        - Loss Management: Create MPLS-TP loss/delay measurement 
        - Delay Measurement: Create MPLS-TP loss/delay measurement 
 
    
   3.5. Survivability 
    
   - Deterministic path protection 
   - Switch over within 50ms 
   - 1:1, 1+1, 1:N protection 
   - Linear protection 
   - Ring protection 
    
4. MPLS-TP Use Case Studies 
    
    
   4.1. Mobile Backhaul 
    
     
                                                              [Page 7] 
    
    
   MPLS-TP Use Cases Studies and Design Considerations       July 2010 
    
   Mobility is one of the fastest growing areas in communication world 
   wide. For some regions, the tremendous rapid mobile growth is 
   fueled with lack of existing land-line and cable infrastructure. 
   For other regions, the introduction of Smart phones quickly drove 
   mobile data traffic to become the primary mobile bandwidth 
   consumer, some SPs have already seen 85% of total mobile traffic 
   are data traffic.  
    
   MPLS-TP has been viewed as a suitable technology for Mobile 
   backhaul. 

  4.1.1. 2G and 3G Mobile Backhaul Support  
    
   MPLS-TP is commonly viewed as a very good fit for 2G)/3G Mobile 
   backhaul.  
    
   2G (GSM/CDMA) and 3G (UMTS/HSPA/1xEVDO) Mobile Backhaul Networks are 
   dominating mobile infrastructure today. 
    
   The connectivity for 2G/3G networks are Point to point. The logical 
   connections are hub-and-spoke. The physical construction of the 
   networks can be star topology or ring topology. In the Radio Access 
   Network (RAN), each mobile base station (BTS/Node B) is 
   communicating with one Radio Controller (BSC/RNC) only. These 
   connections are often statically set up.  
    
   Hierarchical Aggregation Architecture / Centralized Architecture are 
   often used for pre-aggregation and aggregation layers. Each 
   aggregation networks inter-connects with multiple access networks. 
   For example, single aggregation ring could aggregate traffic for 10 
   access rings with total 100 base stations.   
    
   The technology used today is largely ATM based. Mobile providers are 
   replacing the ATM RAN infrastructure with newer packet technologies. 
   IP RAN networks with IP/MPLS technologies are deployed today by many 
   SPs with great success. MPLS-TP is another suitable choice for 
   Mobile RAN. The P2P connection from base station to Radio Controller 
   can be set statically to mimic the operation today in many RAN 
   environments, in-band OAM and deterministic path protection would 
   support the fast failure detection and switch over to satisfy the 
   SLA agreement. Bidirectional LSP may help to simplify the 
   provisioning process. The deterministic nature of MPLS-TP LSP set up 
   can also help packet based synchronization to maintain predictable 
   performance regarding packet delay and jitters. 

  4.1.2. LTE Mobile Backhaul 
 

     
                                                              [Page 8] 
    
    
   MPLS-TP Use Cases Studies and Design Considerations       July 2010 
    
   One key difference between LTE and 2G/3G Mobile networks is that the 
   logical connection in LTE is mesh while 2G/3G is P2P star 
   connections.  
    
   In LTE, the base stations eNB/BTS can communicate with multiple 
   Network controllers (PSW/SGW or ASNGW), and each Radio element can 
   communicate with each other for signal exchange and traffic offload 
   to wireless or Wireline infrastructures. 
    
   IP/MPLS may have a great advantage in any-to-any connectivity 
   environment. The use of mature IP or L3VPN technologies is 
   particularly common in the design of SP's LTE deployment plan. 
    
   MPLS-TP can also bring advantages with the in-band OAM and path 
   protection mechanism. MPLS-TP dynamic control-plane with GMPLS 
   signaling may bring additional advantages in the mesh environment 
   for real time adaptivities, dynamic topology changes, and network 
   optimization.  
    
   Since MPLS-TP is part of the MPLS family. Many component already 
   shared by both IP/MPLS and MPLS-TP, the line can be further blurred 
   by sharing more common features. For example, it is desirable for 
   many SPs to introduce the in-band OAM developed for MPLS-TP back 
   into IP/MPLS networks as an enhanced OAM option. Today's MPLS PW can 
   also be set statically to be deterministic if preferred by the SPs 
   without going through full MPLS-TP deployment. 
 

  4.1.3. WiMAX Backhaul 
   WiMAX Mobile backhaul shares the similar characteristics as LTE, 
   with mesh connections rather than P2P, star logical connections.  
    
   4.2. Metro Access and Aggregation 
    
   Some SPs are building new Access and aggregation infrastructure, 
   while others plan to upgrade/replace of existing transport 
   infrastructure with new packet technologies such as MPLS_TP. The 
   later is of course more common than the former.  
    
   The access and aggregation networks today can be based on ATM, TDM, 
   MSTP, or Ethernet technologies as later development. 
    
   Some SPs announced their plans for replacing their ATM or TDM 
   aggregation networks with MPLS-TP technologies, because the ATM / 
   TDM aggregation networks are no longer suited to support the rapid 
   bandwidth growth, and they are expensive to maintain or may also be 
   and impossible expand due to End of Sale and End of Line legacy 
   equipments. The statistical muxing in MPLS-TP helps to achieve 
     
                                                              [Page 9] 
    
    
   MPLS-TP Use Cases Studies and Design Considerations       July 2010 
    
   higher efficiency comparing with the time division scheme in the 
   legacy technologies.  
    
   The unified MPLS strategy, e.g. IP/MPLS in the core, IP/MPLS or 
   MPLS-TP in aggregation and access appear to be attractive for many 
   SPs. It streamlines the operation, reduce the overall complexity 
   and convergence issues, leveraging MPLS experience, and improve the 
   ability to support revenue generating higher layer services. 
    
   The current requirements from the SPs for ATM/TDM aggregation 
   replacement often include maintaining the current operational 
   model, with the similar user experience in NMS, supports current 
   access network (e.g. Ethernet, ADSL, ATM, STM, etc.), support the 
   connections with the core networks and services (OCN, IP-VPN, E-
   VLAN, Dedicated line, etc.). MPLS-TP currently defined in IETF are 
   meeting these requirements to support a smooth transition. 
    
   The green field network deployment is targeting using the state of 
   art technology to build most stable, scalable, high quality, high 
   efficiency networks to last for the next many years. IP/MPLS and 
   MPLS-TP are both good choices, depending on the operational model.    
    
   4.3. Packet Optical Transport 
    
   (to be added) 
 
 
5. Network Design Considerations  
    
   5.1. IP/MPLS vs. MPLS-TP 
    
   Questions we often hear: I have just built a new IP/MPLS network to 
   support multi-services, including L2/L3 VPNs, Internet service, 
   IPTV, etc. Now there is new MPLS-TP development in IETF. Do I need 
   to move onto MPLS-TP technology to state current with technologies? 
    
   The answer is no generally speaking. MPLS-TP is developed to meet 
   the needs of traditional transport moving towards packet. It is 
   geared to support the transport behavior coming with the long 
   history. IP MPLS and MPLS-TP both are state of art technologies. 
   IP/MPLS support both transport (e.g. PW, RSVP-TE, etc.) and 
   services (e.g L2/L3 VPNs, IPTV, Mobile RAN, etc.), MPLS-TP provides 
   transport only. The new enhanced OAM features built in MPLS-TP 
   should be share in both flavors through future implementation.  
    
   Another question: I need to evolve my ATM/TDM/SONET/SDH networks 
   into new packet technologies, but my operational force is largely 
   legacy transport, not familiar with new data technologies, and I 
   want to maintain the same operational model for the time being, 
     
                                                             [Page 10] 
    
    
   MPLS-TP Use Cases Studies and Design Considerations       July 2010 
    
   what should I do? The answer would be: MPLS-TP may be the best 
   choice today for the transition. 
    
   A few important factors need to be considered for IP/MPLS or MPLS-
   TP include: 
    
        - Technology maturity (IP/MPLS is much more mature with 12 
        years development)  
        - Operation experience (Work force experience, Union agreement, 
        how easy to transition to a new technology? how much does it 
        cost?) 
        - Needs for Multi-service support on the same node (MPLS-TP 
        provide transport only, does not replace many functions of 
        IP.MPLS) 
        - LTE, IPTV/Video distribution considerations (which path is 
        the most viable for reaching the end goal with minimal cost? 
        but it also meet the need of today's support) 
    
   5.2. Standards compliance 
    
   It is generally recognized by SPs that standards compliance are 
   important for driving the cost down and product maturity up, multi-
   vendor interoperability, also important to meet the expectation of 
   the business customers of SP's. 
    
   MPLS-TP is a joint work between IETF and ITU-T. In April 2008, IETF 
   and ITU-T jointly agreed to terminate T-MPLS and progress MPLS-TP 
   as joint work [RFC 5317]. The transport requirements would be 
   provided by ITU-T, the protocols would be developed in IETF.  
    
   T-MPLS is not MPLS-TP. T-MPLS solution would not inter-op with 
   IP/MPLS, it would not be compatible with MPLS-TP defined in IETF.  
    
    
   5.3. General network design considerations 
             -  
    - Migration considerations 
    - Resilency 
    - Scalability 
    - Performance 
    
   Design considerations for Delay / loss measurement  
   It is viewed as very important for some SPs that the working path 
   and protect path share similar delay measurement. It is critical 
   for certain financial applications. 
    
    
   This draft is work in progress, more would be filled in the 
   following revision. 
     
                                                             [Page 11] 
    
    
   MPLS-TP Use Cases Studies and Design Considerations       July 2010 
    
 
 
6. Security Considerations 
 
   Reference to [MPLS/GMPLS SEC FW]. 
    
    
7. IANA Considerations 
    
   This document contains no new IANA considerations. 
    
8. Normative References 
    
   [RFC 5317]: Joint Working Team (JWT) Report on MPLS Architectural 
   Considerations for a Transport Profile, Feb. 2009.  
    
   [RFC 5654], Niven-Jenkins, B., et al, "MPLS-TP Requirements", RFC 
   5654, September 2009. 
    
   (More to be added) 
 
 
9. Informative References 
    
    
   [MPLS-TP FW] Bocci, M., Bryant, et al., "A Framework for MPLS in 
   Transport Networks", draft-ietf-mpls-tp-framework-12 (work in 
   progress), June 2010. 
    
   [MPLS/GMPLS SEC FW] L. Fang, et al, Security Framework for MPLS and 
   GMPLS Networks, draft-ietf-mpls-mpls-and-gmpls-security-framework-
   09.txt, March 2010. 
    
   (More to be added) 
 
 
10.     Author's Addresses 
    
   Luyuan Fang 
   Cisco Systems, Inc. 
   300 Beaver Brook Road 
   Boxborough, MA 01719 
   USA 
   Email: lufang@cisco.com 
    
   Nabil Bitar 
   Verizon 
   40 Sylvan Road 
     
                                                             [Page 12] 
    
    
   MPLS-TP Use Cases Studies and Design Considerations       July 2010 
    
   Waltham, MA 02145 
   USA 
   Email: nabil.bitar@verizon.com 
    
   Raymond Zhang 
   British Telecom 
   BT Center 
   81 Newgate Street 
   London, EC1A 7AJ 
   United Kingdom 
   Email: raymond.zhang@bt.com 
    
   Masahiro DAIKOKU 
   KDDI corporation 
   Japan 
   Email: ms-daikoku@kddi.com 
    
    
    





























     
                                                             [Page 13] 
    
