
   Network Working Group                                 Luyuan Fang 
   Internet Draft                                      Cisco Systems 
   Intended status: Informational  
   Expires: April 24, 2012                  
                                               
                                                    October 24, 2011 
 
                         VPN4DC Problem Statement  
                draft-fang-vpn4dc-problem-statement-00.txt 
    
Abstract 
 
   Provider Provisioned IP VPNs are commonly used to interconnect 
   multiple locations of a private network, such as an enterprise with 
   multiple offices. Current developments in data center operations 
   create the need to consider additional connectivity and 
   connectivity management problems described in this document. 
 
Status of this Memo 
 
   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with 
   the provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.  
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute 
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents 
   at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress". 
    
   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 24, 2012. 
    
Copyright Notice 
    
   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the 
   document authors.  All rights reserved. 
    
   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal 
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents 
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of 
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents 
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with 
   respect to this document.  Code Components extracted from this 
   document must include Simplified BSD License text as described in 
   Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without 
   warranty as described in the Simplified BSD License. 
    
    
Fang                    Expire April 24, 2012                [Page 1] 
    
Internet Draft          VPN4DC Problem Statement        October 2011 
    
Table of Contents 
 
   1.   Introduction                                                 2 
   2.   Terminology                                                  3 
   3.   VPN4DC: A problem Definition                                 3 
   4.   Private network connectivity between data centers            4 
   5.   Private Networks within a public data center                 5 
   6.   Connectivity between different VPNs                          5 
   7.   Mobile connectivity                                          5 
   8.   Security Considerations                                      6 
   9.   IANA Considerations                                          6 
   10.  Normative References                                         6 
   11.  Informative References                                       6 
   12.  Author's Address                                             6 
    
    
Requirements Language 
 
   Although this document is not a protocol specification, the key 
   words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in 
   this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC 
   2119]. 
 
    
1. Introduction 
 
   Data centers are increasingly being consolidated and outsourced in 
   an effort both to improve the deployment time of applications as 
   well as reduce operational costs. This coincides with an increasing 
   requirement for compute, storage and network connectivity from 
   applications. 
    
   The consolidation and virtualization of data centers, either public 
   or private, has consequences in terms of network requirements. It 
   creates several new problems for private network connectivity, 
   which are incremental the existing L3VPN technology. It is helpful 
   to identify and analyze these problems separately: 
    
        - Private network connectivity between different data centers, 
   either public or private. 
    
        - Private network connectivity between different compute 
   resources within a public data center. 
    
        - Connectivity between different private networks within or 
   across data centers. 
     
                                                              [Page 2] 
    
    
Internet Draft          VPN4DC Problem Statement        October 2011 
    
         
        - Content distribution between centralized public or private 
   data centers and enterprise branch offices. 
         
        - Private network connectivity for mobile devices. 
    
   This document defines the problems under the assumption that 
   applications require IP unicast connectivity but no layer 2 direct 
   adjacencies. Applications with layer 2 requirements are likely to 
   also have assumptions of other media characteristics such as round 
   trip time, for instance.  
    
   This document is also under the assumption that both IPv4 and IPv6 
   unicast are in scope, but multicast service is a topic for further 
   discussion and outside the scope of this document. 
    
   The private network service to be provided must provide traffic 
   isolation between different VPNs allowing the use of a common 
   infrastructure and take into account the need to reduce operational 
   costs. 
       
2. Terminology  
    
   AS           Autonomous Systems  
   DC           Data Center 
   IaaS         Infrastructure as a Service 
   LTE          Long Term Evolution 
   RT           Route Target 
   ToR          Top-of-Rack switch 
   VM           Virtual Machine 
   VMM          Virtual Machine Manager, Hypervisor 
   VPN          Virtual Private Network 
 
    
3. VPN4DC: A problem Definition 
    
   A VPN4DC solution needs to address the following problems that are 
   incremental to existing IPVPN solutions: 
    
        - IP only data center: defined by a data center where VM, 
           applications, and hypervisors require only IP connectivity 
           and the underlying DC infrastructure is IP only.  
            
        - Network isolation among tenants or applications sharing the 
           same data centers. 
 
        - Hypervisors may not support BGP as a control protocol. 
      
    
     
                                                              [Page 3] 
    
    
Internet Draft          VPN4DC Problem Statement        October 2011 
    
 
        - Fast and secure provisioning of a VPN connectivity for a VM 
           with low operational complexity within a data center and 
           across data centers. This includes the ability to connect a 
           VM to a customer VPN outside the data center, thus requiring 
           the ability to provision the communication path within the 
           data center to the customer VPN. It also includes 
           interconnecting VMs within and across physical data centers 
           in the context of a virtual data center. The customer VPN 
           service could be provided by a BGP/MPLS VPN [RFC 4363] 
           network service provider. The VPN connectivity provisioning 
           is targeted to be done via in-band signaling rather than an 
           out-of-band control infrastructure. The Software Defined 
           Network (SDN) is addressing the latter approach. It is 
           expected that both in-band and out-of-band provisioning 
           control will have applicability in different environments.  
    
4. Private network connectivity between data centers 
 
    
   Private data centers attach to the VPN network via a CE device, 
   which advertises the respective IP address prefixes to the network. 
   In this space, the requirements remain unchanged from current 
   private networks, unless we assume the ability to migrate Virtual 
   Machines (VMs) between different data centers. 
    
   In the case that VMs are allowed to migrate between distinct data 
   centers, this requires that each specific IP Host prefix for a VM 
   to be advertised to the VPN network or an "home agent" approach 
   that can redirect traffic from one data center to another (with 
   potential negative consequences to latency). 
    
   When private networks interconnect with public data centers, the 
   VPN provider must interconnect with the public data center 
   provider. In this case we are in the presence of an Inter-Provider 
   VPN in which the VPN service provider manages part of the 
   connectivity and in which the data center provider provides network 
   attachment points for multiple common customers.  
    
   As with existing Inter-AS BGP/MPLS VPN scenarios, the Route Target 
   (RT) associated with a specific VPN (in a symmetrical VPN) must be 
   coordinated between the two entities (service provider and data 
   center provider). The data center provider services (e.g. the API 
   portal to its orchestration system) must also be accessible to all 
   the carriers VPNs. 
    
   As data center providers often have different operational 
   procedures than network services providers it is important to 
   identify potential solutions, from operational procedures to 
     
                                                              [Page 4] 
    
    
Internet Draft          VPN4DC Problem Statement        October 2011 
    
   application APIs that can exchange the necessary information 
   between the VPN network service provider and data center provider. 
 
    
5. Private Networks within a public data center 
    
   Public data centers achieve efficiencies by executing the compute 
   loads of many different customers over a common infrastructure for 
   compute, storage and network. 
    
   Compute nodes are often executed as Virtual Machines, in an 
   "Infrastructure as a Service" (IaaS) data center. The set of 
   virtual machines corresponding to a particular customer should be 
   constrained to a private network. L3VPN technologies have proven to 
   be able to scale to a large number of customer routes while 
   providing for aggregated management capability. It is important to 
   document the applicability of BGP/MPLS L3VPN technology to VMs in a 
   data center. 
    
   It must take into account that MPLS itself is not a common 
   technology within data centers and as such the solution must 
   provide for IP based forwarding. It is also important to consider 
   whether the end-system itself can contain the routing information 
   corresponding to the VPN overlay networks without the assistance of 
   the Top-of-Rack (ToR) switch, which may be constrained in terms of 
   its routing table size. 
 
    
6. Connectivity between different VPNs 
    
   Within a data center, the VMs within a private network will need to 
   communicate with data center common services such as storage or 
   data-base services. These services often imply high traffic 
   volumes. 
    
   The traditional approach is to deploy stateful service appliance, 
   between different VPNs. That may become cost prohibitive for 
   services with high volume of traffic. It is important to consider 
   whether pushing the desired traffic control rules to the ingress 
   points of the network (traffic sources) may assist in addressing 
   this operational issue. 
    
 
7. Mobile connectivity 
    
   Application access is being done increasingly from clients such as 
   cell phones or tablets that may come in via a private WiFi access 
   point or a public WiFi or 3G/LTE access. These clients must have 
   access to application which servers reside on a private network. 
     
                                                              [Page 5] 
    
    
Internet Draft          VPN4DC Problem Statement        October 2011 
    
    
   It is important to consider whether it is possible to connect 
   applications in mobile clients to provider provisioned VPNs. For 
   instance by using IPSec tunnels; or whether these applications are 
   best served by content caches running in the service provider 
   infrastructure.  
    
   The solution should assume that client, VPN provider and data 
   center may be in different Autonomous Systems. 
    
    
8. Security Considerations 
 
   The document presents the problems need to be addressed in the 
   L3VPN for data center space. The requirements and solutions will be 
   documented separately. 
    
   The security considerations for general requirements or individual 
   solutions will be documented in the relevant documents. 
    
    
9. IANA Considerations 
    
   This document contains no new IANA considerations. 
    
    
10.     Normative References 
    
   [RFC 4363] Rosen, E. and Y. Rekhter, "BGP/MPLS IP Virtual Private 
   Networks (VPNs)", RFC 4364, February 2006.   
 
    
11.     Informative References 
    
   [RFC 2119] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate                    
   Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997. 
    
    
12.     Author's Address 
    
   Luyuan Fang 
   Cisco Systems 
   111 Wood Avenue South 
   Iselin, NJ 08830 
   USA 
   Email: lufang@cisco.com 
    
    
    
     
                                                              [Page 6] 
    
    
Internet Draft          VPN4DC Problem Statement        October 2011 
    
13.     Acknowledgement  
    
    
   The author would like to thank Pedro Marques for his helpful 
   comments/input. 












































     
                                                              [Page 7] 
    
