



Network Working Group                                          M. Hubert
Internet-Draft                                                        BT
Intended status: Standards Track                               R. Murray
Expires: January 03, 2014                               B. Niven-Jenkins
                                                Velocix (Alcatel-Lucent)
                                                           July 02, 2013


             Illustrative CDNI Metadata for HTTPS Delivery
                  draft-hubert-cdni-https-metadata-00

Abstract

   The CDNI Metadata specification describes generic CDNI metadata
   objects and properties as well as mechanisms to extend the generic/
   base objects and properties to support additional standardised and/or
   proprietary capabilities.  This document is intended to "test" the
   extensibility of the CDNI Metadata protocol by defining CDNI Metadata
   for delivery of content over HTTPS that extends the existing generic
   CDNI Metadata.

Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 03, 2014.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.



Hubert, et al.          Expires January 03, 2014                [Page 1]

Internet-DraftIllustrative CDNI Metadata for HTTPS Delivery    July 2013


   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
     1.1.  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  CDNI Metadata Property Object Description . . . . . . . . . .   2
     2.1.  HTTPS Delivery Metadata . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
       2.1.1.  Example HTTPS Delivery Metadata object  . . . . . . .   4
     2.2.  Specifying HTTPS Delivery in CDNI Metadata  . . . . . . .   4
   3.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   4.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   5.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5

1.  Introduction

   The CDNI Metadata specification describes generic CDNI metadata
   objects and properties as well as mechanisms to extend the generic/
   base objects and properties to support additional standardised and/or
   proprietary capabilities.  This document is intended to "test" the
   extensibility of the CDNI Metadata protocol by defining CDNI Metadata
   for delivery of content over HTTPS that extends the existing generic
   CDNI Metadata defined in [I-D.ietf-cdni-metadata].

   This document intends to test the extensibility of the CDNI Metadata
   protocol using HTTPS without client certificate authentication.

1.1.  Terminology

   This document reuses the terminology defined in
   [I-D.ietf-cdni-metadata].

2.  CDNI Metadata Property Object Description

   CDNI Metadata property objects are defined in this section.

2.1.  HTTPS Delivery Metadata





Hubert, et al.          Expires January 03, 2014                [Page 2]

Internet-DraftIllustrative CDNI Metadata for HTTPS Delivery    July 2013


   HTTPS Metadata provides the dCDN with information about how to
   deliver content using HTTPS.  All properties that apply to HTTP
   Delivery also apply to HTTPS delivery with the same meanings.  The
   following HTTPS-specific properties are defined by this document.

   This document defines a new CDNI Metadata Object - the HTTPSDelivery
   metadata object which may be contained within a GenericMetadata
   object as defined in [I-D.ietf-cdni-metadata].  The HTTPSDelivery
   metadata object's type is "application/cdni.HTTPSDeliveryMetadata",
   its value is a dictionary of HTTPS delivery properties and the
   mandatory-to-enforce property MUST be True.

   The following HTTPS delivery properties are defined in this document.
   This is meant to be an illustrative set of HTTPS specific properties
   that would be combined with the HTTP delivery properties defined in
   the specification/RFC that defines HTTP delivery.  [[Editor's note:
   Does the HTTPS metadata 'override' the HTTP metadata (e.g. duplicate
   properties in the HTTPS metadata object or does the dCDN need to
   combine the properties from each?]]

      Property: https.tls.version

         Description: List of SSL/TLS versions for which delivery is
         allowed.

         Type: List of TLSVersion.  TLSVersion is a string containing an
         enumaration (in uppercase) of the SSL/TLS version, e.g.
         "TLS1.0" or "TLS1.1" etc.

         Mandatory-to-Specify: Yes.

      Property: https.ciphersuites

         Description: List of cipher suites for which delivery is
         allowed.

         Type: List of TLSCipherSuite.  TLSCipherSuite is a string
         containing an enumeration of the cipher suite, e.g.
         "TLS_DHE_RSA_WITH_AES_256_CBC_SHA" or
         "TLS_RSA_WITH_AES_128_CBC_SHA" etc.

         Mandatory-to-Specify: Yes.

      Property: https.certificate

         Description: Server certificate to present to User Agents.

         Type: String containing base64 encoding of server certificate.



Hubert, et al.          Expires January 03, 2014                [Page 3]

Internet-DraftIllustrative CDNI Metadata for HTTPS Delivery    July 2013


         Mandatory-to-Specify: Yes.

      Property: https.key

         Description: Private key.

         Type: String containing base64 encoding of server certificate.

         Mandatory-to-Specify: Yes.

   A new enumeration for HTTPS is required as Protocol metadata object
   as per [I-D.ietf-cdni-metadata] (section 4.3.2)

2.1.1.  Example HTTPS Delivery Metadata object

2.2.  Specifying HTTPS Delivery in CDNI Metadata

   Whether HTTP, HTTPS or both is allowed for a given hostname is
   controlled via a ProtocolACL (as specified by
   [I-D.ietf-cdni-metadata]).  If the ProtocolACL specified in the
   HostMetadata object for a hostname contains only HTTPS then the dCDN
   MUST NOT deliver content associated with that HostMetadata object
   over HTTP.  Likewise if only HTTP is specified the dCDN MUST NOT
   deliver content associated with that HostMetadata object over HTTPS.
   If both HTTP and HTTPS is specified in the HostMetadata's Protocol
   ACL then the dCDN MUST deliver content via the protocol is was
   requested over.  PathMetadata objects associated with the
   HostMetadata can be used to control the availability/permissibility
   of HTTP/HTTPS/mixed delivery on a per-URI path basis (via PathMatch
   objects).

3.  IANA Considerations

   Add enumeration for HTTPS to Protocol metadata object
   [I-D.ietf-cdni-metadata](section 4.3.2).

   Add type for "HTTPS Delivery Metadata" CDNI Metadata Property Object

4.  Security Considerations

   The HTTPS private key should be embedded in the metadata in base64
   encoding format.  Metadata pertaining to HTTPS MUST be exchanged over
   secure transport i.e HTTPS, and CDNI metadata receivers MUST be
   authorised/authenticated.  The detail of precise mechanisms to do
   this is out of scope of this document.  The storage and manipulation
   of HTTPS metadata such as the private key on the dCDN itself must
   also be secure.  The detail of precise mechanisms to do this are also
   out of scope of this document.



Hubert, et al.          Expires January 03, 2014                [Page 4]

Internet-DraftIllustrative CDNI Metadata for HTTPS Delivery    July 2013


5.  Normative References

   [I-D.ietf-cdni-metadata]
              Niven-Jenkins, B., Murray, R., Watson, G., Caulfield, M.,
              Leung, K., and K. Ma, "CDN Interconnect Metadata", draft-
              ietf-cdni-metadata-01 (work in progress), February 2013.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

Authors' Addresses

   Mal Hubert
   BT
   Adastral Park
   Martlesham Heath, Ipswich  IP5 3RE
   UK

   Email: mal.hubert@bt.com


   Rob Murray
   Velocix (Alcatel-Lucent)
   3 Ely Road
   Milton, Cambridge  CB24 6DD
   UK

   Email: rmurray@velocix.com


   Ben Niven-Jenkins
   Velocix (Alcatel-Lucent)
   3 Ely Road
   Milton, Cambridge  CB24 6DD
   UK

   Email: ben@velocix.com














Hubert, et al.          Expires January 03, 2014                [Page 5]
