
Network Working Group                                        Michael Ko 
Internet Draft                                              Edward Wang 
Intended status : Informational                         Huawei Symantec 
Expires : April 2012                                   October 14, 2011 
     

             Problem Statement for Dynamic Secure Interconnect 
                   draft-ko-dsi-problem-statement-00.txt 

Abstract 

   This document examines the problems and challenges associated with 
   the process of setting up secure interconnections between authorized 
   network nodes.  The network nodes can be located anywhere in a 
   private or public network, directly connected or behind one or more 
   levels of NAT [NAT].  Setting up a secure interconnection in this 
   environment entails the resolution of various issues such as 
   authentication, peer discovery, virtual network address management, 
   and connection parameters determination. 

Status of this Memo 

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with 
   the provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79. 

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents 
   at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as 
   reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html. 

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 

   This Internet-Draft will expire in April 2012. 

Table of Contents 

   1    Introduction ................................................2 
   2    Problems in Establishing Secure Interconnections ............3 
   2.1  Connectivity Problems .......................................3 
   2.2  Security Problems ...........................................5 
   2.3  Management Problems .........................................6 
 
 
Ko                        Expires April 2012                  [Page 1] 
Internet-Draft          DSI Problem Statement           October 2011 
 
   3    Conclusions .................................................8 
   4    Security Considerations .....................................9 
   5    IANA Considerations .........................................9 
   6    Informative References ......................................9 
   7    Acknowledgments ............................................11 
    

1  Introduction 

   The pervasiveness and the ubiquity of the Internet have empowered 
   mobile users, bringing it closer to reality for anyone to achieve 
   the goal of being able to work anywhere, anytime, and using any 
   device.  The user's computer may only contain just a minimal 
   operating system with a web browser to serve as little more than a 
   display terminal for processes occurring on a network of computers 
   far away.  Therefore, being able to setup a connection with any 
   authorized network nodes containing the needed resources on demand 
   will further increase the flexibility for the user, allowing him/her 
   to pick and choose the appropriate resources based on different 
   criteria for the task at hand.  These network nodes containing the 
   needed resources may reside inside the local network, or externally 
   at an internet connected datacenter.   

   A user may need to set up a secure interconnection with an 
   authorized network node for data backup and archiving purposes.  
   This allows a user that stores his/her data at one facility (such as 
   a cloud storage facility) to backup and archive his/her data at a 
   different facility (such as a different cloud storage facility) in 
   order to avoid suffering irrecoverable data loss in a catastrophic 
   situation. 

   A user may want to set up a secure interconnection with a remote 
   authorized network node for data mirroring purposes.  This allows a 
   mobile user to maintain remote copies of the data at different 
   locations.  Then depending on his/her current location, he/she can 
   select the nearest network node containing a replica of his/her data 
   in order to reduce the access latency. 

   In some anti-DDoS (distributed denial of service) solutions, the 
   network node running the operation of the anti-DDoS solution is 
   responsible for formulating the detection and cleaning policies 
   based on user defined requirements.  The network node needs to set 
   up secure interconnections with the network nodes responsible for 
   DDoS detection and the network nodes responsible for cleaning in 
   order to deliver the policies for execution.  In turn, each network 
   node containing the DDoS detectors identifies and detects DDoS 
   traffic, and periodically sets up a secure interconnection with the 
 
 
Ko                       Expires April, 2012                 [Page 2] 
Internet-Draft          DSI Problem Statement           October 2011 
 
   network node running the operation to return the detection results 
   in order for the cleaning policies to be updated based on the 
   detection results.  Similarly, each network node acting as a 
   cleaning agent filters DDoS traffic and isolates threats, and 
   periodically sets up a secure interconnection with the network node 
   running the anti-DDoS solution in order to receive updated cleaning 
   policies. 

   These and other examples point to the need for setting up secure 
   interconnections with authorized network nodes anywhere in the 
   Internet for various reasons. 

2  Problems in Establishing Secure Interconnections 

   Establishing and maintaining a secure interconnection between two 
   network nodes entails challenges related to connectivity, security, 
   and management.   

2.1  Connectivity Problems 

   The first consideration in establishing a secure interconnection 
   between two authorized network nodes is the ability to create an 
   end-to-end connection between the two nodes.  Ideally any node 
   connected to the Internet should be able to establish addressing and 
   create direct end-to-end connection with another network node 
   regardless of its topological location and Internet Protocol 
   technology (IPv4/v6).  In reality, a network node can be located 
   anywhere in a private or public network, directly connected or 
   behind one or more levels of NAT.  In addition, it is not uncommon 
   for a node to have a dynamic IP address on its physical or virtual 
   interfaces.  Furthermore, the status of a node being online or 
   offline is dynamic.  For a mobile user, even the physical location 
   of a node is also dynamic.   

   Due to the dynamic nature, automated discovery is an important 
   requirement for the user to set up a secure interconnection with an 
   authorized network node.  The IETF standard known as the Service 
   Location Protocol [SLP] allows computers and other devices to find 
   services in a local area network.  In larger networks, one or more 
   "directory agents" are used in SLP.  Service agents send register 
   messages containing all the services they advertise to the 
   "directory agents".  User agents issue service requests to the 
   "directory agent", specifying the characteristics of the services 
   they require.  To provision services to users, a network 
   administrator can assign a scope string to each and every user agent 
   in order to limit the user agent to discover only that particular 
   grouping of services.  As currently defined, the "directory agent" 
 
 
Ko                       Expires April, 2012                 [Page 3] 
Internet-Draft          DSI Problem Statement           October 2011 
 
   merely functions as a cache and does not have the authority to set 
   the scopes for the user agents. 

   In some cases it is not possible to establish a direct end-to-end 
   connection especially when both parties are located behind NATs.  
   The IETF standard known as Traversal Using Relays around NAT [TURN] 
   allows a host behind a NAT to use the services of an intermediate 
   node that acts as a communication relay in order to exchange packets 
   with its peers.  A client using TURN must have some way to 
   communicate the relayed transport address to its peers, and to learn 
   each peer's IP address and port (more precisely, each peer's server-
   reflexive transport address).  This can be done using a special-
   purpose "introduction" or "rendezvous" protocol (see [RFC5128]), but 
   it does require the use of a publicly addressable "rendezvous 
   server". 

   The Internet Storage Name Service [ISNS] protocol facilitates the 
   automated discovery, management, and scalable configuration of 
   Internet Small Computer Systems Interface [ISCSI] devices on a 
   TCP/IP network.  iSNS allows the administrator to go beyond a simple 
   device-by-device management model, where each storage device is 
   manually and individually configured with its own list of known 
   initiators and targets.  Using iSNS, each storage device 
   subordinates its discovery and management responsibilities to an 
   "iSNS server".  The "iSNS server" serves as the consolidated 
   configuration point through which management stations can configure 
   and manage the entire storage network.  With the iSNS protocol 
   supporting the interaction between "iSNS servers" and iSNS clients, 
   iSNS provides the intelligent storage discovery and management 
   services needed.  However, iSNS is intended to emulate Fibre Channel 
   fabric services for managing both iSCSI and Fibre Channel devices, 
   and is therefore not suitable for use outside of the storage area 
   network. 

   The iSNS model points to the desirability of subordinating the 
   network nodes to a consolidated configuration point for scalability 
   reasons.  This allows the network administrator to use the 
   consolidated configuration point through which management stations 
   can configure and manage the network, instead of the simple node-by-
   node management model, where each network node is manually and 
   individually configured with its own list of authorized network 
   nodes.  The consolidated configuration point, acting as a central 
   repository, can facilitate the automated discovery problem since it 
   contains the necessary parameters for network nodes to discover and 
   construct secure interconnections with other authorized network 
   nodes.  Certain parameters can be pre-configured by the network 
   administrator while others can be dynamically provided by the 
 
 
Ko                       Expires April, 2012                 [Page 4] 
Internet-Draft          DSI Problem Statement           October 2011 
 
   network nodes.  The parameters may contain the topology of the 
   overlay network (e.g., hub-and-spokes or hub), the function type of 
   specific network nodes (e.g., router or host), the tunneling method 
   (e.g., IPsec), the routing protocols (e.g., OSPF), or routing lookup 
   method (e.g., DNS lookup), the dynamic physical and virtual IP 
   addresses of the network nodes, etc.  For NAT traversal, the central 
   repository can also serve as the rendezvous server.  Existing 
   standards that use central repositories such as the SLP "directory 
   agent", the "iSNS server", etc., provide some but not all of the 
   functionalities needed. 

   Existing methodologies can be used by network nodes to discover the 
   central repository, such as pre-configuring the domain name or 
   address of the central repository in the network nodes, or 
   provisioning via Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol [DHCP] or 
   Domain Name System [DNS] lookup, etc.  When a network node is ready 
   for interconnections, either seeking to connect to other network 
   nodes, or allowing others to connect to it, it contacts a central 
   repository to login and register its presence in the network.  After 
   a successful login, a network node may register additional 
   information (e.g., its dynamic IP address) with the central 
   repository so that the information can be shared with other 
   authorized network nodes.  The central repository in turn provides 
   the network node with the necessary information needed to establish 
   a connection with other network nodes.  Through the central 
   repository, a network node should be able to determine other network 
   nodes that it is authorized to access, the online status of other 
   network nodes, parameters needed to establish a connection, etc. 

2.2  Security Problems 

   The second consideration in establishing a secure interconnection 
   between two authorized network nodes is security.  Ideally any node 
   with the same security/application strategy can form a secure 
   interconnection free of the restrictions of the physical network, 
   and network Security Assurance solutions should not be dependent on 
   network topology.  The secure interconnection should provide unified 
   security services for trusted network construction, authentication 
   and access control, data confidentiality and data integrity, and 
   non-repudiation. 

   In a datacenter, there are identifiable boundaries to an enclave.  
   (An enclave is the collection of local computing devices that are 
   governed by a single security policy).  This facilitates the defense 
   of the enclave boundary by focusing on effective control and 
   monitoring of data flow into and out of the enclave.  Effective 
   control measures include firewalls, guards, Virtual Private Networks 
 
 
Ko                       Expires April, 2012                 [Page 5] 
Internet-Draft          DSI Problem Statement           October 2011 
 
   [VPN], and identification and authentication access control for 
   remote users.  Effective monitoring mechanisms include network-based 
   Intrusion Detection System (IDS), vulnerability scanners, and virus 
   detectors located on the LAN (see [IATF]). 

   On the Internet, critical systems are exposed, and physical 
   isolation can no longer be relied upon to enforce security.  
   Instead, each network node must be treated as a separate enclave and 
   be protected as such.  There is a need for client authentication, 
   peer discovery, virtual network address management, etc. in order to 
   enable a user to setup a secure interconnection.  

   Various IETF standards on security such as IP Security [IPSEC], 
   Transport Layer Security [TLS], Secure Shell [SSH], Public-Key 
   Cryptography Standards [PKCS], etc, provide the needed framework for 
   network nodes to create security tunnels to satisfy the security 
   requirement.  But to create a security tunnel during connection 
   establishment, a network node may need to have access to certificate 
   fingerprint (see [RFC4572]), generated keys and security strategy, 
   etc.  These can be facilitated by having a central repository in the 
   network responsible for disseminating the required information.  A 
   central repository is also needed to handle the authentication, 
   authorization and accounting for a network node after the network 
   node presents its identity and credentials to the central repository 
   upon login.  This means that the network node and the central 
   repository may share a pre-configured or automatically established 
   security association to prevent unauthorized access. 

   Existing standards such as Kerberos [KERBEROS] can be used to 
   satisfy the authentication aspect of establishing a secure 
   interconnection.  Kerberos acts as a trusted third-party 
   authentication service by using conventional (shared secret key) 
   cryptography.  Extensions to Kerberos can provide for the use of 
   public key cryptography during certain phases of the authentication 
   protocol.     

2.3  Management Problems 

   The third consideration in establishing a secure interconnection 
   between two authorized network nodes is on management and control.  
   The following is a list of some of the critical management tasks 
   that are required for establishing a secure interconnection between 
   two authorized network nodes: 

   1. Discover if the network nodes that a user is authorized to access 
      are currently online and active. 

 
 
Ko                       Expires April, 2012                 [Page 6] 
Internet-Draft          DSI Problem Statement           October 2011 
 
   2. Discover the functional attributes associated with these 
      authorized network nodes. 

   3. Discover the location of the authorized network nodes. 

   4. Determine if accessing the network node requires going through a 
      relay (e.g., TURN).  Discover the location of the relay if it is 
      needed. 

   5. Determine the parameters needed to establish a secure 
      interconnection between the two network nodes. 

   6. Discover, via inquiry or advertisement, other authorized network 
      nodes as they become active and available. 

   One popular protocol for managing networked devices is the Simple 
   Network Management Protocol [SNMP].  The current standard version, 
   SNMPv3, defines the full security framework including User-based 
   Security Model [USM] and View-based Access Control Model [VACM].  
   SNMP was designed to facilitate the exchange of management 
   information between networked devices.  Even though it was 
   originally intended to configure network equipment, SNMP is mainly 
   being used for network monitoring due to several reasons.  Firstly, 
   network operators prefer the text-based Command Line Interfaces 
   (CLI) to configure their boxes, instead of the BER-encoded SNMP (see 
   [BER]).  Secondly, many equipment vendors did not provide the option 
   to completely configure their devices via SNMP (see [RFC3535]).     

   The Network Configuration Protocol [NETCONF] uses an Extensible 
   Markup Language (XML) based data encoding for the configuration data 
   and the protocol messages to provide mechanisms to install, 
   manipulate, and delete the configuration of network devices.  The 
   Secure Shell [SSH] protocol is mandatory to support for 
   confidentiality and authentication.  NETCONF uses a simple RPC-based 
   mechanism to facilitate communication between a client and a server.  
   A client is typically a network administrator, while a server is 
   typically a network device.  Accordingly, a device may optionally 
   support multiple NETCONF sessions but is only required to support 
   one session.  After all, "the NETCONF protocol is focused on the 
   information required to get the device into its desired running 
   state" by the network administrator. 

   Due to the dynamic nature of the network, existing protocols that 
   are geared towards static or manual configuration or monitoring 
   purposes would be difficult, if not impossible, to allow a user to 
   discover important information about the authorized network nodes 
   available.  Furthermore, as the number of network nodes increases, 
 
 
Ko                       Expires April, 2012                 [Page 7] 
Internet-Draft          DSI Problem Statement           October 2011 
 
   the amount of effort required becomes prohibitive for manual 
   configuration.   

   A protocol to facilitate the automated discovery, management, and 
   configuration of network nodes will be useful in establishing secure 
   interconnections.  This protocol does not directly establish a 
   secure interconnection between the two network nodes.  It only 
   conveys the information needed by the two network nodes to establish 
   a secure interconnection.  This enables all existing methods of 
   secure interconnection establishment, such as VPN, to be supported 
   without any changes. 

   Furthermore, with the desirability of having a central repository 
   for scalability reasons to satisfy the connection and security 
   requirements, the management protocol should support the following 
   interactions between a network node and the central repository: 

   1. Mutual authentication between a network node and the central 
     repository 

   2. Virtual address assignment for the network node 

   3. Responding to inquiries from each network node regarding the 
     online status and other pertinent information related to peer 
     discovery for other network nodes that it is authorized to access 

   4. Providing all necessary parameters for establishing a secure 
     interconnection between two network nodes 

   5. Initiating State Change Notifications from the network nodes 

   Multiple central repositories are desirable for redundancy.  If the 
   [LDAP] information base is used to support the central repository, 
   then the information can be transferred using the [LDAP] protocol.  
   Otherwise a protocol is needed for distributing the information 
   between central repositories. 

3  Conclusions 

   This problem statement concludes that to handle the connectivity and 
   security problems related to the task of establishing a secure 
   interconnection in a dynamic environment between two authorized 
   network nodes, it would be desirable to have a central repository to 
   coordinate the connection process for scalability reasons.  Having a 
   central repository facilitates the task of the network administrator 
   by allowing him/her to go beyond a simple node-by-node management 
   model, where each network node is manually and individually 
 
 
Ko                       Expires April, 2012                 [Page 8] 
Internet-Draft          DSI Problem Statement           October 2011 
 
   configured.  Instead, each network node subordinates its discovery 
   and management responsibilities to the central repository.  Each 
   network node, having retrieved the information from the central 
   repository regarding the other network nodes that it is authorized 
   to access, can proceed with the connection process using supported 
   standards. 

   With the central repository being the consolidated configuration 
   point for all the authorized network nodes in the network, a 
   protocol is needed for the interaction between a central repository 
   and a network node.  Where redundancy is required, the protocol also 
   needs to handle the interaction among central repositories. 

4  Security Considerations 

   If a new protocol is deployed, the interaction between a central 
   repository and a network node and the interaction between two 
   central repositories is subject to various security threats.  As a 
   result, the protocol messages may need to be authenticated.  In 
   addition, to protect against snooping of the protocol messages, 
   confidentiality support is desirable and is required when certain 
   functions of the central repository are utilized.   

5  IANA Considerations 

   This document has no actions for IANA. 

6  Informative References 

   [BER] "Information technology - ASN.1 encoding rules: Specification 
       of Basic Encoding Rules (BER), Canonical Encoding Rules (CER) 
       and Distinguished Encoding Rules (DER)", ITU-T X.690, July 2002 

   [DHCP] R. Droms, "Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol", RFC 2131, 
       March 1997 

   [DNS] P. Mockapetris, "Domain Names - Implementation and 
       Specification", RFC 1035, November 1987 

   [IATF] Technical Directors, National Security Agency Information 
       Assurance Solutions, "Information Assurance Technical 
       Framework", Release 3.1, September 2002 

   [IPSEC] S. Kent et al., "Security Architecture for the Internet 
       Protocol", RFC 4301, December 2005 


 
 
Ko                       Expires April, 2012                 [Page 9] 
Internet-Draft          DSI Problem Statement           October 2011 
 
   [ISCSI] J. Satran et al., "Internet Small Computer Systems Interface 
       (iSCSI)", RFC 3720, April 2004 

   [ISNS] J. Tseng et al., "Internet Storage Name Service (iSNS)", RFC 
       4171, September 2005 

   [KERBEROS] C. Neuman et al., "The Kerberos Network Authentication 
       Service (V5)", RFC 4120, July 2005 

   [LDAP] K. Zeilenga, "Lightweight Directory Access Protocol (LDAP): 
       Technical Specification Road Map", RFC 4510, June 2006 

   [NAT] P. Srisuresh et al., "Traditional IP Network Address 
       Translator (Traditional NAT)", RFC 3022, January 2001 

   [NETCONF] R. Enns et al, "NETCONF Configuration Protocol (NETCONF)", 
       RFC6241, June 2011 

   [PKCS] J. Jonsson et al., "Public-Key Cryptography Standards (PKCS) 
       #1: RSA Cryptography Specifications Version 2.1", RFC 3447, 
       February 2003 

   [RFC3535] J. Schoenwaelder, "Overview of the 2002 IAB Network 
       Management Workshop", RFC 3535, May 2003 

   [RFC4572]  J. Lennox, "Connection-Oriented Media Transport over the 
       Transport Layer Security (TLS) Protocol in the Session 
       Description Protocol (SDP)", RFC 4572, July 2006 

   [RFC5128] P. Srisuresh et al., "State of Peer-to-Peer (P2P) 
       Communication across Network Address Translators (NATs)", RFC 
       5128, March 2008 

   [SLP] E. Guttman et al., "Service Location Protocol, Version 2", RFC 
       2608, June 1999 

   [SNMP] R. Presuhn et al., "Version 2 of the Protocol Operations for 
       the Simple Network Management Protocol (SNMP)", STD 62, RFC 
       3416, December 2002 

   [SSH] T. Ylonen et al., "The Secure Shell (SSH) Protocol 
       Architecture", RFC 4251, January 2006 

   [TLS] T. Dierks et al., "The Transport Layer Security (TLS) Protocol 
       Version 1.2", RFC 5246, August 2008 


 
 
Ko                       Expires April, 2012                [Page 10] 
Internet-Draft          DSI Problem Statement           October 2011 
 
   [TURN] R. Mahy et al., "Traversal Using Relays around NAT (TURN): 
       Relay Extensions to Session Traversal Utilities for NAT (STUN)", 
       RFC 5766, April 2010 

   [USM] U. Blumenthal et al., "User-based Security Model (USM) for 
       version 3 of the Simple Network Management Protocol (SNMPv3)", 
       STD 62, RFC 3414, December 2002 

   [VACM] B. Wijnen et al., "View-based Access Control Model (VACM) for 
       the Simple Network Management Protocol (SNMP)", STD 62, RFC 
       3415, December 2002 

   [VPN] A. Nagarajan, "Generic Requirements for Provider Provisioned 
       Virtual Private Networks (PPVPN)", RFC 3809, June 2004 

7  Acknowledgments 

   The authors would like to thank David Harrington for his valuable 
   advice and suggestion.   

Author's Address 

   Michael Ko 
   Huawei Symantec Technologies Co., Ltd. 
   20245 Stevens Creek Blvd. 
   Cupertino, CA 95014, USA 
   Phone: +1-408-510-7465 
   Email: michael@huaweisymantec.com 
    
   Edward Wang 
   Huawei Symantec Technologies Co., Ltd. 
   3rd Floor, Section D, Keshi Building 
   No. 28A, Xinxi Rd., Shangdi, Haidian Dist. 
   Beijing 100085 P.R. China 
   Phone: +86-10-6272-1288 
   Email: wangyc@huaweisymantec.com 
    
    
Copyright Notice 

   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the 
   document authors. All rights reserved. 

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal 
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents 
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of 
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents 
 
 
Ko                       Expires April, 2012                [Page 11] 
Internet-Draft          DSI Problem Statement           October 2011 
 
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with 
   respect to this document.  Code Components extracted from this 
   document must include Simplified BSD License text as described in 
   Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without 
   warranty as described in the Simplified BSD License. 

Intellectual Property Statement 

   The IETF Trust takes no position regarding the validity or scope of 
   any Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be 
   claimed to pertain to the implementation or use of the technology 
   described in any IETF Document or the extent to which any license 
   under such rights might or might not be available; nor does it 
   represent that it has made any independent effort to identify any 
   such rights. 

   Copies of Intellectual Property disclosures made to the IETF 
   Secretariat and any assurances of licenses to be made available, or 
   the result of an attempt made to obtain a general license or 
   permission for the use of such proprietary rights by implementers or 
   users of this specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line 
   IPR repository at http://www.ietf.org/ipr 

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement 
   any standard or specification contained in an IETF Document. Please 
   address the information to the IETF at ietf-ipr@ietf.org. 

Disclaimer of Validity 

   All IETF Documents and the information contained therein are 
   provided on an "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION 
   HE/SHE REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, 
   THE IETF TRUST AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL 
   WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY 
   WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION THEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE 
   ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS 
   FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 








 
 
Ko                       Expires April, 2012                [Page 12] 
