


Internet Engineering Task Force                             Nam-Seok. Ko
Internet-Draft                                                      ETRI
Intended status: Informational                               C. Williams
Expires: September 9, 2010                                    Consultant
                                                                  J. Qin
                                                                     ZTE
                                                           March 8, 2010


                    Preliminary MIF Threat Analysis
                  draft-ko-mif-threat-analysis-01.txt

Abstract

   MIF is working to describe the issues of attaching to multiple
   networks on hosts and document existing practice.  The group is also
   expected to analyze the impacts and effectiveness of these existing
   mechanisms.  This document identifies the threats to such scenarios
   that are under consideration in the MIF working group.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 9, 2010.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.




Ko, et al.              Expires September 9, 2010               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft       Preliminary MIF Threat Analysis          March 2010


   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the BSD License.


1.  Introduction

   A host attached to multiple networks has to make decisions about
   default router selection, address selection, DNS server selection,
   choice of interface for packet transmission, and the treatment of
   configuration information received from the various networks.  The
   interfaces may be physical or virtual.  The communications over such
   interfaces may be with the same or different network domain.
   Configuration parameters for the enablement of such communication may
   be specific to an interface or global.  Communications may be
   simultaneous with each interface.

   MIF is dealing with issues of attaching to multiple networks on
   hosts.  This document will identify security threats with respect to
   MIF nodes for the scenarios defined in the MIF problem statement
   [I-D.blanchet-mif-problem-statement].  A separate document will be
   prepared to analyze the impacts and effectiveness with respect to
   security on current practices and solutions.  Here we start with
   identification of security attacks.  In
   [I-D.blanchet-mif-problem-statement] the MIF problem area is to be
   split into five categories: 1) Configuration 2) DNS resolution 3)
   Routing 4) Address selection and 5) connexion management.  Security
   impacts with respect to threats is required to determine the proper
   security considerations.  This document discusses the threats for MIF
   without discussing any solutions.  The requirements arising out of
   these threats will be used as input to the MIF Working Group.  The
   working group is considering both IPv4 and IPv6 and such security
   threat analysis will be done with this in mind.


2.  MIF Threats

   This first revision of the draft will identify the MIF threats.  As
   MIF progresses with proposals a section may be added later for
   security implications of current MIF practices and solutions.

   As is defined in [I-D.blanchet-mif-problem-statement] a MIF host is



Ko, et al.              Expires September 9, 2010               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft       Preliminary MIF Threat Analysis          March 2010


   defined to be configured with more than one IP addresses and those
   addresses may be from different administrative domains.
   Communications using these IP addresses will happen independently and
   may occur simultaneously.  In essence, each of the multiple
   connections that define a MIF node is actually a group of
   configuration objects that define the characteristics of a
   connection.  As such, most of the threat attacks for MIF focus on the
   security and integrity of MIF configuration objects.

   MIF security attacks relating to this specific definition are
   identified:

   One such attack is directed at the ability of MIF node to communicate
   either on one or more of its interfaces.  Such an attack is initiated
   by preventing the specific configuration objects from being
   delivered.  An attacker could launch a flooding attack on the
   entities that provide the intelligence to deal with configuration and
   policy information for the interfaces.  By preventing the MIF node
   from delivering the configuration as well as the address selection
   policy information to nodes, the MIF node is kept from properly
   communicating either on one or more interfaces.

   Another attack that a MIF node is vulnerable to is that it may be
   hijacked by malicious injection of illegitimate configuration object
   information of one interface via another interface.  In this threat
   the attacker injects malicious policy information that could redirect
   packets and attack the remote network via one of the other interfaces
   of the MIF node.

   Malicious nodes may also tap to collect the network policy
   information of one interface from another interface and leak it to
   unauthorized parties.  The threat could also allow a malicious node
   to obtain access to security policy information of one interface from
   other interfaces.

   The undetermined behavior of IP stacks in the multihomed context
   bring additional threats where an interface on a multihomed host
   might be used to conduct attacks targeted to the networks connected
   by the other interfaces.  Protection against hijacking attacks,
   flooding attacks (DOS), and leakage of confidential information for
   MIF nodes have implications on the MIF problem statement security
   requirements.  A major thrust for the design of MIF components is
   design for independence.  By keeping interfaces truly separate,
   security independence among the interfaces can be achieved.  The next
   section covers these MIF security requirements.






Ko, et al.              Expires September 9, 2010               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft       Preliminary MIF Threat Analysis          March 2010


3.  MIF Security Requirements

   The security requirements are enumerated as:

   o  MIF must not allow the unwanted injection of configuration objects
      targeted to specific interface(s) to other interfaces.

   o  MIF must prevent the usage of one interface to hijack the network
      connection of another interface.  Such a hijack could lead to
      attacks on remote networks that the interface is providing
      communication over.

   o  MIF must provide for security independence among the interfaces.

   o  MIF must prevent the access of security policy information of one
      interface from other interfaces.

   o  MIF must prevent the leakage of confidential information from one
      interface to other interfaces.

   o  MIF must prevent attacks by malicious nodes to use an interface to
      block legitimate configuration objects from reaching other
      interfaces or preventing those interfaces from executing on the
      configuration objects.

   o  MIF should provide for the integrity of the network configuration
      objects it receives for the respective interfaces.

   o  MIF should provide for the authentication and authorization of the
      sources of network configuration objects for the respective
      interfaces.

   o  A MIF node should not be more vulnerable to security breaches than
      a traditionally non-MIF node (one that has a single interface with
      single network connection).  The enablement of additional
      interfaces (virtual or physical) should not cause the other
      network connections to become more vulnerable to security
      breaches.

   Through the study of the security implications of existing MIF
   practices and the realization of these security goals, the MIF
   configured node will be better prepared to resist a large class of
   DOS, privacy and integrity attacks.


4.  Security Considerations

   This document identifies the MIF threats in general.  MIF must have



Ko, et al.              Expires September 9, 2010               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft       Preliminary MIF Threat Analysis          March 2010


   the security capabilities to protect MIF node from any malicious
   attempts caused by security holes such as denial of service attacks.
   The MIF solution must not compromise the security architecture of the
   basic IPv4/IPv6 networks.


5.  IANA Considerations

   This document makes no requests to IANA.


6.  Informative References

   [I-D.blanchet-mif-problem-statement]
              Blanchet, M. and P. Seite, "Multiple Interfaces Problem
              Statement", draft-blanchet-mif-problem-statement-01 (work
              in progress), June 2009.

   [I-D.chown-addr-select-considerations]
              Chown, T., "Considerations for IPv6 Address Selection
              Policy Changes", draft-chown-addr-select-considerations-02
              (work in progress), March 2009.

   [I-D.savolainen-6man-fqdn-based-if-selection]
              Savolainen, T., "Domain name based network interface
              selection",
              draft-savolainen-6man-fqdn-based-if-selection-00 (work in
              progress), October 2008.

   [I-D.savolainen-mif-dns-server-selection]
              Savolainen, T., "DNS Server Selection on Multi-Homed
              Hosts", draft-savolainen-mif-dns-server-selection-00 (work
              in progress), February 2009.

   [RFC1122]  Braden, R., "Requirements for Internet Hosts -
              Communication Layers", STD 3, RFC 1122, October 1989.

   [RFC1661]  Simpson, W., "The Point-to-Point Protocol (PPP)", STD 51,
              RFC 1661, July 1994.

   [RFC2131]  Droms, R., "Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol",
              RFC 2131, March 1997.

   [RFC3315]  Droms, R., Bound, J., Volz, B., Lemon, T., Perkins, C.,
              and M. Carney, "Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol for
              IPv6 (DHCPv6)", RFC 3315, July 2003.

   [RFC3484]  Draves, R., "Default Address Selection for Internet



Ko, et al.              Expires September 9, 2010               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft       Preliminary MIF Threat Analysis          March 2010


              Protocol version 6 (IPv6)", RFC 3484, February 2003.

   [RFC3704]  Baker, F. and P. Savola, "Ingress Filtering for Multihomed
              Networks", BCP 84, RFC 3704, March 2004.

   [RFC4291]  Hinden, R. and S. Deering, "IP Version 6 Addressing
              Architecture", RFC 4291, February 2006.

   [RFC4861]  Narten, T., Nordmark, E., Simpson, W., and H. Soliman,
              "Neighbor Discovery for IP version 6 (IPv6)", RFC 4861,
              September 2007.

   [RFC5113]  Arkko, J., Aboba, B., Korhonen, J., and F. Bari, "Network
              Discovery and Selection Problem", RFC 5113, January 2008.

   [RFC5221]  Matsumoto, A., Fujisaki, T., Hiromi, R., and K. Kanayama,
              "Requirements for Address Selection Mechanisms", RFC 5221,
              July 2008.


Authors' Addresses

   Nam-Seok Ko
   ETRI
   FMC Technology Research Team, ETRI, 161 Gajeong-don, Yuseong-gu,
   Daejeon, Korea  305-350
   +82 42 860 5560

   Email: nsko@etri.re.kr


   Carl Williams
   Consultant
   Palo Alto, California  94306
   United States

   Email: carl.williams@mcsr-labs.org


   Jacni Qin
   ZTE
   Shanghai, Pudong District
   China

   Email: jacniq@gmail.com






Ko, et al.              Expires September 9, 2010               [Page 6]


