


Network Working Group                                         P. Hoffman
Internet-Draft                                            VPN Consortium
Intended status: Informational                         November 21, 2010
Expires: May 25, 2011


Requirements for Draft Tracking by the IETF Community in the Datatracker
              draft-ietf-genarea-datatracker-community-02

Abstract

   The document gives a set of requirements for extending the IETF
   Datatracker to give individual IETF community members, including the
   IETF leadership, easy methods for tracking the progress of the
   Internet Drafts of interest to them.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on May 25, 2011.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.




Hoffman                   Expires May 25, 2011                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft     Datatracker Community Tracking Reqs     November 2010


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     1.1.  Usage Scenarios  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     1.2.  Context for This Document  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     1.3.  Definitions Used in This Document  . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     1.4.  Expected user interactions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     1.5.  Discussion of These Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   2.  Requirements for Tools Features  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     2.1.  Lists  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
       2.1.1.  Requirement: Lists of drafts can be large  . . . . . .  7
       2.1.2.  Requirement: A user can create multiple lists  . . . .  7
       2.1.3.  Requirement: Some lists must be able to be private
               or anonymous . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
       2.1.4.  Requirement: It must be easy for IETF leadership
               and individuals to make lists they create
               publicly-readable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
       2.1.5.  Requirement: Specifying the drafts that are in a
               list must be simple  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
       2.1.6.  Requirement: Adding groups of drafts to a list by
               attribute must be simple . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
       2.1.7.  Requirement: Lists can dynamically include other
               lists  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
       2.1.8.  Later Requirement: Users can add comments to say
               why they added a draft or group  . . . . . . . . . . . 10
       2.1.9.  Requirement: These extensions must not make the
               Datatracker take up too many resources . . . . . . . . 10
     2.2.  Notifications  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
       2.2.1.  Requirement: Users can be notified when a draft
               changes status . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
       2.2.2.  Requirement: Every list has Atom feeds associated
               with it  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
       2.2.3.  Requirement: Every list has mail streams
               associated with it . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
       2.2.4.  Requirement: Notifications need to specify which
               list caused the notification . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
       2.2.5.  Later Requirement: The tool must have instructions
               on how to use it Atom feeds  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     2.3.  Display in the Datatracker . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
       2.3.1.  Requirement: Users can define how the rows are
               sorted in a display  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
       2.3.2.  Requirement: Users can choose which attributes to
               display  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
       2.3.3.  Requirement: Users can flag drafts with dates in
               the future . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
       2.3.4.  Requirement: Users can specify highlighting of
               drafts with recent changes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
     2.4.  File Output  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14



Hoffman                   Expires May 25, 2011                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft     Datatracker Community Tracking Reqs     November 2010


       2.4.1.  Requirement: Users can get their current list as a
               single file  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   3.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   4.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   5.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   6.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   Appendix A.  Possible Tracking of Non-draft Documents  . . . . . . 16
     A.1.  Tracking RFC Status Changes and Errata . . . . . . . . . . 17
     A.2.  Tracking WG Charter Changes  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
     A.3.  Tracking IANA Registry Changes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
     A.4.  Tracking Changes in Documents Outside the IETF Sphere  . . 17
   Appendix B.  Some Known Open Issues  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
   Appendix C.  Differences Between -00 and -01 . . . . . . . . . . . 18
   Appendix D.  Differences Between -01 and -02 . . . . . . . . . . . 18
   Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20




































Hoffman                   Expires May 25, 2011                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft     Datatracker Community Tracking Reqs     November 2010


1.  Introduction

   IMPORTANT NOTE: This is an early draft of a set of requirements.  It
   has gone through one round of community review at IETF 79 in Beijing,
   and thus probably is missing things that should be included, and some
   of the things in this draft are wrong and will be changed in future
   drafts.  Nothing in this draft should be considered solid.

   The IETF Datatracker is used by many IETF community members to find
   the status of Internet Drafts (I-Ds) and view drafts that meet
   particular criteria.  The current Datatracker, found at
   <https://datatracker.ietf.org/>, allows anyone to search for active
   I-Ds and get a list of drafts matching the given criteria.  (The
   Datatracker also allows for searching RFCs and expired I-Ds, but
   those are not relevant to this discussion.)

   Users can search in the Datatracker by the filename of the draft,
   words in the draft's title, author, associated Working Group (WG) or
   IETF area, the responsible Area Director (AD), or IESG status.  The
   returned list of drafts includes five columns: draft filename (with
   an active link to an HTMLized version of the draft maintained by the
   IETF tools team), the draft's title, the date it was submitted, its
   status in the IETF process, and the responsible AD (if any).  For
   example, the output of a search in the current Datatracker can be
   seen at <http://imgur.com/snfyl.png>.

   Instead of using the search capability of the Datatracker to manually
   find I-Ds of interest, users might want to create lists of drafts
   that they normally follow.  Some users will want to keep their lists
   to themselves, but others will want to allow others to view their
   lists.

   Different users in the IETF community will have different ways that
   they want to get information on draft updates and status.  Many users
   will want to be notified immediately, such as through an Atom feed
   (see [RFC4287]) or automatically-generated email.  Many users will
   want to only find out about updates when they go to a web page.  Many
   users might want to get the data for a list as input to other tools.
   And, of course, some users will want all three.  All of these desires
   are related to the overall desire to track drafts through their
   lifecycle.

1.1.  Usage Scenarios

   The main motivation for these proposed changes to the Datatracker is
   to allow a variety of potential users to be able to track drafts and
   thus be better able to see when important events happen.  A few
   examples include:



Hoffman                   Expires May 25, 2011                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft     Datatracker Community Tracking Reqs     November 2010


   o  A WG chair might want to keep a list of all the drafts from other
      WGs that relate to active drafts in his or her WG.
   o  That same WG chair might want to help WG members be able to follow
      the same drafts that he or she is following.
   o  Someone who cares about an established topic such as the DNS may
      want to follow the various drafts that might make changes to the
      DNS.  This would include not only drafts that are in the many WGs
      that directly are changing the DNS (DNSEXT, DNSOP, BEHAVE, and so
      on), but also individual submissions, IAB drafts, and even IRTF
      research.
   o  Developers who are not active in the IETF process might want to
      lightly follow drafts on a particular topic to watch for things
      that might affect their implementations.
   o  An IETF "regular" might want to follow parts of the process by
      focusing on all the drafts that are being shepherded by a
      particular Area Director.

1.2.  Context for This Document

   This document describes the requirements for extending the
   Datatracker for such capabilities.  When complete, this document may
   be used to issue an RFP for the design and development of these
   enhancements to the Datatracker.  This document was prepared at the
   request of the IAOC.

   Some of the requirements in this document are listed as "later
   requirements".  This means that these requirements might not be part
   of the first RFP for adding these enhancements.

   The statement of work that led to this document says "The tools that
   will eventually be provided to individuals in the community include":

   o  the ability to create one or more (possibly large) lists of I-Ds
      that they want to follow
   o  the ability to get notifications when individual drafts from a
      list changes state
   o  the ability to see all of the state changes that have occurred on
      all the drafts in a list over a specified range of dates
   o  the ability to set the granularity of the changes (such as "every
      change", "just approvals and publication", and so on)
   o  the ability to organize their views of a list in many fashions
      that would be useful to different types of community members
   o  the ability to share and merge lists with other community members

   Note that [RFC2026] describes the process that Internet Drafts go
   through before they either become RFCs or are abandoned.  The
   Datatracker does not control this process: instead, it simply reports
   on the current state of individual drafts as they go through the



Hoffman                   Expires May 25, 2011                  [Page 5]

Internet-Draft     Datatracker Community Tracking Reqs     November 2010


   process.

   During the early discussion of these requirements, some community
   members proposed that it would be very useful to track other types of
   documents, such as WG charters.  Appendixes A through D list these
   proposals.  It is not clear currently if those sections will be part
   of the initial deployment of the requirements in the main body of
   this document.

1.3.  Definitions Used in This Document

   A "user" is an individual person who is member of the IETF community.

   A "list" is an unordered set of Internet Drafts and groups of
   Internet Drafts.  Lists are specified by users.

   An "attribute" is a feature of a draft, such as its filename, its
   current state in the IETF process, and so on.  Attributes are usually
   displayed as columns in the Datatracker.

   A "row" is a set of attributes about a single draft that is displayed
   in the Datatracker.

   A "significant change in status" is all approvals and disposition of
   the draft.  Assuming that the changes to the Datatracker specified in
   [WGSTATES] and [ALTSTREAMS] are made, "all approvals" means the
   following:

   o  IETF stream: the WG states "Adopted by a WG", "In WG Last Call",
      "WG Consensus: Waiting for Write-up", "Parked WG document", and
      "Dead WG document"; the IESG states "Publication Requested", "In
      Last Call", and "IESG Evaluation"
   o  IAB stream: "Active IAB Document", "Community Review", and "Sent
      to the RFC Editor"
   o  IRTF stream: "Active RG Document", "In RG Last Call", "Awaiting
      IRSG Reviews", "In IESG Review", "Sent to the RFC Editor", and
      "Document on Hold Based On IESG Request"
   o  ISE stream: "Submission Received", "In ISE Review", "In IESG
      Review", "Sent to the RFC Editor", and "Document on Hold Based On
      IESG Request"
   o  All streams: in addition to the above, the disposition states
      "Approved", "RFC Published", and "Dead" are also included

1.4.  Expected user interactions

   When a user wants to follow a group of drafts, he or she goes to the
   Datatracker and creates a new list.  The requirements for lists are
   given in Section 2.1.  After a list is created, the user has three



Hoffman                   Expires May 25, 2011                  [Page 6]

Internet-Draft     Datatracker Community Tracking Reqs     November 2010


   ways that he or she might see when drafts in the list are updated:

   o  By going to the Datatracker page for the list (see Section 2.3)
   o  By subscribing to the Atom feed for the list (see Section 2.2.2)
      in a feed reader that automatically fetches updates
   o  By subscribing to the mail stream for the list (see Section 2.2.3)
      and reading the stream in their mail reader

1.5.  Discussion of These Requirements

   This document is being discussed on the datatracker-rqmts@ietf.org
   mailing list.  For more information, see
   <https://www.ietf.org/mailman/listinfo/datatracker-rqmts>.

   There will probably be virtual interim meetings to discuss this
   document in late 2010 and early 2011.


2.  Requirements for Tools Features

   This section defines the requirements for the tool described earlier
   in this document.  The eventual tool, if implemented, may have more
   features than are listed here; however, before this document is
   finished, it should contain as many requirements as possible upon
   which the IETF community can agree.

2.1.  Lists

2.1.1.  Requirement: Lists of drafts can be large

   An active IETF participant might want to follow the status of
   hundreds of drafts.  For example, some ADs have 100 drafts in their
   area, and they may also want to follow drafts outside their area that
   affect documents in their area.

2.1.2.  Requirement: A user can create multiple lists

   A user might have multiple areas of interest and would want to track
   each area on a different web page.  Another example would be a WG
   chair who wants to track the drafts in his or her WG separately from
   the drafts in a different area of interest.  An IETF participant
   might want to have a list of drafts that they are following closely,
   and another list of drafts written by work colleagues.

2.1.3.  Requirement: Some lists must be able to be private or anonymous

   Seeing a list of drafts that covers multiple areas of interest can
   tell you something about the person who created the list.  For



Hoffman                   Expires May 25, 2011                  [Page 7]

Internet-Draft     Datatracker Community Tracking Reqs     November 2010


   example, you might be able to guess that they might be looking for a
   job in a different field by looking at their list of drafts of
   interest.  Of course, anyone can follow individual drafts today
   without having that be exposed; however, following a particular group
   of drafts can reveal information about a person.

   There is a open issue about whether lists should be default be
   private/anonymous or public, and how that default should be manifest
   in the eventual UI for creating lists.

   The first proposed methods that might keep lists private/anonymous
   are:

   o  Private lists might only be available using passwords or some
      other common authentication mechanism.  This would require that
      the Datatracker have a subscription process for users that could
      assign passwords, and a per-user process for adding lists to a
      user account.  (If the current Datatracker username and login
      scheme is used, the interface needs to be improved so that getting
      a new login, and changing one's password, are significantly
      easier.)
   o  Anonymous lists might be assigned random URLs from a very large
      (2^128) namespace, and the user who creates a list does not tell
      others the assigned URL.  This method makes it impossible for
      someone to search the entire set of assigned lists.  Given that
      the URLs for lists are most likely going to be copy-and-pasted
      anyway, having long random strings in the list's URL is not an
      impediment.

2.1.4.  Requirement: It must be easy for IETF leadership and individuals
        to make lists they create publicly-readable

   Private or anonymous lists are fine for individuals, but publicly-
   readable lists can magnify the value to the whole community.  In
   fact, some early commenters on this document emphasized that
   publicly-readable lists will be more valuable to the IETF than
   helping individuals track documents that are only of interest to
   them.

   Probably the easiest method to implement publicly-readable lists is
   to make them read-only aliases for private or anonymous lists.  This
   would allow the list originators to control the contents of the list
   as normal, but also allow anyone to view the results in the
   Datatracker and/or subscribe to notifications.  There may be other
   methods that would also make sense, and this section might change in
   the future.

   Publicly-readable lists should have short URLs that can be



Hoffman                   Expires May 25, 2011                  [Page 8]

Internet-Draft     Datatracker Community Tracking Reqs     November 2010


   transcribed without relying on copy-and-paste.  The names in the URLs
   for lists that are associated with IETF activities (initially, the
   lists created by WG chairs and ADs) can be mnemonic, but other public
   lists should have names that are not mnemonic in order to prevent
   name-squatting.

   It is important to note that publicly-readable lists can only be
   changed by the owners.  Allowing many people to change the contents
   of a list would probably lead to lists that are not very useful to
   typical users.

   Proposed later requirements include having the Datatracker list all
   of the publicly-readable lists (or certainly at least the ones
   associated with IETF activities), and having links from WG pages in
   Datatracker to the publicly-readable lists maintained by the WG
   chairs.

2.1.5.  Requirement: Specifying the drafts that are in a list must be
        simple

   When a user creates a new list, it must be easy to add individual
   drafts to the list.  This could be done using the Datatracker's
   current search facility, and simply adding a "add to list" option for
   Further, when editing an existing list, it must be easy to add
   additional drafts, and it must be easy to remove drafts from a list.

2.1.6.  Requirement: Adding groups of drafts to a list by attribute must
        be simple

   Drafts have many attributes, and some users might want to follow all
   of the drafts that have a particular attribute.  Some, but not all,
   attributes have values that make sense for creating lists.  It should
   be easy to add each of the following attributes when adding to or
   editing a list:

   o  All drafts associated with an individual WG
   o  All drafts associated with all WGs in an individual Area
   o  All drafts with a particular responsible AD
   o  All drafts with a particular author
   o  All drafts with a particular document shepherd
   o  All drafts that have a reference to a particular RFC
   o  All drafts that have a reference to a particular draft
   o  All drafts that are referenced by a particular RFC
   o  All drafts that are referenced by a particular draft
   o  All drafts that contain a particular text string

   These attributes are dynamic, and thus the list of drafts that have a
   particular attribute will change after the user adds that attribute



Hoffman                   Expires May 25, 2011                  [Page 9]

Internet-Draft     Datatracker Community Tracking Reqs     November 2010


   to a list.  The Datatracker should update lists with dynamic
   attributes as often as is sensible for the server environment, such
   as once an hour or more.

   Note that some of these attributes are derived by programs created by
   the IETF Tools Team that parse drafts and are therefore inherently
   not completely reliable.

2.1.7.  Requirement: Lists can dynamically include other lists

   If a user is authorized to see the contents of a list, he or she can
   include that other list in a different list.  When the referenced
   list changes, those changes are also reflected in the referring-to
   list; that is, if list A includes list B, and the set of drafts in
   list B changes, the set of drafts in list A is automatically changed.

   This feature is expected to be useful for experts (particularly WG
   chairs) who create lists on topics that others might consider
   interesting.  For example, if Alice creates a list that contains all
   the drafts that she thinks relate to TLS, and Bob has access to that
   list, Bob can add that list to his personal list of things for which
   he is interested.  Bob might also create a list-of-lists about TLS
   that includes references to Alice's list as well as to a similar list
   that Eric put together.

   There needs to be some way to prevent circular references in lists
   that refer to other lists.

2.1.8.  Later Requirement: Users can add comments to say why they added
        a draft or group

   In public lists, it might be useful for someone to be able to
   understand why particular drafts and/or groups are added.  Allowing
   the user who put together the list to add a comment field would help
   someone else see the motivation.

2.1.9.  Requirement: These extensions must not make the Datatracker take
        up too many resources

   Currently, the only state that the Datatracker keeps for its users is
   a very small set of attributes assigned to a username-password pair.
   The extensions described here will cause the Datatracker to need to
   keep more information, namely lists.  Each list might have additional
   associated state as well.  Depending on the method for keeping lists
   private or anonymous, this could lead to the Datatracker needing a
   larger amount of storage and other resources.  When this document is
   near completion, it would probably be good to list exactly which new
   state will be kept on the Datatracker server.



Hoffman                   Expires May 25, 2011                 [Page 10]

Internet-Draft     Datatracker Community Tracking Reqs     November 2010


   In order to reduce the chance that these extensions would strain the
   Datatracker, some sort of denial-of-service prevention should be used
   when the extensions are added.  For example, if the lists are user-
   based, a user might be limited to having only a certain number of
   lists; if they are anonymous, the Datatracker might have test to
   prove that the person creating the list actually exists, such as a
   CAPTCHA test or a requirement that the user has a reachable mail
   address.

   A later requirement might be to cull lists if it seems that storing
   them on the Datatracker is taking too many resources.  If lists are
   user-based, the Datatracker can periodically send mail to the user
   reminding them to delete lists that are no longer needed; if the
   lists are anonymous, the Datatracker can maybe check whether or not a
   list is viewed or the Atom feed retrieved.

   Culling presents a problem, however, for lists that are public.  The
   creator of a list might no longer be using it, but others might be.
   Thus, it is likely that the Datatracker needs to be be able to
   maintain lists long-term even if their creators are no longer using
   them.

2.2.  Notifications

2.2.1.  Requirement: Users can be notified when a draft changes status

   Some users do not want to go to the Datatracker's display page to
   find out when a draft has been updated.  Instead, they want to be
   notified immediately after the draft is changed.  The Datatracker
   needs to support this type of immediate notification, where
   "immediate" means "within an hour of a change to any draft in the
   list".  This requirement can be met with Atom feeds and mail streams,
   as described in the next two sections.

   The Datatracker might create a generic "notifications engine" that
   can be used to generate the Atom feeds and mail streams.  This engine
   can then be used to later add other notification types, such as a
   Jabber feed.

2.2.2.  Requirement: Every list has Atom feeds associated with it

   The list will have two Atom feeds that are generated from the changes
   to the list: one for every change in status, and another for
   significant change of status.  Each Atom feed will have a stable URL
   that can be used by feed readers.

   Many IETF users are already using Atom feeds created by the IETF
   Tools Team for individual drafts.  Using the new feeds for lists



Hoffman                   Expires May 25, 2011                 [Page 11]

Internet-Draft     Datatracker Community Tracking Reqs     November 2010


   described here will allow them to have better selection capabilities
   to reduce the number of feeds they need to follow.

2.2.3.  Requirement: Every list has mail streams associated with it

   A user can subscribe to two email streams that are generated from the
   changes to the list: one for every change in status, and another for
   significant change of status.

   Note that the mail streams are for each change; they are not batched
   (such as one message per day).  Users who want less frequent but
   batched notifications need to use the Atom feeds instead of the mail
   streams.

   Because lists can incorporate other lists, and those other lists
   might be very large or grow very large, a user might suddenly get a
   flood of email.  The Datatracker needs to warn a user when the list
   to which he or she is subscribed has more than 100 drafts.

2.2.4.  Requirement: Notifications need to specify which list caused the
        notification

   Users might have feeds and/or subscriptions to multiple lists.  In
   order to disambiguate duplicate notifications from multiple lists,
   the body of the message in the Atom feed or mail stream needs to say
   which list generated the notification.  (Ideally, a user who wants
   notifications will make one list based on multiple lists, but if they
   subscribe to multiple lists, this requirement will at least suggest
   to them that they want to limit their overlapping subscriptions.)

2.2.5.  Later Requirement: The tool must have instructions on how to use
        it Atom feeds

   Even though Atom feeds have been around for years, they are new to
   many Internet users, and even experienced users only know how to use
   them in limited ways.  The Datatracker should have at least a few
   paragraphs explaining how the Atom feeds that it provides can be used
   in different tools such as dedicated feed readers, online feed-
   display services, and so on.

2.3.  Display in the Datatracker

2.3.1.  Requirement: Users can define how the rows are sorted in a
        display

   There are many ways that a user might want to see the Datatracker's
   HTML view of a list.  For example, a user might want to normally see
   it in alphabetical order by the drafts' filenames, but after the user



Hoffman                   Expires May 25, 2011                 [Page 12]

Internet-Draft     Datatracker Community Tracking Reqs     November 2010


   is of the net for a week, he or she might want to see the list in
   order of changes of status so that those drafts changed recently
   appear at the top of the list.

   The default is to first list the groups first in alphabetical order
   by group name, then individual drafts in alphabetical order by draft
   filename.  When displaying a list, the Datatracker should allow easy
   sorting of the drafts with the following collation orders:

   o  Alphabetical order by group name followed by individual drafts
      (default)
   o  Alphabetical by draft filename
   o  Alphabetical by draft title
   o  Alphabetical by associated WG
   o  Date of publication of current version of the draft
   o  Date of most recent change of status of any type
   o  Date of most recent significant change of status

   In displays, a particular draft should only included once; for
   example, if someone manually adds draft-ietf-cuteacronym-sometopic to
   his list and also specifies that all drafts from the "cuteacronym" WG
   are included in the list, that draft should only appear once in the
   display.  The column saying which included list(s) contain this draft
   helps alleviate this loss of information.

   The user might also want to group the files using the groupings in
   the list, such as "all drafts from this WG" and "all drafts that
   contain this word in the title".

   The Datatracker should save the last-chosen sorting for display with
   the definition of the list.

2.3.2.  Requirement: Users can choose which attributes to display

   There are many attributes that might be displayed, and different
   users will have different information that they want to see.  Also,
   users will have different display technologies: someone might
   normally use a web browser on a large screen, but at other times use
   the browser on their phone.

   Choosing which attributes should be displayed should be simple for
   the user.  The Datatracker should save the last-chosen set of
   attributes for display with the definition of the list.  The default
   is to display is draft filename, draft title, date of current draft,
   status in stream process, associated WG or RG, whether it was changed
   within the last 7 days, and included list(s) which contain this
   draft.




Hoffman                   Expires May 25, 2011                 [Page 13]

Internet-Draft     Datatracker Community Tracking Reqs     November 2010


   The Datatracker should support display of the following attributes:

   o  Draft filename
   o  Draft title
   o  Date of current draft
   o  Status in the IETF process
   o  Associated WG or RG
   o  Associated AD, if any
   o  Changed within the last 1 day
   o  Changed within the last 2 days
   o  Changed within the last 7 days
   o  Included list(s) which contain this draft

   There is some leeway for how the Datatracker might display these
   attributes.  For example, the "changed within" attributes might be
   shown with a check mark or a colored box.  The "included lists"
   attribute might show a pop-up with the names of the lists, given that
   list names might be long.

2.3.3.  Requirement: Users can flag drafts with dates in the future

   When tracking drafts, some users want to be able to say "tell me if
   this draft has not changes state by a particular date" such as when a
   draft is starting a two-week last call or a draft author has promised
   a new version by the end of the week.  This feature gives the user a
   "dashboard" style capability.

   For each draft in a list, the user should be able to set one date-
   based deadline.  When using the display version of the Datatracker,
   if that date has passed and no change in status happened between the
   time that the user set the deadline and the set date, the Datatracker
   will highlight the deadline in red.  It must also be easy to remove
   these deadlines.

2.3.4.  Requirement: Users can specify highlighting of drafts with
        recent changes

   The Datatracker cannot easily keep track of when a user last looked
   at the page for a particular list.  Thus, it instead needs to let a
   user say which range of dates they are most interested in.  To that
   end, the user needs to be able to easily specify the amount of time
   they consider recent, either as "the past nnn hours", "the past nnn
   days", or "since this particular date".

2.4.  File Output






Hoffman                   Expires May 25, 2011                 [Page 14]

Internet-Draft     Datatracker Community Tracking Reqs     November 2010


2.4.1.  Requirement: Users can get their current list as a single file

   Some users have their own tools for displaying and otherwise
   processing lists of drafts.  To make this easier, users should be
   able to get a machine-parsable file that has a well-known format and
   syntax that contains all the data that was used to create the current
   display.  The order of the records in the file is not important
   because it is assumed that the user's program will sort the results
   themselves.  All attributes will be included because it is assumed
   that the user's programs will only deal with the ones the care about.

   When a list is marshaled into a data file, each record in the file
   format represents a single draft.  In a file, a particular draft is
   only included once; for example, if someone manually adds
   draft-ietf-cuteacronym-sometopic to his list and also specifies that
   all drafts from the "cuteacronym" WG are included in the list, that
   draft only appears once.

   This feature will allow anyone to create mash-ups of their own and
   create their own web sites based on the IETF data.  This is
   significantly easier than adding features to the Datatracker, and is
   able to cater to narrower audiences.

   The format of the file will be XML or JSON or tab-separated fields in
   a text file.  The decision on which format is supported will be based
   on the desires of the community while discussing this document.
   (Imagine how much fun that will be!)  Regardless of the format
   chosen, a syntax will need to be specified.


3.  IANA Considerations

   None.


4.  Security Considerations

   A tool for tracking the status of Internet Drafts can affect the
   privacy of its users.  The requirements for privacy of the
   Datatracker views are discussed earlier in the document.

   Web applications, particularly those that store data on a web server,
   are a common source of security issues such as cross-site scripting
   attacks.  The tool described in this document might also use access
   control for lists, and access control and authentication also cause
   security issues if not implemented properly.





Hoffman                   Expires May 25, 2011                 [Page 15]

Internet-Draft     Datatracker Community Tracking Reqs     November 2010


5.  Acknowledgements

   Ideas used in this document were contributed by Scott Bradner, Leslie
   Daigle, Spencer Dawkins, Aaron Falk, Russ Housley, Tero Kivinen,
   Barry Leiba, John Levine, Henrik Levkowetz, Kurtis Lindqvist, Andy
   Malis, Ray Pelletier, Blake Ramsdell, Julian Reschke, Jim Schaad,
   Yaron Sheffer, Robert Sparks, Andrew Sullivan, and Sean Turner.


6.  Informative References

   [ALTSTREAMS]
              Hoffman, P., "Data Tracker States and Annotations for the
              IAB, IRTF, and Independent Submission Streams",
              draft-hoffman-alt-streams-tracker (work in progress),
              September 2010.

   [CHARTERTOOL]
              Hoffman, P., "Requirements for a Working Group Charter
              Tool", draft-ietf-genarea-charter-tool (work in progress),
              October 2010.

   [RFC2026]  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision
              3", BCP 9, RFC 2026, October 1996.

   [RFC4287]  Nottingham, M., Ed. and R. Sayre, Ed., "The Atom
              Syndication Format", RFC 4287, December 2005.

   [WGSTATES]
              Juskevicius, E., "Definition of IETF Working Group
              Document States", draft-ietf-proto-wgdocument-states (work
              in progress), October 2010.


Appendix A.  Possible Tracking of Non-draft Documents

   NOTE: This is the first draft to include the functionality listed in
   the next four subsections.  Thus, it is not at all clear if any of
   these will be a requirement, a later requirement, or a non-
   requirement.

   Further, even if one or more of these non-draft items is made a
   requirement, it is not clear whether they will be included in the
   same lists with drafts.  That is, if tracking RFC status changes are
   considered a requirement, it is not clear whether a user would
   include the RFCs in a list that also contains draft, or whether they
   would need to create two lists.




Hoffman                   Expires May 25, 2011                 [Page 16]

Internet-Draft     Datatracker Community Tracking Reqs     November 2010


A.1.  Tracking RFC Status Changes and Errata

   The contents of RFCs never change after they are published.  However,
   that does not mean that nothing alters the meaning of the RFC.  In
   specific, an RFC can be updated or obsoleted by another RFC; also,
   errata can be made against RFCs.  A user who cares about the RFC
   might want to know when these changes are made.

   Currently, the only way for the Datatracker to see these changes is
   by polling structured files on the RFC Editor site and parsing them.

A.2.  Tracking WG Charter Changes

   It will soon be easier to track changes in WG charters and
   milestones; see [CHARTERTOOL] for more information.  Someone
   subscribing to the stream for a WG would be able to see each of these
   changes.  With the expected changes, the Datatracker would be able to
   update WGs in a list without any polling.

A.3.  Tracking IANA Registry Changes

   Developers may need to get values from IANA registries for their
   software/hardware implementations.  They might want to know when the
   registry changes, such as additional entries or updates to current
   entries.  Thus, being able to be notified when a registry changes
   would be valuable to them.

   Adding this functionality may be tricky for some registries.  For
   example, if a developer cared about DKIM signature tags, they would
   have to subscribe to
   <http://www.iana.org/assignments/dkim-parameters/> which (currently)
   covers a handful of registries, all related to DKIM.  Thus, a change
   to the DKIM hash algorithms would trigger a message showing that the
   registry had changed, even though the DKIM signature tags registry
   had not.

A.4.  Tracking Changes in Documents Outside the IETF Sphere

   Users might want to track documents that relate to IETF activities
   but are produced by other standards development organizations (SDOs)
   such as the W3C, the IEEE, the Unicode Consortium, the ITU, and
   others.  In order for the tracker to track these documents, it would
   need to poll occasionally and possibly scrape listings from HTML.


Appendix B.  Some Known Open Issues

   Given the early stage of this document, there are actually many more



Hoffman                   Expires May 25, 2011                 [Page 17]

Internet-Draft     Datatracker Community Tracking Reqs     November 2010


   open issues than are listed here.  This list is mostly meant to
   remind the author of topics that need to be updated in future
   versions of the document, and to spur readers to think of even more
   open issues.

   o  There may be legal issues with keeping user data private if we use
      login accounts.
   o  When an AD agrees to sponsor an individual submission, does the
      Datatracker consider that draft associated with the AD?  If not,
      that needs to be dealt with here.
   o  Thought: add a button in the normal Datatracker output to add a
      particular draft to a particular list.

   New open issues added in -02:

   o  Maybe need a way to let a user delete lists that are no longer
      used.
   o  Maybe want to remind users monthly that they created a list.
   o  If the Datatracker contains private information (that is still to
      be seen), that private information needs to be invisible in lists
      so that it is not accidentally exposed.
   o  Should "significant change in status" be judged by the list
      creator, such as by a series of check boxes for every possible
      status change?
   o  Idea for a later requirement: A list creator can add comments
      about who might be interested in following the list.
   o  If the design goes towards anonymous pages under a common root
      URI, there should be a robots.txt page telling spiders not to look
      beneath it.
   o  It should be easy to remove items from list in the Datatracker
      display.
   o  If the agendas for an upcoming meeting are scraped for draft
      names, it would be possible to add an attribute to a draft that
      lists that WG agenda(s) on which it appears.


Appendix C.  Differences Between -00 and -01

   Added info for the mailing list.


Appendix D.  Differences Between -01 and -02

   Note that this is a *huge* modification based on the large number of
   suggestions given during the meeting at IETF 79 in Beijing.

   Changed the intro to indicate that there was input from IETF 79.




Hoffman                   Expires May 25, 2011                 [Page 18]

Internet-Draft     Datatracker Community Tracking Reqs     November 2010


   Added a new section 1.1 on usage scenarios.

   Added the statement of work to the new "Context for this Document"
   section 1.2.  Added a brief introduction to the ideas in Appendix A
   through D to section 1.2.  Discussed "later requirements".

   In old 1.1 (now 1.3), updated the definitions of "user" and "list".
   Also made the definition of "significant change in status" much
   fuller.

   In 2.1.3, opened the issue of whether public or private should be the
   default.  Also clarified that the two proposals are just the first
   two proposals.  Also added the note about the Datatracker's GUI for
   new usernames and changing passwords.

   Added new 2.1.4 on publicly-readable lists.

   In old 2.1.4 (now 2.1.5), changed the second sentence to make it
   clear that the Datatracker's current search facility is fine as-is.

   Clarified old 2.1.5 (now 2.1.6) to be "best effort" instead of
   exactly one hour.

   In old 2.1.6 (now 2.1.7), added the need for prevention of circular
   references.

   Added 2.1.8, a later requirement for adding comments.

   Added 2.1.9, requirement that the Datatracker not take up too many
   resources.

   In 2.2, added idea of a notifications stream.

   In 2.2.1, clarified that this requirement can be met with the
   following requirements.

   In 2.2.3, added a note about not having batched mail streams, and
   added a requirement for warnings on long lists.

   Added section 2.2.5, the requirement that the tool must have
   instructions on how to use it Atom feeds.

   In 2.3, removed the intro text.

   In 2.3.1, added the default display.

   In 2.3.2, added the default display.  Also removed "Also, the user
   should also be able to specify the order in which the attributes are



Hoffman                   Expires May 25, 2011                 [Page 19]

Internet-Draft     Datatracker Community Tracking Reqs     November 2010


   displayed."

   Added 2.3.3, the requirement for dashboard-style specification of
   date timers on drafts.

   Added 2.3.4, the requirement that users can specify highlighting of
   drafts with recent changes.

   Added Scott Bradner, Leslie Daigle, Spencer Dawkins, Aaron Falk, Tero
   Kivinen, Barry Leiba, Henrik Levkowetz, Kurtis Lindqvist, Andy Malis,
   Jim Schaad, Robert Sparks, and Sean Turner, to the acknowledgements.

   Made the reference to RFC 2026 to be informative.  Added references
   for the two active drafts.

   Previous Appendix A, "Some Known Open Issues", and previous Appendix
   B, "Differences Between -00 and -01", became Appendixes C and D,
   respectively, due to the addition of the new appendix for non-draft
   items that might be tracked.

   Removed the open issue about dashboards because it is now 2.3.3.

   Removed the open issue about non-IETF streams because the information
   is now included in the document.

   Removed the open issue about changing public lists because the
   document is now clear that they are read-only.

   Removed the open issue "Is there a formal definition for 'drafts
   associated with a particular WG'?" based on a response from Henrik
   Levkowetz on the mailing list.

   Removed some open issues that could be incorporated later: "Should
   paging be supported for long lists in the HTML display?"  "Should the
   file output be in all the interesting formats (XML and JSON and tab-
   separated text) or just one?"

   Removed open issue "How prescriptive do we want to be?  Should this
   say things like "JavaScript pop-up" and "CSS" and such?" because
   there is no need to go to that level.

   Added some more open issues.









Hoffman                   Expires May 25, 2011                 [Page 20]

Internet-Draft     Datatracker Community Tracking Reqs     November 2010


Author's Address

   Paul Hoffman
   VPN Consortium

   Email: paul.hoffman@vpnc.org













































Hoffman                   Expires May 25, 2011                 [Page 21]

