A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3027

        Title:      Protocol Complications with the IP Network Address
                    Translator
        Author(s):  M. Holdrege, P. Srisuresh
        Status:     Informational
        Date:       January 2001
        Mailbox:    matt@ipverse.com, srisuresh@yahoo.com
        Pages:      20
        Characters: 48662
        Updates/Obsoletes/SeeAlso:    None

        I-D Tag:    draft-ietf-nat-protocol-complications-06.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.isi.edu/in-notes/rfc3027.txt


Many internet applications can be adversely affected when end nodes
are not in the same address realm and seek the assistance of an IP
Network Address Translator (NAT) enroute to bridge the realms.  The
NAT device alone cannot provide the necessary application/protocol
transparency in all cases and seeks the assistance of Application
Level Gateways (ALGs) where possible, to provide transparency.  The
purpose of this document is to identify the protocols and applications
that break with NAT enroute.  The document also attempts to identify
any known workarounds.  It is not possible to capture all applications
that break with NAT in a single document.  This document attempts to
capture as much information as possible, but is by no means a
comprehensive coverage.  We hope the coverage provides sufficient
clues for applications not covered.

This document is a product of the Network Address Translators Working
Group of the IETF.

This memo provides information for the Internet community.  It does
not specify an Internet standard of any kind.  Distribution of this
memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.


