


DISPATCH Working Group                                          M. Patel
Internet-Draft                                                    Nortel
Intended status: Standards Track                               R. Jesske
Expires: April 11, 2010                                 Deutsche Telekom
                                                                M. Dolly
                                                                    AT&T
                                                         October 8, 2009


Uniform Resource Identifier (URI) Parameters for indicating the Calling
             Party's Catagory and Originating Line Identity
             draft-patel-dispatch-cpc-oli-parameter-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 11, 2010.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2009 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents in effect on the date of
   publication of this document (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info).
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.





Patel, et al.            Expires April 11, 2010                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft         CPC and OLI URI Parameters           October 2009


Abstract

   This document defines two new URI parameters to describe the calling
   party's category and toll class of service originating line
   information which are parameters also used in SS7 ISUP and other
   telephony signalling protocols.  The intended use of these URI
   parameters is for the "tel" URI or equivalent SIP URI representation.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Parameter Definitions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   4.  Usage  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   5.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   6.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   7.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   8.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     8.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     8.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10





























Patel, et al.            Expires April 11, 2010                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft         CPC and OLI URI Parameters           October 2009


1.  Introduction

   SS7 ISUP[ITU-ISUP] defines a Calling Party's Category (CPC) parameter
   that characterizes the station used to originate a call and carries
   other important state that can describe the originating party.  One
   example of such information is the call may originate from a
   payphone; such information can be used by the network to handle the
   call in a specific way.  When telephone numbers are contained in
   URIs, such as the tel URI or equivalent SIP URI, it may be desirable
   to communicate any CPC associated with that telephone number or, in
   the context of a call, the party calling from it. [RFC3966]

   In some networks (including North America), the Originating Line
   Information (OLI) parameter defined in ANSI ISUP is used to carry
   information related to the calling party and the class of service for
   a call. Legacy multifrequency (MF) signalling networks carry this
   information in the ANI II Digits [ANSI-ISUP]. The call can originate
   from a multitude of devices or stations. For example, a coin operated
   phone or a phone located inside a prison can be used to originate a
   call. In such cases, it can be desirable to handle calls originating
   from such stations in a specific manner, or to restrict certain
   services to the calling party. A URI parameter specified in this
   document is designed to carry data related to these sources as
   well. [1]

   The following sections describe the formal syntax of the "cpc" and
   "oli" parameters and their usage.

   Emergency registration is possible only when the UE has sufficient
   credentials to register with its home network and can detect that an
   emergency session is initiated.  Unfortunately, marking of the
   emergency registration can not be fulfilled by the use of the Service
   URN.

   In some countries, it is a regulatory requirement that devices be
   able to place emegency calls in circumstances where other calls may
   not be permitted.  When a UAC issues an emergency marked REGISTER
   request it informs the registrar that the contact address and the
   address-of-record being registered are to be used for emergency
   calls, and roaming and barring restrictions should not be applied for
   the registered address-of-record.

   This document proposes a way to mark a REGISTER request as an
   emergency registration.







Patel, et al.            Expires April 11, 2010                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft         CPC and OLI URI Parameters           October 2009


2.  Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].


3.  Parameter Definitions

   The Calling Party's Category (CPC) and the Originating Line
   Information (OLI) are represented as URI parameters for the tel URI
   scheme and the SIP URI representation of telephone numbers.  The ABNF
   syntax is as follows. The 'par' production is defined in RFC 3966
   [RFC5234][RFC3966].  The "/=" syntax indicates an extension of the
   production on the left-hand side:
      par /= cpc / oli
      cpc = cpc-tag "=" cpc-value
      oli = oli-tag "=" oli-value
      cpc-tag = "cpc"
      oli-tag = "oli"
      cpc-value = "ordinary" / "test" / "operator" / "payphone" /
      "unknown" / genvalue
      oli-value = 2*(DIGIT)
      genvalue = 1*(alphanum / "-" / "." )

   The semantics of these CPC values are described below:
      ordinary: The caller has been identified, and has no special
      features.
      test: This is a test call that has been originated as part of a
      maintenance procedure.
      operator: The call was generated by an operator position.
      payphone: The calling station is a payphone.
      unknown: The CPC could not be ascertained.

   The two digit OLI values are decimal codes assigned and administered
   by NANPA.

   The "cpc" and "oli" URI parameters are optional parameters.  At the
   most, one "cpc" and/or one "oli" parameter may be included in a URI
   of the calling party.

   An example of the syntax of the "cpc" parameter is given below:

   From: <tel:+17005554141;cpc=payphone>;tag=1928301774

   Alternatively, the tel URI may be included in the P-Asserted-Identity
   header [RFC3325]:




Patel, et al.            Expires April 11, 2010                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft         CPC and OLI URI Parameters           October 2009


   P-Asserted-Identity: <tel: +17005554141;cpc=payphone>

   The "oli" URI parameter usage is given in the following example,
   which uses the SIP URI representation of telephone numbers: :

   From: <sip: +1700554141@example.com;oli=29>;tag=1928301774

   The "oli" parameter with value 29 indicates that the device that the
   call is initiated from is located within a prison.


4.  Usage

   The CPC and OLI are generally useful only when describing the
   originator of a telephone call or the station from where a telephone
   call is originated.  Therefore, when this parameter is used in an
   application such as SIP, it is recommended that the parameter be
   applied to URIs that characterize the originator of a call (such as a
   SIP URI or tel URI in the P-Asserted-Identity header field or the
   From header field of a SIP message).  Note that many Calling Party's
   Category values from the PSTN are intentionally excluded from the
   "cpc" parameter as they are either meaningless outside of the PSTN or
   can be represented using another existing concept.  For example, the
   language of an operator can be expressed more richly using the
   Accept-Language header in SIP than in the "cpc" parameter.  Similarly
   the priority of a call is a characteristic of the call and not the
   calling party.

   It is anticipated that "cpc" and "oli" URI parameters will be used
   primarily by gateways that interwork ISUP or ANI II networks with SIP
   networks.  Various SIP network intermediaries might consult the CPC
   or OLI information as they make routing decisions, although no
   specific behavior is prescribed in this document.  While no specific
   mapping of the various ISUP parameters that contain CPC or OLI data
   is offered in this document, creating such a mapping would be
   trivial..  It is proposed that use of this URI parameter is
   restricted to the Contact header included in the REGISTER request
   (and the 2xx response to the REGISTER request) related to an
   emergency call only.  The "sos" URI parameter MUST NOT be considered
   as a replacement for the Service URN for emergency calls originated
   by a UA.

   While the CPC and OLI could be conveyed using the ISUP tunneling
   mechanism described in RFC 3372 , this technique is widely regarded
   by the implementation community as overkill for the problem of
   conveying CPC and OLI information. For example, the "cpc" and "oli"
   parameters provides a convenient way for SIP intermediaries to make
   routing decisions based on the CPC and OLI information without having



Patel, et al.            Expires April 11, 2010                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft         CPC and OLI URI Parameters           October 2009


   to implement an ISUP parser. The "cpc" and "oli" URI parameters
   provide a simple, convenient form of CPC and OLI interoperability of
   SIP with ISUP and ANI II, which is otherwise poorly addressed in RFC
   3372 [RFC3372]. Indeed when a SIP intermediary makes routing
   decisions for a call where both the originating and the terminating
   gateways natively use ANI II, the ISUP tunneling approach is
   especially unattractive, requiring each of the three devices to
   perform a translation into an otherwise unneeded PSTN protocol.
   [RFC3372]

   If the "cpc" URI parameter is not present, consumers of the CPC
   information should treat the URI as if it specified a CPC of
   "ordinary".  If the "oli" URI parameter is not present, consumers of
   the OLI information should treat the URI as if no OLI information is
   provided.  If a SIP intermediary does not support the "cpc" or "oli"
   URI parameters and receives a SIP message where the calling party URI
   in the From or P-Asserted-header fields includes a "cpc" or "oli" URI
   parameter, then the SIP intermediary silently ignores the URI
   parameter in accordance with RFC 3261. [RFC3261]

   At most, one instance of the "cpc" parameter and/or one instance of
   the "oli" parameter can be associated with a particular URI within a
   SIP request.  It is recommended that the "cpc" and "oli" URI
   parameters are associated with URIs included in the P-Asserted-
   Identity header field.  Where the P-Asserted-Identity header field is
   not supported or included, another header field used to carry a URI
   to characterize the originator of a call may be used.  One example of
   such a header field is the From header field.  The following section
   discusses further the motivation behind this recommendation.


5.  Security Considerations

   There are three potential risks specific to the information provided
   by the Calling Party's Category or Originating Line Identity:

   - leakage of potentially private information;

   - the threat of tampering with the CPC or OLI to add false CPC or OLI
   values; and

   - the threat of tampering with the CPC or OLI to remove actual CPC or
   OLI values.

   The information contained in the "cpc" or "oli" parameter may be of a
   private nature, and it may not be appropriate for this value to be
   revealed to the destination user (typically it would not be so
   revealed in the PSTN).  However, the calling party's category is



Patel, et al.            Expires April 11, 2010                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft         CPC and OLI URI Parameters           October 2009


   often discoverable or easily guessable from the calling party's phone
   number.  For that reason it is unlikely that this information is
   significantly more privacy sensitive than the telephone number
   itself.  The same techniques used to provide complete or partial
   telephone number privacy in SIP are appropriate to apply to the "cpc"
   and "oli" parameters as well.  For more information about privacy
   issues in SIP see RFC 3323[RFC3323] .  The mechanism described in RFC
   3325 [RFC3325]may also be relevant for maintaining partial privacy or
   the CPC or OLI within a trusted administrative domain or federation
   of domains as described in RFC 3324. [RFC3324]

   Making a call with a falsified CPC or OLI (ex: hospital, police, or
   operator) could allow the caller to gain access to resources or
   information not otherwise available.  Likewise removing an
   "undesirable" CPC or OLI value (ex: prison or hotel) could allow the
   caller to bypass various restrictions in the telephone network.  For
   that reason, agents which expect CPC or OLI values SHOULD take care
   to insure the integrity and authenticity of the "cpc" or "oli" URI
   parameter.  The RECOMMENDED mechanism to protect the entire calling
   party address along with the "cpc" or "oli" URI parameter is the SIP
   Identity [5] mechanism.  Alternatively, agents within an
   administrative domain or federation of domains MAY use the mechanism
   described in RFC 3325to place the "cpc" or "oli" URI parameter in a
   P-Asserted-Identity header field. When such mechanism is used, the
   "cpc" or "oli" URI parameter is added by a network entity or SIP
   intermediary if knowledge of the calling party's category or
   originating line identity (class of service) is known. [RFC3325]

   When the end-device, acting as a UAC originating a call, is not
   trusted, the value of a "cpc" or "oli" URI parameter included by the
   UAC may be removed or modified by a trusted network entity.  If a
   request containing CPC or OLI is sent towards a non-trusted entity,
   this information should be removed.

   The SIP Identity mechanism provides a signature over the URI in the
   From header field of a SIP request.  It can sign a tel URI alone or a
   tel URI embedded in a SIP or SIPS URI, but it provides stronger
   protection against tampering when the tel URI is embedded in a SIP or
   SIPS URI.  Because there is no direct correlation between a tel URI
   and an Internet domain, the receiver can use a list of domains from
   which it will trust CPC or OLI information, or a list of root
   certificates which are associated with trusting CPC or OLI
   information.

   Otherwise, this mechanism adds no new security considerations to
   those discussed in RFC 3261. [RFC3261]





Patel, et al.            Expires April 11, 2010                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft         CPC and OLI URI Parameters           October 2009


6.  IANA Considerations

   This document extends the registry of URI parameters for the Tel URI
   and SIP URI as defined RFC 3969and RFC 5341 [RFC3969]. Two new URI
   parameters for the Tel URI and SIP URI schemes are defined in this
   document as follows: [RFC5341]

   Parameter Name: cpc, oli

   Predefined Values: Yes

   Reference: This document


7.  Acknowledgements

   The original version of this document was written by Jon Peterson and
   subsequently authored by Rohan Mahy.

   This document is based on draft-mahy-iptel-cpc-06


8.  References

8.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC3966]  Schulzrinne, H., "The tel URI for Telephone Numbers",
              RFC 3966, December 2004.

   [RFC5234]  Crocker, D. and P. Overell, "Augmented BNF for Syntax
              Specifications: ABNF", STD 68, RFC 5234, January 2008.

   [RFC3969]  Camarillo, G., "The Internet Assigned Number Authority
              (IANA) Uniform Resource Identifier (URI) Parameter
              Registry for the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)",
              BCP 99, RFC 3969, December 2004.

   [RFC5341]  Jennings, C. and V. Gurbani, "The Internet Assigned Number
              Authority (IANA) tel Uniform Resource Identifier (URI)
              Parameter Registry", RFC 5341, September 2008.

   [RFC3261]  Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., Camarillo, G., Johnston,
              A., Peterson, J., Sparks, R., Handley, M., and E.
              Schooler, "SIP: Session Initiation Protocol", RFC 3261,
              June 2002.



Patel, et al.            Expires April 11, 2010                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft         CPC and OLI URI Parameters           October 2009


   [ITU-ISUP]
              International Telecommunications Union, "Recommendation
              Q.763: Signalling System No. 7: ISDN user part formats and
              codes", December 1999, <http://www.itu.int>.

8.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.ietf-ecrit-phonebcp]
              Rosen, B. and J. Polk, "Best Current Practice for
              Communications Services in support of Emergency  Calling",
              draft-ietf-ecrit-phonebcp-13 (work in progress),
              July 2009.

   [RFC5031]  Schulzrinne, H., "A Uniform Resource Name (URN) for
              Emergency and Other Well-Known Services", RFC 5031,
              January 2008.

   [3GPP.23.167]
              3GPP, "IP Multimedia Subsystem (IMS) emergency sessions",
              3GPP TS 23.167 7.11.0, December 2008.

   [ANSI-ISUP]
              American National Standards Institute, "ANSI T1.113-2000,
              Signaling System No. 7, ISDN User Part", 2000,
              <http://www.ansi.org>.

   [RFC3325]  Jennings, C., Peterson, J., and M. Watson, "Private
              Extensions to the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) for
              Asserted Identity within Trusted Networks", RFC 3325,
              November 2002.

   [RFC3372]  Vemuri, A. and J. Peterson, "Session Initiation Protocol
              for Telephones (SIP-T): Context and Architectures",
              BCP 63, RFC 3372, September 2002.

   [RFC3323]  Peterson, J., "A Privacy Mechanism for the Session
              Initiation Protocol (SIP)", RFC 3323, November 2002.

   [RFC3324]  Watson, M., "Short Term Requirements for Network Asserted
              Identity", RFC 3324, November 2002.

URIs

   [1]  <http://www.nanpa.com/number_resource_info/
        ani_ii_assignments.html>






Patel, et al.            Expires April 11, 2010                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft         CPC and OLI URI Parameters           October 2009


Authors' Addresses

   Milan Patel
   Nortel
   Maidenhead Office Park, Westacott Way
   Maidenhead, Berkshire, UK

   Email: milanpa@nortel.com


   Roland Jesske
   Deutsche Telekom
   Heinrich-Hertz-Strasse 3-7
   Darmstadt, 64307, Germany

   Email: r.jesske@telekom.de


   Martin Dolly
   AT&T
   200 Laurel Ave
   Middletown, NJ,, US

   Email: mdolly@att.com



























Patel, et al.            Expires April 11, 2010                [Page 10]

