


DISPATCH Working Group                                          M. Patel
Internet-Draft                                                    Nortel
Intended status: Standards Track                               R. Jesske
Expires: April 29, 2010                                 Deutsche Telekom
                                                                M. Dolly
                                                                    AT&T
                                                        October 26, 2009


Uniform Resource Identifier (URI) Parameters for indicating the Calling
             Party's Catagory and Originating Line Identity
             draft-patel-dispatch-cpc-oli-parameter-01.txt

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 29, 2010.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2009 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents in effect on the date of
   publication of this document (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info).
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.





Patel, et al.            Expires April 29, 2010                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft         CPC and OLI URI Parameters           October 2009


Abstract

   This document defines two new URI parameters to describe the calling
   party's category and toll class of service originating line
   information which are parameters also used in SS7 ISUP and other
   telephony signalling protocols.  The intended use of these URI
   parameters is for the tel URI and SIP URI address schemes.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   3.  Parameter Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   4.  Usage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   5.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   6.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   7.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   8.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
     8.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
     8.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9





























Patel, et al.            Expires April 29, 2010                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft         CPC and OLI URI Parameters           October 2009


1.  Introduction

   SS7 ISUP[ITU-ISUP] defines a Calling Party's Category (CPC) parameter
   that characterizes the station used to originate a call and carries
   other important state that can describe the originating party.  One
   example of such information is the call may originate from a
   payphone; such information can be used by the network to handle the
   call in a specific way.  When telephone numbers are contained in
   URIs, such as the tel URI [RFC3966] or equivalent SIP URI, it may be
   desirable to communicate any CPC associated with that telephone
   number or, in the context of a call, the party calling from it.  This
   document proposes a method of carrying CPC data in SIP messages.

   In some networks (including North America), the Originating Line
   Information (OLI) parameter defined in ANSI ISUP [ANSI-ISUP] is used
   to carry information related to the calling party and the class of
   service for a call.  Legacy multifrequency (MF) signalling networks
   carry this information in the ANI II Digits
   <http://www.nanpa.com/number_resource_info/ani_ii_assignments.html>.
   The call can originate from a multitude of devices or stations.  For
   example, a coin operated phone or a phone located inside a prison can
   be used to originate a call.  In such cases, it can be desirable to
   handle calls originating from such stations in a specific manner, or
   to restrict certain services to the calling party.  This document
   proposes a method of carrying OLI data in SIP messages.

   Other use cases may exist where is it useful to transfer information
   about the endpoint even when interworking with the PSTN does not
   occur.  In such cases, the calling party's catagory or originating
   line identity can be added when the calling party is identified by
   either a tel URI or a SIP URI.


2.  Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].


3.  Parameter Definitions

   The Calling Party's Category (CPC) and the Originating Line
   Information (OLI) are represented as URI parameters for the tel URI
   scheme and the SIP URI representation of telephone numbers.  The ABNF
   [RFC5234] syntax is as follows.  The 'par' production is defined in
   RFC 3966 [RFC3966].  The "/=" syntax indicates an extension of the
   production on the left-hand side:



Patel, et al.            Expires April 29, 2010                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft         CPC and OLI URI Parameters           October 2009


      par /= cpc / oli
      cpc = cpc-tag "=" cpc-value
      oli = oli-tag "=" oli-value
      cpc-tag = "cpc"
      oli-tag = "isup-oli"
      cpc-value = 8*8BIT / "ordinary" / "test" / "operator" / "payphone"
      / "unknown" / genvalue
      oli-value = 8*8BIT / "hotel" / "prison" / "cellular" / "cellular-
      roaming" / genvalue
      genvalue = 1*(alphanum / "-" / "." )

   The semantics of these CPC and OLI values are described below:
      ordinary: The caller has been identified, and has no special
      features.
      test: This is a test call that has been originated as part of a
      maintenance procedure.
      operator: The call was generated by an operator position.
      payphone: The calling station is a payphone.
      unknown: The CPC could not be ascertained.
      hotel: The calling station is in a hotel or motel.
      prison: The calling station is in a prison.
      cellular: The calling station is a radio-telephone operating in
      its home network.
      cellular-roaming: The calling station is a radio-telephone roaming
      in another network.

   The 8 bit values are assigned by ITU-T/ANSI [ITU-ISUP][ANSI-ISUP] and
   for the OLI, are binary equivalaents of the decimal codes used in the
   II digits of the ANI sequence for in-band signalling system
   <http://www.nanpa.com/number_resource_info/ani_ii_assignments.html>.

   The "cpc" and "isup-oli" URI parameters are optional parameters.  At
   the most, one "cpc" and/or one "isup-oli" parameter may be included
   in a URI of the calling party.  In SIP the calling party is generally
   identified by the identity given in the From header field, or
   alternatively, in the P-Asserted-Identity header field if this is
   used.  Usage is discussed in the following sections of this document.

   An example of the syntax of the "cpc" parameter is given below:

   From: <tel:+17005554141;cpc=payphone>;tag=1928301774

   Alternatively, the tel URI may be included in the P-Asserted-Identity
   header field [RFC3325]:

   P-Asserted-Identity: <tel: +17005554141;cpc=payphone>

   The "isup-oli" URI parameter usage is given in the following example,



Patel, et al.            Expires April 29, 2010                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft         CPC and OLI URI Parameters           October 2009


   which uses the SIP URI representation of telephone numbers:

   From: <sip: +1700554141@example.com;isup-oli=00011101>;tag=1928301774

   The "isup-oli" parameter with value 00011101 indicates that the
   device that the call is initiated from is located within a prison.
   An "isup-oli" with value "prison" is equally valid.

   For the case where a call is originared by a SIP UA where the caller
   is identified by a SIP URI that does not contain a telephone number,
   "isup-oli" URI parameter usage is given in the following example,
   which uses the SIP URI representation of telephone numbers:

   P-Asserted-Identity: <sip: alice@example.com;isup-oli=cellular>

   The "isup-oli" parameter with value "cellular" indicates that the
   device that the call is initiated from is a mobile device operating
   in its home cellular network.


4.  Usage

   The CPC and OLI are generally useful only when describing the
   originator of a telephone call or the station from where a telephone
   call is originated.  Therefore, when this parameter is used in an
   application such as SIP, it is recommended that the parameter be
   applied to URIs that characterize the originator of a call (such as a
   SIP URI or tel URI in the P-Asserted-Identity header field or the
   From header field of a SIP message).  Note that many Calling Party's
   Category values from the PSTN are intentionally excluded from the
   "cpc" parameter as they are either meaningless outside of the PSTN or
   can be represented using another existing concept.  For example, the
   language of an operator can be expressed more richly using the
   Accept-Language header in SIP than in the "cpc" parameter.  Similarly
   the priority of a call is a characteristic of the call and not the
   calling party.

   It is anticipated that "cpc" and "isup-oli" URI parameters will be
   used primarily by gateways that interwork ISUP or ANI II networks
   with SIP networks.  However, scenarios where interworking with the
   PSTN does not occur are not precluded.  Various SIP network
   intermediaries might consult the CPC or OLI information as they make
   routing decisions, although no specific behavior is prescribed in
   this document.  While no specific mapping of the various ISUP
   parameters that contain CPC or OLI data is offered in this document,
   creating such a mapping would be trivial.

   While the CPC and OLI could be conveyed using the ISUP tunneling



Patel, et al.            Expires April 29, 2010                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft         CPC and OLI URI Parameters           October 2009


   mechanism described in RFC 3372 [RFC3372], this technique is widely
   regarded by the implementation community as overkill for the problem
   of conveying CPC and OLI information.  For example, the "cpc" and
   "isup-oli" parameters provides a convenient way for SIP
   intermediaries to make routing decisions based on the CPC and OLI
   information without having to implement an ISUP parser.  The "cpc"
   and "isup-oli" URI parameters provide a simple, convenient form of
   CPC and OLI interoperability of SIP with ISUP and ANI II, which is
   otherwise poorly addressed in RFC 3372[RFC3372].  Indeed when a SIP
   intermediary makes routing decisions for a call where both the
   originating and the terminating gateways natively use ANI II, the
   ISUP tunneling approach is especially unattractive, requiring each of
   the three devices to perform a translation into an otherwise unneeded
   PSTN protocol.

   If the "cpc" URI parameter is not present, consumers of the CPC
   information should treat the URI as if it specified a CPC of
   "ordinary".  If the "isup-oli" URI parameter is not present,
   consumers of the OLI information should treat the URI as if no OLI
   information is provided.  If a SIP intermediary does not support the
   "cpc" or "isup-oli" URI parameters and receives a SIP message where
   the calling party URI in the From or P-Asserted-header fields
   includes a "cpc" or "isup-oli" URI parameter, then the SIP
   intermediary silently ignores the URI parameter in accordance with
   RFC 3261[RFC3261].

   At most, one instance of the "cpc" parameter and/or one instance of
   the "isup-oli" parameter can be associated with a particular URI
   within a SIP request.  It is recommended that the "cpc" and "oli" URI
   parameters are associated with URIs included in the P-Asserted-
   Identity header field.  Where the P-Asserted-Identity header field is
   not supported or included, another header field used to carry a URI
   to characterize the originator of a call may be used.  One example of
   such a header field is the From header field.  The following section
   discusses further the motivation behind this recommendation.


5.  Security Considerations

   There are three potential risks specific to the information provided
   by the Calling Party's Category or Originating Line Identity:

   - leakage of potentially private information;

   - the threat of tampering with the CPC or OLI to add false CPC or OLI
   values; and

   - the threat of tampering with the CPC or OLI to remove actual CPC or



Patel, et al.            Expires April 29, 2010                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft         CPC and OLI URI Parameters           October 2009


   OLI values.

   The information contained in the "cpc" or "isup-oli" parameter may be
   of a private nature, and it may not be appropriate for this value to
   be revealed to the destination user (typically it would not be so
   revealed in the PSTN).  However, the calling party's category is
   often discoverable or easily guessable from the calling party's phone
   number.  For that reason it is unlikely that this information is
   significantly more privacy sensitive than the telephone number
   itself.  The same techniques used to provide complete or partial
   telephone number privacy in SIP are appropriate to apply to the "cpc"
   and "isup-oli" parameters as well.  For more information about
   privacy issues in SIP see RFC 3323[RFC3323].  The mechanism described
   in RFC 3325 [RFC3325] may also be relevant for maintaining partial
   privacy or the CPC or OLI within a trusted administrative domain or
   federation of domains as described in RFC 3324[RFC3324].

   Making a call with a falsified CPC or OLI (i.e. "operator") could
   allow the caller to gain access to resources or information not
   otherwise available.  Likewise removing an "undesirable" CPC or OLI
   value (ex: prison or hotel) could allow the caller to bypass various
   restrictions in the telephone network.  For that reason, agents which
   expect CPC or OLI values SHOULD take care to insure the integrity and
   authenticity of the "cpc" or "isup-oli" URI parameter.  The
   RECOMMENDED mechanism to protect the entire calling party address
   along with the "cpc" or "isup-oli" URI parameter is the SIP Identity
   mechanism [RFC4474] .  Alternatively, agents within an administrative
   domain or federation of domains MAY use the mechanism described in
   RFC 3325[RFC3325] to place the "cpc" or "isup-oli" URI parameter in a
   P-Asserted-Identity header field.  When such mechanism is used, the
   "cpc" or "isup-oli" URI parameter is added by a network entity or SIP
   intermediary if knowledge of the calling party's category or
   originating line identity (class of service) is known.

   When the end-device, acting as a UAC originating a call, is not
   trusted, the value of a "cpc" or "isup-oli" URI parameter included by
   the UAC may be removed or modified by a trusted network entity.  If a
   request containing CPC or OLI is sent towards a non-trusted entity,
   this information should be removed.

   The SIP Identity mechanism provides a signature over the URI in the
   From header field of a SIP request.  It can sign a SIP URI or a tel
   URI alone or a tel URI embedded in a SIP or SIPS URI, but it provides
   stronger protection against tampering when the tel URI is embedded in
   a SIP or SIPS URI.  Because there is no direct correlation between a
   tel URI and an Internet domain, the receiver can use a list of
   domains from which it will trust CPC or OLI information, or a list of
   root certificates which are associated with trusting CPC or OLI



Patel, et al.            Expires April 29, 2010                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft         CPC and OLI URI Parameters           October 2009


   information.

   Otherwise, this mechanism adds no new security considerations to
   those discussed in RFC 3261[RFC3261].


6.  IANA Considerations

   This document extends the registry of URI parameters for the Tel URI
   and SIP URI as defined RFC 3969[RFC3969] and RFC 5341[RFC5341].  Two
   new URI parameters for the Tel URI and SIP URI schemes are defined in
   this document as follows:

   Parameter Name: cpc, isup-oli

   Predefined Values: Yes

   Reference: This document


7.  Acknowledgements

   The original version of this document was written by Jon Peterson as
   a result of spliiting the appendix from draft-ietf-sip-privacy-04 and
   subsequently authored by Rohan Mahy.

   This document is based on draft-mahy-iptel-cpc-06.


8.  References

8.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC3966]  Schulzrinne, H., "The tel URI for Telephone Numbers",
              RFC 3966, December 2004.

   [RFC5234]  Crocker, D. and P. Overell, "Augmented BNF for Syntax
              Specifications: ABNF", STD 68, RFC 5234, January 2008.

   [RFC3969]  Camarillo, G., "The Internet Assigned Number Authority
              (IANA) Uniform Resource Identifier (URI) Parameter
              Registry for the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)",
              BCP 99, RFC 3969, December 2004.

   [RFC5341]  Jennings, C. and V. Gurbani, "The Internet Assigned Number



Patel, et al.            Expires April 29, 2010                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft         CPC and OLI URI Parameters           October 2009


              Authority (IANA) tel Uniform Resource Identifier (URI)
              Parameter Registry", RFC 5341, September 2008.

   [RFC3261]  Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., Camarillo, G., Johnston,
              A., Peterson, J., Sparks, R., Handley, M., and E.
              Schooler, "SIP: Session Initiation Protocol", RFC 3261,
              June 2002.

   [ITU-ISUP]
              International Telecommunications Union, "Recommendation
              Q.763: Signalling System No. 7: ISDN user part formats and
              codes", December 1999, <http://www.itu.int>.

8.2.  Informative References

   [RFC4474]  Peterson, J. and C. Jennings, "Enhancements for
              Authenticated Identity Management in the Session
              Initiation Protocol (SIP)", RFC 4474, August 2006.

   [ANSI-ISUP]
              American National Standards Institute, "ANSI T1.113-2000,
              Signaling System No. 7, ISDN User Part", 2000,
              <http://www.ansi.org>.

   [RFC3325]  Jennings, C., Peterson, J., and M. Watson, "Private
              Extensions to the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) for
              Asserted Identity within Trusted Networks", RFC 3325,
              November 2002.

   [RFC3372]  Vemuri, A. and J. Peterson, "Session Initiation Protocol
              for Telephones (SIP-T): Context and Architectures",
              BCP 63, RFC 3372, September 2002.

   [RFC3323]  Peterson, J., "A Privacy Mechanism for the Session
              Initiation Protocol (SIP)", RFC 3323, November 2002.

   [RFC3324]  Watson, M., "Short Term Requirements for Network Asserted
              Identity", RFC 3324, November 2002.













Patel, et al.            Expires April 29, 2010                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft         CPC and OLI URI Parameters           October 2009


Authors' Addresses

   Milan Patel
   Nortel
   Maidenhead Office Park, Westacott Way
   Maidenhead, Berkshire, UK

   Email: milanpa@nortel.com


   Roland Jesske
   Deutsche Telekom
   Heinrich-Hertz-Strasse 3-7
   Darmstadt, 64307, Germany

   Email: r.jesske@telekom.de


   Martin Dolly
   AT&T
   200 Laurel Ave
   Middletown, NJ,, US

   Email: mdolly@att.com



























Patel, et al.            Expires April 29, 2010                [Page 10]

