A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        BCP 55
        RFC 3227

        Title:      Guidelines for Evidence Collection and Archiving
        Author(s):  D. Brezinski, T. Killalea
        Status:     Best Current Practice
        Date:       February 2002
        Mailbox:    dbrezinski@In-Q-Tel.org, tomk@neart.org
        Pages:      10
        Characters: 18468
        Updates/Obsoletes/SeeAlso:  None

        I-D Tag:    draft-ietf-grip-prot-evidence-05.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3227.txt


A "security incident" as defined in the "Internet Security Glossary",
RFC 2828, is a security-relevant system event in which the system's
security policy is disobeyed or otherwise breached.  The purpose of
this document is to provide System Administrators with guidelines on
the collection and archiving of evidence relevant to such a security
incident.

If evidence collection is done correctly, it is much more useful in
apprehending the attacker, and stands a much greater chance of being
admissible in the event of a prosecution.

This document specifies an Internet Best Current Practices for the
Internet Community, and requests discussion and suggestions for
improvements.  Distribution of this memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.

