


Kerberos Working Group                                       H. Moustafa
Internet-Draft                                   France Telecom - Orange
Intended status: Informational                                G. Bourdon
Expires: April 21, 2011                                   France Telecom
                                                                   T. Yu
                                                 MIT Kerberos Consortium
                                                        October 18, 2010


 Distributed Authentication in Wireless Mesh Networks Through Kerberos
                                Tickets
                  draft-moustafa-krb-wg-mesh-nw-00.txt

Abstract

   This document presents the problem of authentication and
   authorization in wireless mesh networks constituted by several users
   communicating with application servers and communicating with each
   other in a single or multi-hop fashion.  Each user in this
   environment can also play the role of an application provider.

   Imagine a large music event where the provided network infrastructure
   is enhanced with network storage equipment to allow visitors to
   access content relating to the bands playing at the events, such as
   recorded video of previous performances, supplementary audio and
   video material relevant to the bands playing, etc.  Certain content
   is, however, not necessarily available to everyone under the same
   conditions.  Instead access control is applied before the full range
   of audio, and video material can be accessed.  Other content, such as
   previews, might be offered for free.  How can such authentication,
   and authorization infrastructure be made available with minimal
   configuration complexity for a temporary event like a music festival?

   This document lists the requirements for a potentially needed
   Kerberos extension and presents a solution proposal based on the
   attempt to use a Kerberos extension for mutual authentication in
   wireless mesh networks.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.




Moustafa, et al.         Expires April 21, 2011                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft         Distributed Authentication           October 2010


   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 21, 2011.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


1.  Specification Requirements

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].


2.  Introduction and Problem Statement

   Authentication and authorization to services access is still an open
   problem in wireless mesh network distributed environments in which
   several users would need to communicate to several application
   servers and with each other in a single or multi-hop fashion, and
   each user could play the role of an application provider.

   The Kerberos authentication model [RFC4120] uses a symmetric
   cryptography approach, offering a high security level and allowing
   mutual authentication.  The principle of using service tickets in
   Kerberos allows for credentials distribution which is suitable for
   wireless mesh networks distributed environments.  However, the
   centralized approach in Kerberos (where each user should communicate
   with the authentication server each time he needs services
   credentials) restricts its usage for authentication in such
   distributed environments.  Furthermore, Kerberos rather authenticates
   each node with respect to the authentication server and to the



Moustafa, et al.         Expires April 21, 2011                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft         Distributed Authentication           October 2010


   application server.  The distributed credentials principle in
   Kerberos (through Service tickets) is promising for allowing
   authentication between each user and the application.  However, the
   authentication between each two users who communicate with each other
   is still not covered by Service tickets, especially with the dynamic
   nature of distributed environments in which users connectivity (that
   could be single or multi-hop) change frequently with time.

   Although the multi-hop communication is transparent to the
   application, there is a need to handle the authentication and access
   control among the different multi-hop communicating nodes to prevent
   against malicious actions taken by the human users themselves.  Based
   on this fact, this draft proposes to use a common key obtained by
   Kerberos for authentication among each two nodes who communicate
   together in a multi-hop fashion.  This common key is dynamic
   (renewable with time) for security reasons in such dynamic and
   distributed wireless environment that is less secure.


3.  Requirements

   This section presents a number of requirements motivated by the
   problem defined in the previous section.  These requirements are as
   follows:
   o  Distributed environment consisting of fixed and mobile nodes.
   o  Dynamic neighbors and dynamic application providers (any node
      could be an application provider at any time providing
      applications to other nodes in the network, e.g. file sharing,
      sending special announcement concerning the surrounding
      environments, and sending alarms in case of problems).
   o  User Generated Content (UGC) application, in which each node could
      be a source of content (mainly multimedia contents) for other
      nodes in the network, e.g. transmitting video snapshots during
      festival events.
   o  Hundreds of nodes (indoor or outdoor environment).
   o  Personal devices (of low power) individually used by users.
   o  Multihop communication.
   o  Authentication and access control of each user node by a trusted
      third party.
   o  Access control of each user by a trusted third party in a way that
      corresponds to the user subscription type and profile.
   o  Mutual authentication between each pair of communicating users.
   o  Limited bandwidth: need for minimizing traffic (minimizing the
      communication with the KDC).
   o  Dynamic credentials (attributing dynamic credentials to be
      distributed to each user).





Moustafa, et al.         Expires April 21, 2011                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft         Distributed Authentication           October 2010


4.  Kerberos Extension Solution Proposal

   This section presents a solution proposal extending the Kerberos
   authentication model for authenticating each user node in wireless
   mesh networks with respect to the network operator and with respect
   to other users nodes participating in the network.

   The Kerberos server resides in the local mesh network or in an
   external network and each user node needs to communicate firstly with
   this server in order to authenticate with respect to the operator and
   to obtain the necessary credentials (Kerberos tickets) for
   authentication with other users nodes and for accessing the offered
   services in the mesh network.  The communication can take place in a
   single hop or through multi-hops (passing by intermediate users
   nodes) according to the proximity of each user node from the
   application providers nodes.

   To prevent unreliable communication from taking place (intermediate
   nodes could do DoS, messages truncating,...), this solution proposal
   extends the classical Kerberos authentication model to adapt to the
   multi-hop communication through introducing a new shared secret for
   authentication and access control between intermediate nodes along
   the multi-hop communication.  But, if this secret is the same for all
   the time, it could be compromised and the entire network would be
   compromised.  Then several shared secrets (taking the form of a
   service ticket obtained through a TGS request) should be obtained.

   The solution proposal takes the following sequence:
   o  Each user node wishing to access the services offered by the mesh
      network starts by sending a first request to the KDC (TGT part) in
      order to authenticate with respect to the operator and to obtain
      the TGT ticket.  The process is similar to the classical Kerberos
      authentication approach, and the user, if legitimate, obtains the
      corresponding TGT ticket.
   o  After obtaining the TGT, the user node re-contacts the KDC (TGS
      part), through sending a TGS request, in order to obtain the
      necessary credentials while presenting the obtained TGT ticket as
      a proof of authenticity.  The classical Kerberos TGS request
      should be extended to illustrate the need of extra credentials for
      authentication with intermediate nodes along the multi-hop
      communication.
   o  Once the KDC (TGS part), receiving the TGS request from the user,
      verifies the TGT ticket and the user authenticity, it sends to the
      user the classical service ticket containing the necessary
      credentials according to the user profile and according to the
      required service.





Moustafa, et al.         Expires April 21, 2011                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft         Distributed Authentication           October 2010


   o  The shared secrets provided to the user to enable him to
      authenticate with other intermediate nodes could take the form of
      service tickets sent through normal Kerberos TGS request process,
      where the service is the relaying process and each relay is
      considered as a service provider node.  Or the classical Kerberos
      TGS reply message could be extended to include these shared
      secrets.
   o  To avoid the shared secret compromise, several shared secrets
      (taking the form of a service ticket obtained through a TGS
      request) are obtained, where each shared secret is valid for a
      given time interval.  However, the shared secret distributions
      should be done in a mean that would not compromise the security of
      the whole network:
      *  If the shared secrets are required by each mesh node at each
         time interval, this would generate lot of traffic during the
         communication with the KDC.
      *  If the shared secrets for future time intervals are pre-
         generated by the KDC and given in batch to each user, this
         would optimize traffic, but if a node is compromised at an
         interval of time, all the shared secrets would be known and the
         network would be compromised.
   o  Then, the KDC sends to each mesh node the current interval shared
      secret and the pre-generated ones for the future, while each pre-
      generated shared secret is encrypted with a key corresponding to
      the its related time interval.  This encryption key should is sent
      to each mesh node in the corresponding time interval either
      through Kerberos protocol or through a multicast routing protocol.
   o  Group keys can be also considered allowing to have a shared secret
      for each group of mesh nodes and allowing each mesh node to
      participate to more than one group and hence to have several group
      keys.  If one group key is compromised it could be deleted by the
      KDC.  Mesh nodes sharing the same group key are mesh nodes sharing
      some common characteristics (making a cluster, hierarchal group
      keys for example, ...).


5.  Potential Use-cases

   This section presents the potential use-cases for distributed
   environments of wireless mesh networks having multi-hop communication
   and requiring distributed authentication authorization.
   o  Temporary network infrastructure deployment for special events
      (sport events, music festivals, ..).  Network operators deploy
      temporary low-cost infrastructure for temporary events and hence
      counts on the communication of users with application servers that
      are locally deployed.  Also the users themselves can play the role
      of application providers contributing to the diffusion of
      multimedia services (video snapshots on the event,video streams



Moustafa, et al.         Expires April 21, 2011                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft         Distributed Authentication           October 2010


      with inserted comments, video streaming for what was missed in the
      event, downloading an interactive audio-visual program for the
      event,. ..).  In such use-case, there is a need for dynamic
      credentials distribution on the different participating nodes and
      there is also a need of controlling the access of each user to the
      authorized service for a duration corresponding to his
      subscription.
   o  Community networks, where a user owns the home gateway to the
      Internet and allows other distributed users to have access to the
      Internet through passing by his home gateway.  Users may need to
      pass by other users (in the community network) in order to reach
      the home gateway.  In this use-case, there is a need for
      credentials distribution in a dynamic manner (adapting to the
      random configuration of the community network) to allow mutual
      authentication between each pair of communicating users and
      between each user and the home gateway providing the Internet
      access.


6.  Security Considerations

   This document focuses on the distributed authentication through the
   Kerberos protocol and presents the requirements to be considered.


7.  IANA Considerations

   This document does not require actions by IANA.


8.  Acknowledgment

   We would like to thank Hannes Tschofenig for his comments on this
   draft and for encouraging us to publish it.

   We would also like to thank our colleague Estelle Transy for all the
   discussions during the use-cases definition.


9.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", March 1997.

   [RFC3365]  Schiller, J., "Strong Security Requirements for Internet
              Engineering  Task Force Standard Protocols", August 2002.

   [RFC4120]  Neumann, C., Yu, T., Hartman, S., and K. Raeburn, "The



Moustafa, et al.         Expires April 21, 2011                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft         Distributed Authentication           October 2010


              Kerberos Network Authentication Service (V5)", July 2005.


Authors' Addresses

   Hassnaa Moustafa
   France Telecom - Orange
   38-40 rue du General Leclerc
   Issy Les Moulineaux,   92794 Cedex 9
   France

   Email: hassnaa.moustafa@orange-ftgroup.com


   Gilles Bourdon
   France Telecom
   90 boulevard Kellermann
   75013 Paris,
   France

   Email: gilles.bourdon@orange-ftgroup.com


   Tom Yu
   MIT Kerberos Consortium


   Email: tlyu@mit.edu























Moustafa, et al.         Expires April 21, 2011                 [Page 7]


