


Kerberos Working Group                                       H. Moustafa
Internet-Draft                                   France Telecom - Orange
Intended status: Informational                                G. Bourdon
Expires: January 6, 2011                                  France Telecom
                                                            July 5, 2010


 Distributed Authentication Through Kerberos Tickets: Problem statement
                            and Requirements
                    draft-moustafa-krb-wg-ps-00.txt

Abstract

   This document presents the problem of authentication and
   authorization in distributed environments constituted by several
   users communicating with application servers and communicating with
   each others.  Each user in this environment can also play the role of
   an application provider.

   Imagine a large music event where the provided network infrastructure
   is enhanced with network storage equipment to allow visitors to
   access content relating to the bands playing at the events, such as
   recorded video of previous performances, supplementary audio and
   video material relevant to the bands playing, etc.  Certain content
   is, however, not necessarily available to everyone under the same
   conditions.  Instead access control is applied before the full range
   of audio, and video material can be accessed.  Other content, such as
   previews, might be offered for free.  How can such authentication,
   and authorization infrastructure be made available with minimal
   configuration complexity for a temporary event like a music festival?
   This document describes a problem statement based on the attempt to
   use Kerberos and lists a couple of requirements for potentially
   needed Kerberos extensions.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."



Moustafa & Bourdon       Expires January 6, 2011                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft         Distributed Authentication              July 2010


   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 6, 2011.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


1.  Specification Requirements

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].


2.  Introduction

   Authentication and authorization to services access is still an open
   problem in distributed environments in which several users would need
   to communicate to several application servers and also with each
   others, where each user could play the role of an application
   provider.  The principle of using service tickets in kerberos allows
   for credentials distribution which is suitable for distributed
   environments.  However, the centralized approach in Kerberos (where
   each user should communicate with the authentication server each time
   he needs services credentials) restricts its usage for authentication
   in distributed environment.

   Indeed, there is a need to control the authentication and access
   authorization among the different communicating users in a dynamic
   manner suitable for the dynamic network configuration.


3.  Problem Statement

   The problem of authentication and access authorization still presents
   an open issue for distributed environments.  Employing symmetric
   cryptography using a secret (key) shared by all users constituting



Moustafa & Bourdon       Expires January 6, 2011                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft         Distributed Authentication              July 2010


   the distributed environment network is a simple approach in terms of
   requiring lesser processing and consuming lesser resources.  However,
   it has two main limitations: i) The possibility of key divulgation,
   where it is sufficient to attack only one user node for attacking the
   whole network and breaking its security, and ii) The difficulty of
   the key distribution process, where one should assume the existence
   of a mechanism assuring key distribution prior to the communication.

   The Kerberos authentication model [RFC4120] uses a symmetric
   cryptography approach, however offering a high security level and
   allowing mutual authentication.  However, Kerberos authentication
   could not be directly applied in distributed environments in which
   the communication between the different users can take place in a
   dynamic manner.  Kerberos rather authenticates each node with respect
   to the authentication server and to the application server.  The
   distributed credentials principle in Kerberos (through TGS tickets)is
   promising for allowing authentication in distributed environment
   between each user and the application server.  However, the
   authentication between each two users that need to communicate
   together is still not covered by the TGS tickets, especially with the
   dynamic nature of distributed environments in which users
   connectivities change frequently with time.


4.  Requirements

   This section presents a number of requirements motivated by the
   problem statement defined in the previous section.  These
   requirements are as follows:
   o  Providing authentication for each user participating in the
      distributed environment network by a trusted third party (as the
      Kerberos server).
   o  Providing access authorization of each user by a trusted third
      party in a way that corresponds to the user subscription type and
      profile.
   o  Providing mutual authentication between each pair of communicating
      users in a dynamic manner through attributing dynamic credentials
      to be distributed to each user.


5.  Potential Use-cases

   This section presents the potential use-cases for distributed
   environments requiring the distribution of the authentication and
   access authorization process.  Two main use-cases are described:
   o  Temporary network infrastructure deployment for special events
      (sport events, music festivals, ..).  Network operators deploy
      temporary low-cost infrastructure for such temporary events and



Moustafa & Bourdon       Expires January 6, 2011                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft         Distributed Authentication              July 2010


      hence counts on the communication of users with the application
      servers that are locally deployed.  Also the users themselves can
      play the role of application providers contributing to the
      diffusion of multimedia services (video snapshots on the event,
      video streams with inserted comments, video streaming for what was
      missed in the event, downloading an interactive audio-visual
      program for the event,. ..).  In such use-case, there is a need
      for dynamic credentials distribution on the different
      participating nodes and there is also a need of controlling the
      access of each user to the authorized service for a duration
      corresponding to his subscription.
   o  Community networks, where a user owns the home gateway to the
      Internet and allows other distributed users to have access to the
      Internet through passing by his home gateway.  Users may need to
      pass by other users (in the community network) in order to reach
      the home gateway.  In this use-case, there is a need for
      credentials distribution in a dynamic manner (adapting to the
      random configuration of the community network) to allow mutual
      authentication between each pair of communicating users and
      between each user and the home gateway providing the Internet
      access.


6.  Security Considerations

   This document focuses on the distributed authentication through the
   Kerberos protocol and presents the requirements to be considered.


7.  IANA Considerations

   This document does not require actions by IANA.


8.  Acknowledgment

   We would like to thank Hannes Tschofenig for his comments on this
   draft and for encouraging us to publish it.

   We would also like to thank our colleague Estelle Transy for all the
   discussions during the use-cases definition.


9.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", March 1997.




Moustafa & Bourdon       Expires January 6, 2011                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft         Distributed Authentication              July 2010


   [RFC3365]  Schiller, J., "Strong Security Requirements for Internet
              Engineering  Task Force Standard Protocols", August 2002.

   [RFC4120]  Neumann, C., Yu, T., Hartman, S., and K. Raeburn, "The
              Kerberos Network Authentication Service (V5)", July 2005.


Authors' Addresses

   Hassnaa Moustafa
   France Telecom - Orange
   38-40 rue du General Leclerc
   Issy Les Moulineaux,   92794 Cedex 9
   France

   Email: hassnaa.moustafa@orange-ftgroup.com


   Gilles Bourdon
   France Telecom
   90 boulevard Kellermann
   75013 Paris,
   France

   Email: gilles.bourdon@orange-ftgroup.com


























Moustafa & Bourdon       Expires January 6, 2011                [Page 5]


