



Networking Working Group                                J. Tripathi, Ed.
Internet-Draft                                       J. de Oliveira, Ed.
Intended status: Informational                         Drexel University
Expires: January 07, 2014                              C. Chauvenet, Ed.
                                                                Watteco.
                                                        JP. Vasseur, Ed.
                                                     Cisco Systems, Inc.
                                                           July 06, 2013


             Why Reactive Protocols are Ill-Suited for LLNs
             draft-tripathi-roll-reactive-applicability-01

Abstract

   This document describes serious issues and shortcomings regarding the
   use of reactive routing protocols in low power and lossy networks
   (LLNs).  Routing requirements for various LLN deployments are
   discussed in order to judge how reactive routing may or may not
   adhere to the necessary criteria.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 07, 2014.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect



Tripathi, et al.        Expires January 07, 2014                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft    Reactive Protocol Evaluation in LLNs         July 2013


   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   3.  Non-compliance with routing requirements in LLNs  . . . . . .   3
     3.1.  Inability to support P2MP traffic pattern . . . . . . . .   3
     3.2.  Inability to support MP2P traffic pattern . . . . . . . .   4
   4.  Dependency of control overhead on application module  . . . .   5
   5.  Flooding issues in LLNs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     5.1.  Impact of flooding in battery operated nodes  . . . . . .   7
   6.  Impact on memory  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   7.  Lack of support for routing based on node capability  . . . .   8
   8.  High delay for emergency traffic  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   9.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   10. Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11

1.  Introduction

   In 2008, the IETF chartered a Working Group called ROLL (Routing Over
   Low power and Lossy networks) with the objective of specifying
   routing requirements of Low power and Lossy Networks (LLN), and then
   either select an existing routing protocol or specify and design a
   new routing protocol in light of the unique requirements of these
   networks.  This led to the specification of a new routing protocol
   called RPL (see [RFC6550]) along with other specifications related to
   RPL.

   Despite the existence of a standard track routing protocol for LLN,
   discussions have been taken place as to whether other routing
   approaches could be suitable, such as deploying reactive routing
   protocols in LLNs, such as in smart metering networks, industrial
   automation, water management networks, etc.. The aim of this document
   is not to discuss a specific reactive routing protocol but why
   reactive routing protocols in general are ill-suited for LLNs.  For
   the sake of illustration, we will refer to a reactive protocol called
   LOADng ([I-D.clausen-lln-loadng]) which was introduced at the IETF,
   with results seeming to indicate performance improvement over the
   standard AODV protocol in the context of LLNs ([clausen-load-vtc]).
   The aim of this document is to highlight the number of shortcomings
   and technical issues in using reactive routing in such networks.
   Note that reactive protocols are perfectly applicable to several
   types of mobile ad-hoc networks (MANETs), which are not LLNs.



Tripathi, et al.        Expires January 07, 2014                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft    Reactive Protocol Evaluation in LLNs         July 2013


   Specifically, LLNs exhibit constrained characteristics such as very
   low data rate (a few Kbps), lossy physical links where the packet
   delivery ratio can be poor (below 50%) and the links exhibit highly
   dynamic properties (high variation of Packet Delivery Ratio (PDR)
   with respect to time).

2.  Terminology

   Please refer to [ROLL-TERMS] for terminology.  Additionally, the
   following terms are used throughout the document.

   U-LLN:  Urban Low-Power Lossy Network.

   PDR:  Packet Delivery Ratio.

   RREQ  Route Request.

   RREP  Route Reply.

   AMI  Advanced Metering Infrastructure.

3.  Non-compliance with routing requirements in LLNs

3.1.  Inability to support P2MP traffic pattern

   An LLN often has a more demanding traffic pattern than simple traffic
   between two peer nodes (P2P traffic).  The nature of deployments and
   applications running over an LLN often requires a given node to send
   the same data to multiple recipients, requiring multicasting or
   point-to-multipoint (P2MP) support from the routing protocol.  These
   destinations may be several hops away, therefore necessitating an
   efficient dissemination method.  Examples of such traffic include:

   o  management information multicasted to all nodes belonging to a
      certain region in a landscape, certain part of the manufacturing
      pipeline in an industrial automation setting, upgrade of a new
      firmware,

   o  new tariff notification to a group of users in a smart grid
      deployment,

   o  a single node providing sensed data to multiple servers.

   Indeed, [RFC5548] necessitates the support of P2MP traffic for a
   protocol to be suitable for U-LLN deployment.  It describes - "Thus,
   the protocol(s) should be optimized to support a large number of
   unicast flows from the sensing nodes or sensing clusters towards a
   LBR, or highly directed multicast or anycast flows from the nodes



Tripathi, et al.        Expires January 07, 2014                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft    Reactive Protocol Evaluation in LLNs         July 2013


   towards multiple LBRs." and "A U-LLN may also need to support
   efficient large-scale messaging to groups of actuators.", which
   represents a massive critical need for a reliable P2MP mechanism.
   This requirement also necessitates a valid MP2P traffic support as
   well, which will be described in the next section.

   While a reactive routing protocol may be altered to support an on-
   demand bi-directional route between any two nodes in the network as
   provided by LOADng (see [I-D.clausen-lln-loadng]), the protocol does
   not define a way to build and maintain an always usable multicast
   topology.  It is worth mentioning here that the AODV protocol in
   [RFC3561] mentions provision for nodes to join a multicast tree and
   RREQs to use multicast IP address as their destination address.
   However, no such methods or provisions are available in the
   lightweight versions of the AODV protocol, namely AODVv2
   [I-D.Perkins-AODVv2] or LOADng ([I-D.clausen-lln-loadng]).  A naive
   and very costly solution would be to create a copy of the same
   message/application data to send for each destination.  Also, to find
   the route to each destination, the node may have to create separate
   route request (RREQ) messages and broadcast them.  This broadcast
   event creates a huge control overhead.  Number of intended
   destinations for this P2MP traffic can reach an order of hundreds or
   thousands, which is very common in an LLN deployed in urban area, or
   for a number of Advanced Metering Infrastructure (AMI) meters in a
   particular region in a smart grid deployment.  If such is the case,
   the protocol does not scale well with the network size in terms of
   control overhead.  Hence, reactive routing protocols in general may
   become unsuitable to be deployed in a large scale LLN such as a U-LLN
   where P2MP traffic needs to be supported and be maintained, even if
   for 1-2 times a day.

   Simulation studies, such as the on in [Tripathi-CISS]have verified
   that a reactive protocol suffers from high (over hundred seconds)
   end-to-end delay and large control overhead when P2MP traffic exists
   in the network.

3.2.  Inability to support MP2P traffic pattern














Tripathi, et al.        Expires January 07, 2014                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft    Reactive Protocol Evaluation in LLNs         July 2013


   Likewise P2MP traffic, MP2P traffic needs to be supported by a
   routing protocol intended for an LLN.  This traffic pattern arises
   when multiple nodes may try to send data to a single sink at the same
   time.  As [RFC5548] describes, "A U-LLN should support occasional
   large-scale traffic flows from sensing nodes through LBRs (to nodes
   outside the U-LLN), such as system-wide alerts."  By nature, this
   kind of traffic may be time-critical, and the alerts may need to be
   delivered within a small time-frame.  Similar traffic may include
   critical scenarios in an industrial automation LLN deployment, where
   all nodes in one area may need to report malfunction, fire, or other
   emergency in that part of the manufacturing plant.

   Since, by default, reactive routing does not provide any efficient
   MP2P routing paradigm, all nodes will create their own route request
   (RREQ) in order to find the route to the LBR or server, if the route
   is expired or not cached.  This situation will create separate
   broadcast control messages from each node, which may lead to a
   broadcast storm in the network, similar to the P2MP traffic scenario.
   The broadcast storm may result in individual RREPs reaching the
   initiator node much later, yielding a high delay for the time-
   critical alert packets.

   Routing for MP2P traffic is therefore not efficient or optimized, and
   does not follow an aggregation tree neither any such hierarchy is
   maintained in reactive protocols.  As a result, it is difficult to
   devise a data aggregation algorithm compatible to AODV or any of its
   derivatives.

4.  Dependency of control overhead on application module

   An LLN that is provisioned to be used for data gathering purpose
   today may include additional application layer modules in the future.
   Smart grid deployments may need to implement new modules of
   management traffic from the base stations to AMI meters, in addition
   to what is envisioned at present.  LLNs are evolving and therefore it
   is expected that new applications and requirements will be part of
   its future (an LLN may also be re-purposed).

   Reactive protocols discover route to destination on an on-demand
   basis.  If communication between same source-destination pair are
   spaced far apart in time, the protocol tends to discover the routes
   every time communication is requested by the application layer.  With
   reactive routing protocols, adding a new application module which
   requires more data communication in between the existing data traffic
   pattern will incur control overhead.  Hence, if a network is designed
   to operate within bounds in terms of maximum control overhead load,
   adding new application modules may well force the control overhead to
   surpass the designed maximum limit.  For example, a deployment



Tripathi, et al.        Expires January 07, 2014                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft    Reactive Protocol Evaluation in LLNs         July 2013


   requiring both MP2P and P2P application may incur more overhead than
   a deployment which is currently working with only data aggregation.
   Since LLNs will undoubtedly require more application modules and
   management modules to be augmented in future, a suitable routing
   protocol should be able to cope with the added traffic.  For the sake
   of illustration, many smart grid networks, which were originally
   designed for the purpose of advanced metering, now require a multi-
   service networks in support of a variety of applications including
   meter reading, use of meters of alarms, distribution automation and
   electric vehicles, leading to a variety of traffic patterns each with
   different quality of service requirements.

   As we observed in [Tripathi-CISS], even for a smaller network with
   less than 100 nodes, if the application data rate is increased from
   once in 12 hours to once an hour, the control overhead for a reactive
   protocol such as LOADng gets magnified by about 10 times.

5.  Flooding issues in LLNs

   A reactive protocol is well-suited for a traffic pattern where data
   transfer is not very frequent.  However, if the traffic pattern
   includes periodic data reporting, even as low as a few times in a
   day, the traffic pattern will induce periodic broadcast of route
   request throughout the network.  A simple example scenario can
   clarify this: assume an application in a U-LLN requires periodic data
   reporting every 6 hours or 4 times in a day - morning, noon, evening
   and night.  If the network consists of 2000 nodes, which is a very
   conservative number in a typical U-LLN, the application alone will
   create a route request broadcast for each sensor node every 11
   seconds, on average.  Thus, over the life of the sensor network, a
   reactive protocol will use more control overhead than a proactive
   protocol.

   The amount of flooding to discover routes may also be controlled via
   tweaking the route expiry time or route validity time.  If a route is
   active, nodes should not waste network resources trying to find out
   the route to the same destination.  Keeping a high expiry time for
   the routes, on the other hand may prevent flooding the next time data
   is generated for the same destination.  However, the path may well
   have been invalid by the route expiry time.  Considering LLN link
   characteristics, link flapping is a very frequent event.  Hence, high
   route expiry time may lead a node to find out invalidity of a path,
   thus forcing to flood the network again for route discovery.  Thus,
   increasing route expiry time or route validity time for an AODV-based
   reactive protocol may not prove to control flooding in LLN.
   Proactively choosing a back-up path proves to be an effective way to
   ensure valid routing path in presence of link flaps, whereas reactive
   routing approaches are not able to cope with link dynamics, thus



Tripathi, et al.        Expires January 07, 2014                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft    Reactive Protocol Evaluation in LLNs         July 2013


   preventing its usage for LLNs.  Furthermore, if traffic is sent along
   a broken path, a new request would consequently be generated, thus
   increasing the control traffic load, in addition to incurring
   additional delays for the user data.

5.1.  Impact of flooding in battery operated nodes

   Note that there is a lot of experimental evidence supporting the
   claim that using flooding or scoped flooding to discover routes is
   ill-suited to low-power and lossy networks (LLNs).  This is due to
   the low-power requirement.  In low-power wireless networks, broadcast
   packets usually cost much more energy by the hardware to transmit
   than unicast ones.  However, at this point, we would exclude
   consideration of such hardware dependent energy expense from our
   discussion.

6.  Impact on memory

   Reactive routing protocols usually rely on route caching for
   discovered destination.  Hence, if any node participates in multiple
   active flows in the network, the node needs to store next hop (and
   validity) information for each source and destination node in the
   network.  Thus, depending on the user traffic, some nodes tend to
   increase their routing table size proportional to the number of flows
   passing through themselves.  Hence, the nodes require more memory
   storage to operate successfully in these networks, depending on the
   traffic pattern.  However, characteristics of LLNs never guarantee
   enough storage space in any node for storing routing tables.  In
   LLNs, thus it is always advantageous to store route to a subset of
   nodes and still be able to find a path to any destination in the
   network.  Reactive routing protocols, in their current specification
   or any variant, fail to achieve low memory requirement in nodes in
   the context of large scale LLNs.

   Destination oriented flooding in LLN, tends to worsen this situation.
   Multiple route requests may reach the same node at the same time for
   different destinations.  Even though the destination may never be
   reached through the concerned node, the node still has to process and
   re-broadcast each request, along with its neighbors.  Vital memory is
   consumed in RREQ/RREP processing and buffering in this method.

   As we observed during simulation study and in [Tripathi-CISS], the
   memory requirement in a reactive protocol such as LOADng grows with
   the network scale considerably.  More specifically, they depend on
   number of active flows through a node, or number of destinations a
   node serves for which the routes have not expired yet.  For a large
   network of over 2000 nodes, the total memory occupancy for a node,
   including route tables and buffered packets, for a reactive protocol



Tripathi, et al.        Expires January 07, 2014                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft    Reactive Protocol Evaluation in LLNs         July 2013


   may reach over 200 KB, as observed during simulation.  Even for a
   small home automation network, the authors in [Malisa-WCNC] pointed
   out, that the number of route entries and thus memory consumption
   depends on route expiry time for a reactive protocol.  With increase
   in the route expiry time or route hold time, average number of route
   entries in a node increases.  If the route expiry time is higher, the
   number of entries increases more sharply with increase in network
   size.  However, at the same time, the study in [Malisa-WCNC] agrees
   with the study conducted in [Tripathi-CISS] that with decrease in
   route expiry time in order to save memory, control overhead increases
   as predicted in section 5.

7.  Lack of support for routing based on node capability

   Apart from providing a route between any two nodes in the network, a
   routing protocol suitable for LLN should be able to handle additional
   constraints.  An LLN mainly consists of constrained devices, both
   functionality and memory-wise, and inherently heterogeneous in
   nature.  Hence, any routing protocol suitable for LLNs should support
   node constraint based routing.  This requirement is mandated in
   [RFC5548] as follows: " the routing protocol MUST be able to
   advertise node capabilities that will be exclusively used by the
   routing protocol engine for routing decision".  For example, the
   routing protocol should avoid a node with less battery power while
   routing to reach a server.  Similarly, for industrial automation
   requirements, [RFC5673] also needs a routing protocol to provide
   device-aware routing, as it describes "The routing algorithm MUST
   support node-constrained routing (e.g., taking into account the
   existing energy state as a node constraint).  Node constraints
   include power and memory, as well as constraints placed on the device
   by the user, such as battery life".  For home routing automation,
   [RFC5826] specifies, "The routing protocol SHOULD route via mains-
   powered nodes if possible.  The routing protocol MUST support
   constraint-based routing taking into account node properties (CPU,
   memory, level of energy, sleep intervals, safety/convenience of
   changing battery)".

   Clearly, recognizing a node's capability and routing accordingly is
   an important aspect for any routing protocol designed to be suitable
   for LLNs.  However, any AODV-based protocol (such as DYMO
   [I-D.DYMO]and LOADng), in their current specification, fail to
   provide routes based on any such constraint.  Currently known
   reactive routing protocols do not have any provision to determine
   whether the next-hop node in a route has enough battery power to
   sustain the route, or whether the next-hop node is main powered or
   provides a particular functionality.  Thus, these protocols fail to
   provide requirements mandated by [RFC5548], [RFC5673] and [RFC5826]
   for routing in an LLN.



Tripathi, et al.        Expires January 07, 2014                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft    Reactive Protocol Evaluation in LLNs         July 2013


8.  High delay for emergency traffic

   Some data in an LLN are delay sensitive by nature.  While data
   generated for periodic reporting can be delivered even up to few
   seconds later, emergency alarms, fault notification and alert packets
   need to be delivered as quickly as possible.  According to [RFC5673],
   in an industrial automation setting, "Non-critical closed-loop
   applications have a latency requirement that can be as low as 100
   milliseconds but many control loops are tolerant of latencies above 1
   second".  Clearly, these types of alert packets need a path to the
   destination beforehand as soon as they are generated.  However,
   reactive protocols depend on finding a path when data is generated.
   Since the receipt of an RREP packet can take up to the network
   traversal time, for large networks the delivery of an emergency
   packet may take more than few hundred milliseconds.  Also, if this
   emergency situation initiates a system wide alert from all nodes in
   the region to one or multiple servers outside the LLN, each node will
   create their own broadcast to reach the destination.  Similar to the
   condition in section 3, the broadcast storm may lead to huge delay in
   receipt of RREP packets, and thus delay in delivering the emergency
   packet.  The broadcast will lead to high control overhead, clogging
   the network, as well as loss of some RREQ/RREP packets.

   Indeed, reactive protocols provide a very high unreliability in delay
   bound for any number of hop distance to the destination.  The delay
   is small when an active path is available, but high when the source
   has to issue a route request.  The delay is a few magnitudes larger
   when multiple route requests/replies are simultaneously active.  As
   observed during simulation and in [Tripathi-CISS], a reactive
   protocol as LOADng may take from tens of seconds to hundreds of
   seconds to deliver the data, depending on the network size and
   whether multiple RREQs/RREPs are active.  Unreliability in delay
   bound has been found to be as high as 95% confidence interval in
   average end-to-end delay for the data packets.  Also in
   [Malisa-WCNC], the authors pointed out how reactive protocols, even
   for a small home automation network presents large delay in order of
   a few seconds which increases with decrease in route expiry time.

9.  Acknowledgements

   TBD

10.  Informative References

   [I-D.DYMO]
              Perkins, C., Ed., Ratliff, S., Ed., and J. Dowdell, Ed.,
              "Dynamic MANET On-demand (AODVv2) Routing", Work in
              Progress, February 2013.



Tripathi, et al.        Expires January 07, 2014                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft    Reactive Protocol Evaluation in LLNs         July 2013


   [I-D.Perkins-AODVv2]
              Perkins, C., Ed., Ratliff, S., Ed., and J. Dowdell, Ed.,
              "Dynamic MANET On-demand (AODVv2) Routing", Work in
              Progress, March 2013.

   [I-D.clausen-lln-loadng]
              Clausen, T., Ed., Yi, J., Ed., Niktash, A., Ed., Igarashi,
              Y., Ed., Satoh, H., Ed., Herberg, U., Ed., Lavenu, C.,
              Ed., Lys, T., Ed., Perkins, C., Ed., and J. Dean, Ed.,
              "The Lightweight On-demand Ad hoc Distance-vector Routing
              Protocol - Next Generation (LOADng)", Work in Progress,
              January 2013.

   [Malisa-WCNC]
              Vucinic, M., Ed., Tourancheau, B., Ed., and A. Duda, Ed.,
              "Performance Comparison of the RPL and LOADng Routing
              Protocols in a Home Automation Scenario", IEEE WCNC -
              Wireless Communications and Networking Conference 2013
              2013, June 2013.

   [RFC3561]  Perkins, C., Belding-Royer, E., and S. Das, "Ad hoc On-
              Demand Distance Vector (AODV) Routing", RFC 3561, July
              2003.

   [RFC5548]  Dohler, M., Ed., Watteyne, T., Ed., Winter, T., Ed., and
              D. Barthel, Ed., "Routing Requirements for Urban Low-Power
              and Lossy Networks", RFC 5548, May 2009.

   [RFC5673]  Pister, K., Ed., Thubert, P., Ed., Dwars, S., and T.
              Phinney, "Industrial Routing Requirements in Low-Power and
              Lossy Networks", RFC 5673, October 2009.

   [RFC5826]  Brandt, A., Buron, J., and G. Porcu, "Home Automation
              Routing Requirements in Low-Power and Lossy Networks", RFC
              5826, April 2010.

   [RFC5867]  Martocci, J., Ed., De Mil, P., Riou, N., and W. Vermeylen,
              "Building Automation Routing Requirements in Low-Power and
              Lossy Networks", RFC 5867, June 2010.

   [RFC6550]  Winter, T., Thubert, P., Brandt, A., Hui, J., Kelsey, R.,
              Levis, P., Pister, K., Struik, R., Vasseur, JP., and R.
              Alexander, "RPL: IPv6 Routing Protocol for Low-Power and
              Lossy Networks", RFC 6550, March 2012.

   [ROLL-TERMS]
              Vasseur, JP., "Terminology in Low power And Lossy
              Networks", Work in Progress, September 2011.



Tripathi, et al.        Expires January 07, 2014               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft    Reactive Protocol Evaluation in LLNs         July 2013


   [Tripathi-CISS]
              Tripathi, J., Ed. and J. de Oliveira, Ed., "Proactive
              versus Reactive Revisited: IPv6 Routing for Low Power
              Lossy Networks", 47th Annual Conference on Information
              Science and Systems (CISS), 2013, March 2013.

   [clausen-load-vtc]
              Clausen, T., Ed., Yi, J., Ed., and A. de Verdiere, Ed.,
              "LOADng: Towards AODV Version 2", Vehicular Technology
              Conference (VTC Fall), 2012 IEEE, September 2012.

Authors' Addresses

   Joydeep Tripathi (editor)
   Drexel University
   3141 Chestnut Street 7-313
   Philadelphia, PA  19104
   USA

   Email: jt369@drexel.edu


   Jaudelice C. de Oliveira (editor)
   Drexel University
   3141 Chestnut Street 7-313
   Philadelphia, PA  19104
   USA

   Email: jau@coe.drexel.edu


   C. Chauvenet (editor)
   Watteco.
   1766, Chemin de la Planquette
   La Garde.  83130
   France

   Email: c.chauvenet@watteco.com


   JP Vasseur (editor)
   Cisco Systems, Inc.
   11, Rue Camille Desmoulins
   Issy Les Moulineaux  92782
   France

   Email: jpv@cisco.com




Tripathi, et al.        Expires January 07, 2014               [Page 11]
