


Networking Working Group                                J. Tripathi, Ed.
Internet-Draft                                       J. de Oliveira, Ed.
Intended status: Informational                         Drexel University
Expires: June 24, 2010                                  JP. Vasseur, Ed.
                                                     Cisco Systems, Inc.
                                                       December 21, 2009


   Performance Evaluation of Routing Protocol for Low Power and Lossy
                             Networks (RPL)
                 draft-tripathi-roll-rpl-simulation-01

Abstract

   This document presents a performance evaluation of the Routing
   Protocol for Low power and Lossy Networks (RPL).  Detailed
   simulations are carried out to produce several routing performance
   metrics using a set of real-life scenarios.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on June 24, 2010.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2009 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal



Tripathi, et al.          Expires June 24, 2010                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft    draft-tripathi-roll-rpl-simulation-01    December 2009


   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   3.  Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   4.  Simulation Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   5.  Metrics to evaluate RPL  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     5.1.  Common Assumptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     5.2.  Path Quality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     5.3.  Routing Table Size . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     5.4.  Control Packet Overhead  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     5.5.  Loss of connectivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   6.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     6.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     6.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11

























Tripathi, et al.          Expires June 24, 2010                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft    draft-tripathi-roll-rpl-simulation-01    December 2009


1.  Terminology

      PDR - Packet Delivery Ratio

   Please refer to additional terminology in
   [I-D.ietf-roll-terminology].


2.  Introduction

   Designing routing in low power devices and lossy link networks
   imposes great challenges, mainly due to low data rates, high
   probability of packet delivery failure, and strict energy constraint
   in nodes.  The IETF ROLL Working Group has specified the Routing
   Protocol for Low power and Lossy Networks (RPL) in
   [I-D.ietf-roll-rpl].

   RPL is designed to meet the core requirements specified in
   [I-D.ietf-roll-home-routing-reqs],[I-D.ietf-roll-building-routing-req
   s],[I-D.ietf-roll-indus-routing-reqs] and [RFC5548].

   This document's contribution is to provide several routing
   performance metrics of RPL using a decrete event simulator in various
   real-life deployment scenarios.  Each result has been checked against
   several real-life deployed networks.  Several routing metrics are
   evaluated in this document:

   o  Path quality metrics;

   o  Control plane overhead;

   o  Ability to cope with unstable situations (link churns, node
      dying);

   o  Required resource constraints on nodes (routing table size, etc.).

   Feedback from the ROLL Working Group are welcome to add new
   evaluation metrics of potential interest in further revisions of this
   document.

   Although simulation cannot prove formally that a protocol operates
   properly in all situations, it could give a good level of confidence
   in protocol behavior in highly stressful conditions, if and only if
   real life data are used.  Simulation is particularly useful
   especially when theoretical model assumptions may not be applicable
   to such networks and scenarios.  Therefore, real deployed network
   data traces have been used to model link behaviors.




Tripathi, et al.          Expires June 24, 2010                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft    draft-tripathi-roll-rpl-simulation-01    December 2009


3.  Method

   RPL was simulated using OMNET++ [OMNETpp], a well-known discrete
   event based simulator written in C++ and NED.  Castalia-2.2
   [Castalia-2.2] has been used as Wireless Sensor Network Simulator
   framework within OMNET++.  The output and events in the simulating
   are visualized with the help of the Network AniMator or NAM, which is
   distributed with NS (Network Simulator). [NS-2]

   Note that NS or any of its versions were not used in this simulation
   study.  Only the visualization tool was borrowed for verification
   purposes.  As noted, real link layer data gathered from networks
   deployed on the field were used to compute the PDR (Packet Delivery
   Ratio) for each of the links in the network.  By contrast with
   theoretical models (e.g.  Markov Chains) which may have assumptions
   not applicable to lossy links, real-life data has been used for two
   aspects of the simulations:

   * Link failure model: Time varying real network traces containing
   packet delivery probability for each link and over all channels for
   both indoor network deployment and outdoor network deployment were
   used.  Thus, different types of link characteristics are used in the
   study.

   * Topology: The topologies are gathered from real-life deployment
   (traces mentioned above) as opposed to random topology simulations.


4.  Simulation Setup

   A 45 node topology, shown in Figure 1, gathered from a real
   deployment, was used in the simulations.

   Figure 1
   Figure 1: Network topology for preliminary simulation results.

   Note that this is just a start to validate the simulation before
   using large scale networks.

   A database of time varying link quality data, gathered from real
   network deployment, was created.  Each link in the topology randomly
   'picks up' a link model from the database, and the link's PDR varies
   according to the gathered data.  Packets are dropped randomly from
   that link with probability (1 - PDR).  Each link has a PDR that
   varies with time (in the simulation, the new PDR is read from the
   database every 10 minutes).  Each time a packet arrives at the Radio
   of a node, the module generates a random number by the Mersenne
   Twister Random number generation method.  The random number is



Tripathi, et al.          Expires June 24, 2010                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft    draft-tripathi-roll-rpl-simulation-01    December 2009


   compared to the PDR to determine whether the packet should be dropped
   or not.  Note that each link use a different random number generator
   to maintain true randomness in the simulator, and to avoid
   correlation between links.  Also, the packet drop applies to all
   kinds of data and control packets (RPL) such as the DIO, DAO, DIS
   packets defined in [I-D.ietf-roll-rpl].

   In simulating RPL, the LBR first initiates sending out DIO messages,
   and the DAG is gradually constructed.  The trickle time interval for
   emitting DIO message assumes the initial value of 1 second, and then
   changes over simulation time as mentioned in [I-D.ietf-roll-rpl].

   I_min is initially set to 1 second and I_doubling is equal to 16, so
   that maximum time between two consecutive DIO emissions by a node
   (under a steady network condition) is 18.2 hours.  Another objective
   of this study is to give insight to the network administrator on how
   to tweak the trickle values.  These recommendations could then be
   used in applicability statement documents.  Further revision of this
   document will include simulations for large scale networks with
   varied parameters and show how quickly the network will stabilize,
   comparing data/control traffic and studying the tradeoff between
   reactivity and lifetime.

   Each node in the network, other than the LBR, also emits DAO messages
   as specified in [I-D.ietf-roll-rpl], to initially populate the
   routing tables with the prefixes received from children via the DAO
   messages in support of the Point to Point (P2P) and Point to
   Multipoint traffic (P2MP) in the "down" direction.  In this revision
   of the document, it is assumed that each node is capable of storing
   route information for other nodes in the network.  In futher revision
   of this document nodes without storage capability will be added to
   the network to see the influence of extra states on the nodes and the
   additional control plane overhead to propagate the route records
   thanks to Reverse Route Stacks in the DAO messages.

   For nodes implementing RPL, the routing table memory requirement
   varies according to the position in the DAG.  The worst-case
   assumption that there is no route summarization in the network is
   made.  Thus a node closer to the DAG will have to store more routing
   entries.  Further revision of this document will explore the
   influence of performing route summarization along the DAG, which
   could be performed thanks to a newly defined Objective Function or
   new address provisioning techniques.  It is also assumed that all
   nodes have equal memory capacity to store the routing states,
   therefore no source routing is required.

   Each node sends traffic according to a Constant Bit Rate (CBR) to all
   other nodes in the network over the simulation period.  To simulate a



Tripathi, et al.          Expires June 24, 2010                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft    draft-tripathi-roll-rpl-simulation-01    December 2009


   more realistic scenario, 20% of the generated packets by each node
   are destined to the root, and the remaining 80% of the packets are
   uniformily assigned as destined to nodes other than the root.
   Therefore the root receives a considerably larger amount of data than
   other nodes.  These values may be revised when studying the P2P
   traffic so as to have a majority of traffic going to all nodes as
   opposed to the root.

   The packets are routed through the DAG built by RPL according to the
   mechanisms specified in [I-D.ietf-roll-rpl].

   Since RPL is an IP routing protocol, no assumption is made on the
   link layer, thus potential gains in terms of header compression
   provided by 6loWPAN is not under consideration [draft-iphc].

   A number of RPL parameters are configured (such as Packet Rate from
   each source, Time Period of the LBR emitting new DAG sequence number)
   to observe their effect on RPL performance metric of interest.


5.  Metrics to evaluate RPL

5.1.  Common Assumptions

   Routing Table Size: as the DAO messages help to feed the routing
   tables in the network, routing table size for each node are recorded.
   Currently, the routing table size is not in terms of Kbyte of memory
   usage but measured in terms of number of entries for each node.  Each
   entry has next hop node and path cost associated with the destination
   node.  In further revision a single full 128-bit address per leaf
   plus a few bits to store other information and flags will be used.

   The ETX (Expected Transmission Count) metric is used to build the DAG
   as specified in [I-D.ietf-roll-routing-metrics].  Further revisions
   of this document will include other metrics and constraints such as
   the Hop count.

5.2.  Path Quality

   Number of Hops: For each pair of source and destination, the average
   number of hops for both RPL and shortest path routing is computed.
   Shortest path routing refers to an hypothetical ideal routing
   protocol that would always provide the shortest path in term of Total
   ETX (or whichever metric is used) in the network.  The Cumulative
   Distribution Function (CDF) of hop distance for all paths (which is
   equal to n*(n-1) in an n node network) in the network with respect to
   number of hops is plotted in Figure 2 for both RPL and shortest path
   routing.  One can observe that the CDF corresponding to 4 hops is



Tripathi, et al.          Expires June 24, 2010                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft    draft-tripathi-roll-rpl-simulation-01    December 2009


   around 80% for RPL and 90% for shortest path routing.  This means,
   for the given topology, 90% of paths will have path length of 4 hops
   or less with an ideal shortest path routing methodology, whereas in
   RPL Point-to-Point (P2P) routing, 90% of paths will have a length
   shorter or equal to 5 hops.  This result shows that despite having a
   non optimized P2P routing scheme, the path quality of RPL is not much
   worse than an optimized one for the topology in consideration.
   Another reason may be, the sink is at the center of the network, so
   routing through the sink is often close to an optimal (shortest path)
   routing.  This result may be different in a topology where the sink
   is located at one end of the network.
   Figure 2
   Figure 2: CDF: hop distance versus number of hops.

   Total ETX: When optimizing ETX metric along the path is used as an
   objective function, the total ETX along the path is computed for each
   pair.  Figure 3 shows the CDF of the total number of ETX to deliver a
   packet from a source to any destination node with respect to total
   ETX of the path from each source to each destination for the network,
   for both RPL, and a shortest path mechanism.  Here also one observes
   that total ETX along the path from all source to all destination is
   close to that of a shortest path for the network in our simulation.
   Figure 3
   Figure 3.: CDF: Total ETX along path versus ETX value.

5.3.  Routing Table Size

   The objective of this metric is to observe the distribution of the
   the number of entries per node.  Figure 4 shows the CDF of required
   number of routing table entries for all nodes.  One can see, that 90%
   of the nodes need to store less than 10 entries in their routing
   cache.
   Figure 4
   Figure 4.: CDF of routing table size with respect to number of nodes.

5.4.  Control Packet Overhead

   The control plane overhead is an important routing metric in Low
   power and Lossy Networks (LLNs).  Indeed, it is imperative to bound
   the control plane overhead.  One of the distinctive charateristics of
   RPL is that it makes use of trickle timers so as to reduce the number
   of control plane packets by eliminating redundant messages.  The aim
   of this metric is thus to analyse the control plane overhead in
   stable condition (no network element failure overhead) and in the
   presence of failures.

   Data and control plane traffic comparison for each node: Figure 5
   shows the comparison of the amount of data packets transmitted



Tripathi, et al.          Expires June 24, 2010                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft    draft-tripathi-roll-rpl-simulation-01    December 2009


   (including forwarded) and control packets (DIO and DAO messages)
   transmitted for each node when minimizing ETX is used by the OCP
   along the DAG.  Here one can observe that considerable amount of
   traffic is routed through the sink itself.  And also the fact that
   the amount of control traffic is really negligible in the protocol is
   reinforced.  As expected, the nodes closer to sink and that act as
   forwarders have much more data packet transmission than other nodes.
   The leaf nodes have comparable amount of data and control packet
   transmission, as they do not take part in routing the data.
   Figure 5
   Figure 5: Amount of data and control packets transmitted for each
   node when minimizing ETX is used OCP along the DAG.

   Data and Control Packet Transmission with respect to time: In Figures
   6, 7 and 8, the amount of data and control packets transmitted for
   node 12 (high rank in DAG), node 43 (in the middle) and node 31 (leaf
   node)are shown, respectively.  These values stand for number of
   packets transmitted for each 10 minutes intervals, to help understand
   what is the density of data and control packet exchange in the
   network.  One can observe as the node is closer to the sink, the
   amount of data is larger, and the amount of control traffic is
   negligible in comparison to the data traffic.  Also, the variation in
   data traffic is much larger for a node closer to sink, because the
   destination of the packets varies over time, and 20% of the packets
   are destined to sink only.  For the nodes that are further away from
   sink , the variation in data traffic becomes lesser, and the amount
   of data traffic is also smaller.

   The control traffic for the nodes has a wave-like pattern.  The
   amount of control packets for each node drops quickly as the DAG
   stabilizes due to the effect of trickle timer.  However, as a new DAG
   Sequence is advertised, the trickles are reset and the nodes start
   emiting DIO frequently again to stabilize the DAG.  One can see, for
   a node closer to sink, the data packet amount is much higher than
   control packet, and somewhat oscillatory around a mean value.  The
   control packet amount exhibits a 'saw-tooth' behavior, mainly because
   as ETX was used, and as when PDR changes, ETX for a child node to its
   parent changes, which results in changing DAG depth of the child.
   This event resets the trickle timer and emit RA-DIO.  Also, issue of
   a new DAG Sequence number triggers DAG recomputation and resets the
   trickle timers.  Therefore, one can observe that the number of
   control packets attains a high value for one interval, and the amount
   comes down to lower values for subsequent intervals.  Also, for leaf
   nodes the amount of control packets are more than data packets, as
   leaf nodes are more prone to face changes in their DAG depth as
   opposed to nodes closer to sink when the link PDR in the topology
   changes dynamically.




Tripathi, et al.          Expires June 24, 2010                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft    draft-tripathi-roll-rpl-simulation-01    December 2009


   Figure 6
   Figure 6: Amount of data and control packets transmitted for node 12.
   Figure 7
   Figure 7: Amount of data and control packets transmitted for node 43.
   Figure 8
   Figure 8: Amount of data and control packets transmitted for node 31.

5.5.  Loss of connectivity

   Upon link failures, a node may loose both his parents (preferred and
   backup) and its sibling (if any).  In this case, if a packet has to
   be sent and the routing table does not contain an entry for the
   corresponding destination the packet is dropped.  RPL proposes two
   mechanims for DAG repairs, known as global repair and local repair.
   In this version of the document, simulation results are presented to
   evaluate the amount of time packets are lost because of loss of
   connectivity.  The idea is to tune the frequency at which new
   DAGSequenceNumbers are generated by the DAG root that are used for
   global repair.  It is expected that a higher frequency will lead to
   shorter duration of connectivity loss at a price of a higher rate of
   control packet in the network.

   Figure 9 shows the CDF of time spent by any node without any service,
   when the packet rate from the sources is a packet each 10 seconds,
   and new DAG sequence number is issued every 10 minutes.  This plot
   reflects the property of RPL without any Local Repair scheme.  When
   all the parents (and siblings) are temporarily unreachable from a
   node, the time before it hears a DIO from another node is recorded,
   which gives the time without service.  In some cases, this value
   might go up to the DAG Repair Timer value, because untill a DIO is
   heard, the link outage is not solved.

   The effect of the DAG Repair Timer on time without service is plotted
   in Figure 10, where the source rate is 20seconds/packet and in Figure
   11, where the source sends a packet every 10 seconds.  In the next
   revision, Local Repair scheme will be implemented along with RPL to
   compare the service outage time with Global Repair scheme.
   Figure 9
   Figure 9: CDF: Loss of connectivity
   Figure 10
   Figure 10: CDF: Loss of connectivity for different Global Repair
   Period, Packet Rate 20/s
   Figure 11
   Figure 11: CDF: Loss of connectivity for different Global Repair
   Period, Packet Rate 10/s

   Figure 12 shows effect of DAG Global repair timer period on control
   traffic.  As the period to emit new DAG sequence increases, the



Tripathi, et al.          Expires June 24, 2010                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft    draft-tripathi-roll-rpl-simulation-01    December 2009


   amount of control traffic also decreases because the trickle interval
   gets larger for each node, which is pretty intuitive.  However this
   smaller amount of control traffic comes at a price of increased time
   for loss of connectivity.
   Figure 12
   Figure 12: Amount of control traffic for different Global Repair
   Timer Period


6.  References

6.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

6.2.  Informative References

   [Castalia-2.2]
              Boulis, A., "Castalia: Revealing pitfalls in designing
              distributed algorithms in WSN, in Proceedings of the 5th
              international conference on Embedded networked sensor
              systems (SenSys'07)", 2007.

   [I-D.ietf-roll-building-routing-reqs]
              Martocci, J., Riou, N., Mil, P., and W. Vermeylen,
              "Building Automation Routing Requirements in Low Power and
              Lossy Networks, draft-ietf-roll-building-routing-reqs-07
              (work in progress)", September 2009.

   [I-D.ietf-roll-home-routing-reqs]
              Brandt, A., Buron, J., and G. Porcu, "Home Automation
              Routing Requirements in Low Power and Lossy Networks,
              draft-ietf-roll-home-routing-reqs-08 (work in progress)",
              September 2009.

   [I-D.ietf-roll-indus-routing-reqs]
              Pister, K., Thubert, P.,  Dwars, S., Phinney, T.,
              "Industrial Routing Requirements in Low Power and Lossy
              Networks, draft-ietf-roll-indus-routing-reqs-06 (work in
              progress)", June 2009.

   [I-D.ietf-roll-routing-metrics]
              Vasseur, J. and D. Networks, "Routing Metrics used for
              Path Calculation in Low Power and Lossy Networks",
              draft-ietf-roll-routing-metrics-04 (work in progress),
              December 2009.




Tripathi, et al.          Expires June 24, 2010                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft    draft-tripathi-roll-rpl-simulation-01    December 2009


   [I-D.ietf-roll-rpl]
              Winter, T., Thubert, P., et al., "RPL: Routing Protocol
              for Low Power and Lossy Networks, draft-ietf-roll-rpl-04
              (work in progress)", November 2009.

   [I-D.ietf-roll-terminology]
              JP Vasseur, "Terminology in Low power And Lossy Networks,
              draft-ietf-roll-terminology-02 (work in progress)", May
              2009.

   [NS-2]     "The Network Simulator-2, http://www.isi.edu/nsnam/ns/".

   [OMNETpp]  Varga, "The OMNeT++ Discrete Event Simulation System, in
              Proceedings of the European Simulation Multiconference
              (ESM'2001)", June 2001.

   [RFC5548]  Dohler, M., Watteyne, T., Winter, T., and D. Barthel,
              "Routing Requirements for Urban Low-Power and Lossy
              Networks", RFC 5548, May 2009.

   [draft-iphc]
              J. Jurski, "Limited IP Header Compression over PPP,
              draft-jurski-pppext-iphc-02.txt (work in progress)", March
              2007.


Authors' Addresses

   Joydeep Tripathi (editor)
   Drexel University
   3141 Chestnut Street 7-313
   Philadelphia, PA  19104
   USA

   Email: jt369@drexel.edu


   Jaudelice C. de Oliveira (editor)
   Drexel University
   3141 Chestnut Street 7-313
   Philadelphia, PA  19104
   USA

   Email: jau@ece.drexel.edu







Tripathi, et al.          Expires June 24, 2010                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft    draft-tripathi-roll-rpl-simulation-01    December 2009


   JP Vasseur (editor)
   Cisco Systems, Inc.
   11, Rue Camille Desmoulins
   Issy Les Moulineaux,   92782
   France

   Email: jpv@cisco.com












































Tripathi, et al.          Expires June 24, 2010                [Page 12]


