IETF MANET Working Group                                    T. Ramrekha
Internet-Draft                                             E. Panaousis
Intended status: Informational                               C. Politis
Expires: October 2011                                WMN Research Group
                                             Kingston University London
                                                           APR 21, 2011

 A Generic Cognitive Adaptive Module (CAM) for Ad Hoc Routing Protocols
                      draft-ramrekha-manet-cam-02.txt


Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with
   the provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   This document may contain material from IETF Documents or IETF
   Contributions published or made publicly available before November
   10, 2008. The person(s) controlling the copyright in some of this
   material may not have granted the IETF Trust the right to allow
   modifications of such material outside the IETF Standards Process.
   Without obtaining an adequate license from the person(s) controlling
   the copyright in such materials, this document may not be modified
   outside the IETF Standards Process, and derivative works of it may
   not be created outside the IETF Standards Process, except to format
   it for publication as an RFC or to translate it into languages other
   than English.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents
   at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as
   reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html

   This Internet-Draft will expire on October 21, 2011.





Ramrekha et al.        Expires October 21, 2011                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft      Cognitive Adaptive Module (CAM)          April 2011


Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors. All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document. Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with
   respect to this document.

Abstract

   This document describes a generic Cognitive Adaptive Module (CAM)
   that can be utilized in conjunction with Mobile Ad hoc Network
   (MANET) routing protocols. The main concept behind CAM is the fact
   that the provisioning of multimedia communications traditionally
   requires routing Quality of Service (QoS) guarantees [9]. Such a
   task is NP Complete in MANETs when QoS optimization is subject to
   more than one parameter [9]. Hence, the provisioning of soft QoS
   guarantees for effective and efficient routing in dynamic
   environments, as specified in [1], is the best alternative. However,
   the latter cannot be optimally achieved by using a single metric
   based path selection process or routing approach due to variations
   in both upper layer service QoS requirements and situational
   constraints. CAM provides interfaces to routing components such that
   protocols can be segmented into these components and can be easily
   made configurable and adaptive. For instance, the route selection
   process can be done in an adaptive manner to satisfy the
   requirements for effective and efficient routing. This is achieved
   by providing interfaces from the CAM core to various user defined
   components (e.g. Repositories Component) such that all components
   and component parts (e.g. DYMO reactive routing logic) can inter-
   communicate.

1. Introduction

   The autonomous nature of Mobile Ad hoc Networks (MANETs) makes them
   suitable for deployment in various scenarios. In such scenarios, the
   routing QoS is defined by the service requirements but the
   achievable QoS is limited by network and scenario constraints. A
   detailed list of these requirements and constraints is presented in
   [1].

   It can be deduced that rigid routing protocols based on a fixed
   route selection process that only consider single path metrics SHALL


Ramrekha et al.        Expires October 21, 2011                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft      Cognitive Adaptive Module (CAM)          April 2011


   NOT perform optimally in such dynamically varying environments.
   Although the network performance using such protocols MAY be
   satisfactory for specific scenarios, the routing approach performs
   sub-optimally for wider context usages.

   An adaptive approach using routing logics from well tested protocols
   such as [3] and [4] will provide a more flexible routing solution
   for the widespread use of MANETs. CAM is a generic module that
   provides interfaces for user defined routing components e.g.
   "Routing algorithms", "Repositories" and "Route quality"
   determination so that these are easily configurable and reusable for
   different scenarios. In addition, CAM offers interfaces to "Monitor"
   and "Adaptive" components that allow protocols to cognitively adapt
   its routing process in dynamic environments. This SHOULD enhance
   overall efficiency and effectiveness (both terms defined as design
   requirements in [1]) of routing algorithms. This version of CAM
   defines the appropriate module, interfaces and components necessary
   to enable this. Furthermore, this document describes the operation
   of a modified version of [10] that uses CAM. This CML version
   utilizes [3], [4] and [5] in order to adapt to various network sizes
   and node distributions by utilizing CAM as a facilitator towards
   making the protocol cognitive and adaptive.

   CAM optionally uses protocols and requirements defined in [3], [4],
   [5] and [10]. The module makes no assumption about the underlying
   link layer other than those made in [10].

2. Notation and Definitions

   lg - The base 2 logarithm function, so that 2^lg(x) = x.

   x||y - concatenation of bit string x and bit string y.

   |x| - number of bits in string x.

3. Conventions used in this document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [2].

3.1. CML Terminology

   This section defines terminology associated with CAM that are not
   already defined in or that differs in meaning from the terminology
   of [3], [4], [5], [7] and [10].



Ramrekha et al.        Expires October 21, 2011                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft      Cognitive Adaptive Module (CAM)          April 2011


   CAM Module - A collection of interfaces and generalized functions
   used to separate routing protocol components. Also defines
   components that are necessary for cognition and adaptation.

   CAM Interface - A structure defining the elements required and
   provided by the module.

   CAM Component - A structure containing definitions and
   implementations of routing logics and structures.

   Routing algorithm - A logic that defines a process for data packet
   delivery including route selection.

   Message passing - A method of transferring information from
   component parts to the CAM module and vice-versa.

   Threshold - A threshold for the context being monitored in the
   network e.g. density of network, network size, battery levels of
   nodes, etc.

   Upper_Threshold_C - The upper value of a threshold for a particular
   monitored MANET context such as network size, node density in the
   neighborhood and battery level of nodes.

   Lower_Threshold_C - The lower value of threshold for a particular
   monitored context.

   MANET Context - A set of characteristics describing the MANET and
   its environment as defined in [1]. This includes node mobility
   levels, small and large node groups as well as technological and
   environmental constraints such as limited battery life of devices
   and bandwidth limitations of wireless links.

   Monitors - A part of the Monitor Component that defines and
   implements necessary logic for user defined monitoring requirements
   for MANET contexts.

   Operation Band - The nodal routing state relative to the monitored
   Context being less than the threshold or more than threshold.

   Coarse variables - This identifies the component that is being
   targeted. The value of the coarse variable MAY be equal to the ID of
   the component for convenience.

   Fine variables - This identifies the parameter that needs to be
   modified within a component part. The variable value SHOULD uniquely
   identify variable parameters within each component part.


Ramrekha et al.        Expires October 21, 2011                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft      Cognitive Adaptive Module (CAM)          April 2011


   Trigger - An implemented logic in the CAM core that is used by the
   Monitors to activate specific Adaptive component parts when a
   threshold is exceeded.

4. Applicability

   This module is designed to be used with protocols that follow
   recommendations particularly from [1] and [7]. It also extends the
   concept of protocol segmentation as introduced by [7] for reasons
   specified thereby. Most notably segments from protocols [3] and [4]
   can be used within such parts of the component for ease of
   implementation and configuration. A standard MANET routing protocol
   should be able to provide optimal QoS performances in all situations
   and the main goal of CAM is to facilitate such an optimization by
   adding cognitive and adaptive features to routing algorithms so that
   they are best fitted for all application purposes and easily
   configurable by users. Examples and particularities of some possible
   scenarios (also mentioned in [1]) where MANETs could be deployed
   are:

   Emergency rescuer and military ad hoc communication - Rescuers and
      military participants will require multimedia communications
      (requiring low delay and delay jitter as well as high throughput
      routing QoS) in terrains where obstacles are common. Devices will
      have limited battery resources and the network topology (in terms
      of both network size and node distribution) will change regularly
      as participating nodes join or leave the network.

   Mesh-based wireless community networks - Community users are likely
      to access multimedia services. Since the topology consists of
      static rechargeable routers, energy spent for routing is not a
      limitation towards QoS provisioning. However, users might prefer
      more efficient energy utilization for greener and cheaper
      solutions while also maintaining the required QoS routing levels.

   Mesh-based wireless enterprise networks - Enterprise users (i.e.
      office users) are likely to access email and file transfer
      services (requiring low packet loss routing QoS). Since the nodes
      are rechargeable, energy limitation is not an issue but users
      might prefer more efficient energy utilization for greener and
      cheaper solutions.

   Smart home ad hoc networks - Home users MAY want to distribute
      content among home devices such as TV, IP-radios, laptops and
      PCs. Here "bursty" communication would be desired and proactive
      maintenance of route information MAY be inefficient and expensive
      in idle periods between bursts.


Ramrekha et al.        Expires October 21, 2011                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft      Cognitive Adaptive Module (CAM)          April 2011


   In addition, CAM SHOULD be useful for communication devices with
   multithreading capabilities such as new generation PDAs. Moreover,
   CAM MAY also be used for general purpose MANETs.

5. Protocol Functioning and Overview

   This document does not describe a protocol but a module that can
   incorporate parts of routing protocols such as [3], [4] and [5].
   Thus this section contains an overview of the module and its
   functional descriptions.

5.1. CAM Overview

   This module is designed to work as a facilitator in the deployment
   of adaptive routing protocols for MANETs including adaptive hybrid
   approaches such as [10]. It is required that CAM MUST be installed
   in each MANET node. The module consists of the module core and
   components as shown in Error! Reference source not found.. The core
   contains generic logic to enable data and control flow among
   components. Then, the pluggable components contain self-configurable
   logical parts that can be easily modified or defined by users.

5.2. CAM Core

   The module core contains essential data structures and logic
   definitions as well as implementations required by the module
   components. These SHOULD facilitate the configuration of well known
   routing parts into more adaptive and hybrid routing approaches.

5.2.1. Interfaces

   The core MUST implement interfaces for each defined component. Thus,
   the core can communicate to the components through these interfaces.
   Component-to-Component communication MUST only be possible via the
   core. Each interface is associated with a component ID. The core can
   then pass messages to the required component using its stored ID
   within core data structures.

5.2.2. Component and part IDs

   Each component and each component part is identified through a
   unique ID. This ID MAY be coded as a 'x' bit string where

   x = x_component || x_part

      |x_component| = (lg (Number of components))



Ramrekha et al.        Expires October 21, 2011                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft      Cognitive Adaptive Module (CAM)          April 2011


   |x_part| = (lg (Number of parts))

5.2.3. Thresholds and Triggers

   The core MUST define triggers for all the contexts being monitored
   in the Monitor component parts. To achieve this, an upper and lower
   threshold MUST be defined for each monitored context. The trigger is
   used to contact the Adaptive module if for a context C:

   1. (Previous_C_Value < Lower_Threshold_C) and (Current_C_Value>=
      Lower_Threshold_C) or

   2. (Previous_C_Value > Upper_Threshold_C) and (Current_C_Value<=
      Upper_Threshold_C)

   The trigger MUST contact the appropriate component by using the
   required IDs in order to change the operation band.

5.2.4. Component Coarse and Fine variables

   The core MUST define both coarse and fine variables for component
   parts. This will allow the core to change routing behavior according
   to context changes. For each active component part, a coarse
   variable MAY be assigned the component part ID. Then, for each
   defined coarse variable specifying a part, associated parameter
   names and values are stored. These values are set by the Adaptive
   component parts and are used to change the routing behavior of
   protocols. The CAM MUST be able to accommodate user defined
   components and parts.

6. Constants

6.1. Network Threshold and other parameter Values

   The considered constants Upper_Threshold_C, and Lower_Threshold_C
   values as well as coefficients a, b, c, d, e and f are found through
   experimentation or research results. These are dependent on the
   module components that are defined by the users and MUST be
   modifiable by the "Adaptive" Component.










Ramrekha et al.        Expires October 21, 2011                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft      Cognitive Adaptive Module (CAM)          April 2011


   In the case of CML the values for H1, H2, R, D1, D2, and N are also
   determined using experimental and research results. Other parameter
   values are specified in [3], [4] and [5].

7. Message Emission and Jitter

   Synchronization of control messages SHOULD be avoided as mentioned
   in [6].

8. IPv6 Considerations

   All the operations and parameters described in this document can be
   used for both IP version 4 and IP version 6. For IPv6 networks, the
   IPv4 addresses in the utilized packets and messages need to be
   replaced by IPv6 addresses. The packet and message sizes will also
   increase accordingly.

9. Security Considerations

   CAM SHOULD have a security component where logics for security
   measures are defined. There are special security considerations for
   MANET routing protocols as described in [16]. Apart from
   authentication, integrity, confidentiality and availability which
   MUST be satisfied for any MANET communication path to defend
   legitimate nodes against malicious external entities, intrusion
   detection SHOULD be designed for the CAM. Intrusion detection
   techniques SHOULD protect MANET against compromised entities, node
   capture attacks or jammers. These are more critical security
   vulnerabilities since cryptographic techniques cannot prevent them.
   Smart intrusion detection and prevention mechanisms MUST be adopted
   by CAM to recognize any adversary that has succeeded to penetrate
   the cryptographic primitives or it has launched a denial of service
   attack.

   In a MANET, which uses IDSs (intrusion detection systems) integrated
   into the nodes, to detect attacks, apart from the energy spent for
   forwarding, some important part of the energy is spent for detection
   purposes. Thus, CAM SHOULD be aware of the energy spent by the IDSs
   as well as the residual energy of the (i) relay nodes and (ii) the
   detection nodes. Therefore, this routing mechanism can extend the
   MANET's lifetime and avoid network's segmentation. MANET routing
   mechanisms  based  on  game  theoretic  concepts  such  as  the  one
   published in [17] MAY be adopted in CAM to provide energy efficient
   and more precise intrusion detection.





Ramrekha et al.        Expires October 21, 2011                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft      Cognitive Adaptive Module (CAM)          April 2011


   Adversaries might launch attacks against one or more components of
   CAM thus a security module MUST provide protection, privacy and
   trustworthiness.

10. IANA Considerations

   The values assigned to messages and message types must in
   conformance with the ones defined in specifications within [3], [4],
   [5] and [12].

11. Conclusions

   This I-D presents CAM, a module that aims at easing the
   configuration of MANET routing protocols. This is an extension of
   the concept of segmenting [5] from [3]. In this document, the
   objective is to encourage designs for more flexible routing
   protocols by segmenting the routing logic into segregated components
   that can be easily configured and rendered adaptive. Thus, such a
   routing protocol will be better suited for a wider range of real
   life applications. A modified version of [10] that integrates [3],
   [4] and [5] routing logics is also presented to demonstrate this.
   This version of CML MAY be better suited than its individual
   component parts if they were all to be used for a given scenario
   e.g. disaster multimedia communication where data delivery latency
   has to be minimized, the battery power of devices is limited while
   the network size as well as node distribution are bound to change.
   Thus CAM SHOULD allow for easier deployments of MANETs in a wider
   range of applications.

12. References

12.1. Normative References

   [1]   Macker, J. and S. Corson, "Mobile Ad hoc Networking (MANET):
         Routing Protocol Performance Issues and Evaluation
         Considerations", RFC 2501, January 1999.

   [2]   Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
         Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [3]   Clausen, T., Dearlove, C., and P. Jacquet, "The Optimized Link
         State Routing Protocol version 2", draft-ietf-manet-olsrv2-
         11.txt (work in progress), March 2010.

   [4]   Chakeres, I., and Perkins, C., " Dynamic MANET On-demand
         (DYMO) Routing", draft-ietf-manet-dymo-19.txt (work in
         progress), March 2010.


Ramrekha et al.        Expires October 21, 2011                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft      Cognitive Adaptive Module (CAM)          April 2011


   [5]   Clausen, T., C. Dearlove, and Dean, J., "MANET Neighborhood
         Discovery Protocol (NHDP)", draft-ietf-manet-nhdp-12.txt (work
         in progress), March 2010.

   [6]   Clausen, T., Dearlove, C., and B. Adamson, "Jitter
         considerations in MANETs", RFC 5148, February 2008.

   [7]   Clausen, T., Dean, J., Dearlove, C., and Adjih, C.
         "Generalized MANET Packet/Message Format", RFC 5444, February
         2009.

   [8]   Dearlove, C., Clausen, T., and P. Jacquet, "Link Metrics for
         OLSRv2" (work in progress).

12.2. Informative References

   [9]   L. Chen and W. Heinzelman, "Qos-aware routing based on
         bandwidth estimation for mobile ad hoc networks," Selected
         Areas in Communications, IEEE Journal on, vol. 23, no. 3, pp.
         561-572, March 2005.

   [10]  Ramrekha, T., Panaousis, E., Millar, G. and Politis, C.,
         "ChaMeLeon (CML): A hybrid and adaptive routing protocol for
         Emergency Situations" draft-ramrekha-manet-cml-00.txt (work in
         progress), February 2010.

   [11]  De Couto, D., Aguayo, D., Bicket, J., and R. Morris, "A High-
         Throughput Path Metric for Multi-Hop Wireless Routing",
         Proceedings of the MOBICOM Conference, 2003.

   [12]  Narten, T. and H. Alvestrand, "Guidelines for Writing an IANA
         Considerations Section in RFCs", RFC 5226, BCP 26, May 2008.

   [13]  Rogge, H., Baccelli, E., and Kaplan, A.," Packet Sequence
         Number based ETX Metric for Mobile Ad Hoc Networks" draft-
         funkfeuer-manet-olsrv2-etx-01 (work in progress), March 2010.

   [14]  Chakeres, I., "IANA Allocations for MANET Protocols", RFC
         5498, March 2009.

   [15]  Clausen, T. and C. Dearlove, "Representing multi-value time in
         MANETs", RFC 5497, March 2009.

   [16]  Anjum, F. and Mouchtaris, P. "Security for Wireless Ad Hoc
         Networks", ISBN: 978-0-471-75688-0, John Wiley & Sons, March
         2007.



Ramrekha et al.        Expires October 21, 2011               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft      Cognitive Adaptive Module (CAM)          April 2011


   [17]  Panaousis, E.A and Politis, C. "A game theoretic approach for
         securing AODV in emergency Mobile Ad Hoc Networks," Local
         Computer Networks, 2009. LCN 2009. IEEE 34th Conference on,
         vol., no., pp.985-992, 20-23 Oct. 2009, doi:
         10.1109/LCN.2009.5355020

13. Acknowledgments

   The authors wish to acknowledge the support of the ICT European 7th
   Framework Program and all the partners in PEACE (IP-based Emergency
   Applications and services for next generation networks) project with
   contract number 225654. In particular, the input from Mr. Grant P.
   Millar, Researcher at WMN Group Kingston University, was well
   appreciated.

   This document was prepared using 2-Word-v2.0.template.dot.

Authors' Addresses

   The following researchers who have contributed to this I-D are
   members of the Wireless Multimedia and Networking (WMN) Research
   Group at Kingston University London:

   Tipu Arvind Ramrekha
   Researcher, WMN Research Group
   Kingston University London KT1 2EE

   Phone: (+44) 02084177025
   Email: a.ramrekha@kingston.ac.uk

   Emmanouil A. Panaousis
   Researcher, WMN Research Group
   Kingston University London KT1 2EE

   Phone: (+44) 02084177025
   Email: e.panaousis@kingston.ac.uk

   Christos Politis
   Head of WMN Research Group
   Kingston University London KT1 2EE

   Phone: (+44) 02084172653
   Email: c.politis@kingston.ac.uk






Ramrekha et al.        Expires October 21, 2011               [Page 11]

