
TRILL Working Group                                        Radia Perlman
INTERNET-DRAFT                                                Intel Labs
Intended status: Proposed Standard                   Donald Eastlake 3rd
Updates: RFCtrill                                                 Huawei
                                                           Ayan Banerjee
                                                                   Cisco
                                                              Hu Fangwei
                                                                     ZTE
Expires: September 28, 2011                               March 29, 2011


                     RBridges: Appointed Forwarders
                <draft-perlman-trill-rbridge-af-00.txt>


Abstract

   The IETF TRILL protocol provides optimal pair-wise data forwarding
   without configuration, safe forwarding even during periods of
   temporary loops, and support for multipathing of both unicast and
   multicast traffic. TRILL accomplishes this by using IS-IS link state
   routing and by encapsulating traffic using a header that includes a
   hop count. Devices that implement TRILL are called RBridges.

   TRILL supports multi-access LAN links that can have multiple end
   stations and RBridges attached. Where multiple RBridges are attached
   to a link, native traffic to and from end stations on that link is
   handled by a subset of those RBridges called Appointed Forwarders,
   with the intent that native traffic in each VLAN be handled by at
   most one RBridge.  The purpose of this document is to improve the
   documentation of the Appointed Forwarder mechanism.


Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.  Distribution of this document is
   unlimited.  Comments should be sent to the TRILL working group
   mailing list <rbridge@postel.org>.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html



R. Perlman, et al                                               [Page 1]

INTERNET-DRAFT                            RBridges: Appointed Forwarders


   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html


















































R. Perlman, et al                                               [Page 2]

INTERNET-DRAFT                            RBridges: Appointed Forwarders


Acknowledgements

   The authors of [RFCtrill] and [RFCadj] and those listed in the
   Acknowledgements section of [RFCtrill] and [RFCadj] are hereby
   acknowledged by reference.



Table of Contents

      1. Introduction............................................4
      1.1 Terminology and Acronyms...............................5

      2. Appointed Forwarders and Their Appointment..............6
      2.1 Appointment Effects of DRB Elections...................6
      2.2 Appointment and Removal by the DRB.....................7
      2.2.1 Processing Forwarder Appointments....................7
      2.2.2 Frequency of Appointments............................8
      2.2.3 Appointed Forwarders Limit...........................8

      3. The Inhibition Mechanism...............................10
      4. Inhibited Appointed Forwarder Behavior.................12
      5. Multiple Ports on the Same Link........................13
      6. Security Considerations................................14
      7. IANA Considerations....................................14

      8. References.............................................15
      8.1 Normative References..................................15
      8.2 Informative References................................15























R. Perlman, et al                                               [Page 3]

INTERNET-DRAFT                            RBridges: Appointed Forwarders


1. Introduction

   The IETF TRILL protocol [RFCtrill] provides optimal pair-wise data
   frame forwarding without configuration, safe forwarding even during
   periods of temporary loops, and support for multipathing of both
   unicast and multicast traffic. TRILL accomplishes this by using [IS-
   IS] [RFC1195] link state routing and encapsulating traffic using a
   header that includes a hop count. The design supports VLANs and
   optimization of the distribution of multi-destination frames based on
   VLANs and IP derived multicast groups. Devices that implement TRILL
   are called RBridges.

   Section 2 of [RFCadj] explains the environment for which the TRILL
   protocol is designed and the differences between that environment and
   the typical Layer 3 routing environment.

   TRILL supports multi-access LAN links that can have multiple end
   stations and RBridges attached. Where multiple RBridges are attached
   to a link, native traffic to and from end stations on that link is
   handled by a subset of those RBridges called Appointed Forwarders,
   with the intent that native traffic in each VLAN be handled by at
   most one RBridge. An RBridge can be Appointed Forwarder for many
   VLANs.

   The purpose of this document is to improve the documentation of the
   Appointed Forwarder mechanism.  It includes reference implementation
   details. Alternative implementations that interoperate on the wire
   are permitted.

   The Appointed Forwarder mechanism is irrelevant to any link on which
   end station service is not offered. This includes links configured as
   point-to-point and any link with all RBridge ports on that link
   configured as trunk ports. (In TRILL, configuration of a port as a
   "trunk port" just means that no end station service will be provided.
   It does not imply that all VLANs are enabled on that port.)

   The Appointed Forwarder mechanism has no affect on the formation of
   adjacencies, the election of the DRB for a link, MTU matching, or
   pseudonode formation. Those topics are covered in [RFCadj].
   Furthermore, Appointed Forwarder status has no effect on the handling
   of TRILL Data frames. It only affects the handling of native frames.

   For other aspects of the TRILL base protocol see [RFCtrill] and
   [RFCadj]. Familiarity with [RFCtrill] and [RFCadj] is assumed in this
   document. In case of conflict between this document and [RFCtrill],
   this document prevails.






R. Perlman, et al                                               [Page 4]

INTERNET-DRAFT                            RBridges: Appointed Forwarders


1.1 Terminology and Acronyms

   This document uses the acronyms defined in [RFCtrill].

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in
   [RFC2119].












































R. Perlman, et al                                               [Page 5]

INTERNET-DRAFT                            RBridges: Appointed Forwarders


2. Appointed Forwarders and Their Appointment

   The Appointed Forwarder on a link for VLAN-x is the RBridge that
   ingresses native frames from the link and egresses native frames to
   the link in VLAN-x. By default, the DRB on a link is in charge of
   native traffic for all VLANs on the link. The DRB may, if it wishes,
   act as Appointed Forwarder for any VLAN and it may appoint other
   RBridges that have ports on the link as Appointed Forwarder for one
   or more VLANs.

   It is important that there not be two Appointed Forwarders on a link
   that are ingressing and egressing native frames for the same VLAN at
   the same time. Should this occur, it could form a loop where frames
   are not protected by a TRILL Hop Count for part of the loop. While
   TRILL tries to avoid such a situation, for loop safety there is also
   an "inhibition" mechanism (see Section 3) that can cause an RBridge
   that is Appointed Forwarder to not ingress or egress native frames.

   As discussed in Section 5, an RBridge may have multiple ports on a
   link. As discussed in [RFCadj], if there are multiple ports with the
   same MAC address on a link, all but one will be suspended. While the
   cases of multiple ports on a link for one RBridge and multiple ports
   with the same MAC address are fully accommodated, multiple ports on a
   link for one RBridge is expected to be a rare condition and duplicate
   MAC addresses are not recommended by either TRILL or IEEE 802.1
   standards.

   Appointed Forwarder status has no affect on the handling of TRILL
   Data frames. It only affects the handling of native frames.

   There are two mechanisms by which an RBridge can be appointed or un-
   appointed as Appointed Forwarder, as a result of DRB elections
   [RFCadj] as discussed in Section 2.1, or as a result of action by the
   DRB as discussed in Section 2.2.



2.1 Appointment Effects of DRB Elections

   When an RBridge believes that it has become the DRB on a link, by
   default it can act as Appointed Forwarder for any VLANs on that link
   that it chooses as long as that VLAN is enabled on its port, or at
   least one of its ports if it has more than one port on the link.

   When an RBridge believes that it has lost DRB status on a link or it
   observes a change in the RBridge that is DRB for the link without
   itself becoming DRB, it loses all Appointed Forwarder status.

   In the rare corner case where an RBridge has more than one port on a
   link, one of which was previously the DRB election winner but that


R. Perlman, et al                                               [Page 6]

INTERNET-DRAFT                            RBridges: Appointed Forwarders


   port has just lost the DRB election to a different port of the same
   RBridge (possibly due to management configuration of port
   priorities), there is no change in which RBridge is DRB. Therefore
   neither of the above points applies and there is no change in
   Appointed Forwarder status.



2.2 Appointment and Removal by the DRB

   The DRB may appoint other RBridges on the link through inclusion of
   one or more Appointed Forwarders sub-TLVs [RFCtisis] in a TRILL Hello
   it sends on the Designated VLAN out the port that won the DRB
   election. When the DRB sends any appointments in a TRILL Hello, it
   must send all appointments for that link in that Hello. Any previous
   appointment not included is implicitly revoked.

   The DRB MUST NOT send any appointments on a link until its DRB
   inhibition timer (see Section 3) for that link has expired.

   How the DRB decides what other RBridges on the link, if any, to
   appoint forwarder for which VLANs is beyond the scope of this
   document.



2.2.1 Processing Forwarder Appointments

   When a non-DRB RBridge that can offer end station service on a link
   receives a TRILL Hello from the DRB on the Designated VLAN sent from
   the port that won the DRB election, that RBridge examines the Hello
   for Appointed Forwarder sub-TLVs. If none are present, there is no
   change in the receiver's Appointed Forwarder status. If one or more
   Appointed Forwarder sub-TLVs are present and none of them appoints
   the receiving RBridge, then it loses all Appointed Forwarder status
   and is no longer Appointed Forwarder for any VLAN. If one or more
   Appointed Forwarder sub-TLVs are present that appoint the receiving
   RBridge they are handled as described below.

   An appointment in an Appointed Forwarder sub-TLV is for a specific
   RBridge and a contiguous interval of VLAN IDs; however, it actually
   appoints that RBridge forwarder only for the VLAN(s) in that range
   that are enabled on one or more ports that RBridge has on the link.
   The RBridge becomes Appointed Forwarder for all such VLANs in all
   such Appointed Forwarder sub-TLVs in the Hello PDU and, if it was
   Appointed Forwarder for any additional VLANs, it loses Appointed
   Forwarder status for such additional VLANs.

   Since the network manager normally controls what VLANs are enabled on
   RBridge ports, they can appoint an RBridge forwarder for an arbitrary


R. Perlman, et al                                               [Page 7]

INTERNET-DRAFT                            RBridges: Appointed Forwarders


   set of VLANs by enabling only those VLANs on the relevant port (or
   ports) and then having the DRB send an appointment that appears to
   appoint the target RBridge forwarder for all VLANs. However, to
   facilitate inter-RBridge communication, the Designated VLAN for a
   link SHOULD be enabled on RBridge ports on that link and it may not
   be desired to appoint the RBridge forwarder for the Designated VLAN.
   Thus, in the general case, it would require two appointments,
   although it would still only require one appointment if the
   Designated VLAN were an extreme low or high value, that is, VLAN 1 or
   VLAN 0xFFE.

   For example, assume the DRB wants RB2 to be Appointed Forwarder for
   all even numbered VLANs and the Designated VLAN for the link is VLAN
   101. The network manager could cause all even numbered VLANs plus
   VLAN 101 to be enabled on the relevant port of RB2 and then, with the
   desired effect, cause the DRB to send appointments to RB2 appointing
   it forwarder for all VLANs from 1 through 100 and from 102 through
   4,095.



2.2.2 Frequency of Appointments

   It is not necessary for the DRB to include the forwarder appointments
   in every TRILL Hello that it sends on the designated VLAN. For loop
   safety, every RBridge is required to indicate, in every TRILL Hello
   it sends in VLAN-x to a link, whether it is acting as the Appointed
   Forwarder for VLAN-x for that link (see item 4 in Section 3). And it
   is RECOMMENDED that the DRB have all VLANs for which end station
   service will be offered on the link, as well as the Designated VLAN,
   enabled. Thus the DRB will generally be informed by other RBridges on
   the link of the VLANs for which they believe they are Appointed
   Forwarder. If this matches the appointments the DRB wishes to make,
   it is not required to re-send its forwarder appointments; however,
   for robustness, especially in cases such as VLAN misconfigurations in
   a bridged LAN link, it is RECOMMENDED that the DRB send its forwarder
   appointments once per Holding Time.



2.2.3 Appointed Forwarders Limit

   The mechanism of DRB forwarder appointment and the limited length of
   TRILL Hellos imposes a limit on the number of RBridges on a link that
   can be Appointed Forwarders. To obtain a conservative estimate,
   assume that no more than 1000 bytes are available in a TRILL Hello
   for such appointments. Assume it is desired to appoint various
   RBridges on a link forwarders for arbitrary non-intersecting sets of
   VLANs.  Using the technique discussed above would generally require
   two appointments, or 12 bytes, per RBridge. With allowance for sub-


R. Perlman, et al                                               [Page 8]

INTERNET-DRAFT                            RBridges: Appointed Forwarders


   TLV and TLV overhead, appointments for 83 RBridges would fit in under
   1000 bytes. Including the DRB, this implies a link with 84 or more
   RBridges attached. Links with more than a hand full of RBridges
   attached are expected to be very rare.

   (If the Designated VLAN were an extreme low or high value, such as
   VLAN 1, which is the default and may be a common value in practice,
   only 6 bytes per RBridge would be required. This would permit twice
   as many different Appointed Forwarder RBridges than indicated by the
   general analysis above or, alternatively, take only half as much
   space to appoint the same number of Appointed Forwarders.)

   Unnecessary changes in the DRB and unnecessary changes in Appointed
   Forwarders SHOULD NOT be made as they result in transient lack of end
   station service. Large numbers of Appointed Forwarders on a link (in
   excess of 65) are NOT RECOMMENDED due to the complexity of their
   establishment and maintenance.



































R. Perlman, et al                                               [Page 9]

INTERNET-DRAFT                            RBridges: Appointed Forwarders


3. The Inhibition Mechanism

   An RBridge has, for every link on which it can offer end station
   service (that is every link for which it can act as an Appointed
   Forwarder), the following timers denominated in seconds:

      a DRB inhibition timer,

      a root change inhibition timer, and

      up to 4,094 VLAN inhibition timers, one for each legal VLAN ID.

   The DRB and root change inhibition timers MUST be implemented.

   The loss of native traffic due to inhibition will be minimized by
   logically implementing a VLAN inhibition timer per each VLAN for
   which end station service will ever be offered on the link by the
   RBridge and this SHOULD be done. However, if implementation
   limitations make a full set of such timers impractical, the VLAN
   inhibition timers for more than one VLAN can, with care, be merged
   into one timer. In particular, an RBridge MUST NOT merge the VLAN
   inhibition timers for together for two VLANs if it is Appointer
   Forwarder for one and not for the other as this can lead to
   unnecessary and indefinitely prolonged inhibition. In the limit,
   there will be safe operations, albeit with more native frame loss
   than would otherwise be required, even if only two VLAN inhibition
   timers are provided, one for VLANs for which the RBridge is Appointed
   Forwarder and one for all other VLANs. Where a VLAN inhibition timer
   represents more than one VLAN, an update or test that would have be
   done to the timer for any of the VLANs is performed on the merged
   timer.

   These timers are set as follows:

      1. On booting or management reset, each port will have its own set
         of timers, as even if two or more are on the same link the
         RBridge will not have had a chance to learn that yet. All
         inhibition timers are set to expired except the DRB inhibition
         timer that, because each port will initially believe it is DRB,
         is set in accordance with item 2 below.

      2. When an RBridge believes that it has become DRB on a link, it
         sets the DRB inhibition timer to the Holding Time of its port
         on that link (or the largest Holding Time of any of its ports
         on that link if it knows it has more than one).

      3. When an RBridge believes that it has lost DRB status on a link,
         it sets the DRB inhibition timer to expired.

       Note: In the rare corner case where one port of an RBridge was


R. Perlman, et al                                              [Page 10]

INTERNET-DRAFT                            RBridges: Appointed Forwarders


         the DRB election winner but later loses the DRB election to a
         different port of the same RBridge on that link (perhaps due to
         management configuration of port priority), neither 2 nor 3
         above applies and the DRB timer is not changed.

      4. When an RBridge RB1 receives a TRILL Hello on VLAN-x from some
         other RBridge RB2 and RB2 asserts in the Hello that it is
         Appointed Forwarder, then RB1 sets the VLAN-x inhibition timer
         for that link to the maximum of its existing value and the
         Holding Time in the received Hello. An RBridge MUST maintain
         VLAN inhibition timers for a link to which it connects if it
         can offer end station service on that link even if it is not
         currently Appointed Forwarder for any VLAN on that link.

      5. When an RBridge RB1 enables VLAN-x on a port connecting to a
         link and VLAN-x was previously disabled on all of RB1's ports
         on that link, it sets the VLAN inhibition timer for VLAN-x for
         that link to its Holding Time for that port.

      6. When an RBridge detects a spanning tree root bridge change on a
         port, it sets the root change inhibition timer for the link to
         an amount of time that defaults to 30 seconds and is
         configurable to any value from 30 down to zero seconds. This
         condition will not occur unless the RBridge is receiving BPDUs
         on the port from an attached bridged LAN. It is safe to
         configure this inhibition time to the settling time of an
         attached bridged LAN. For example, if it is known that Rapid
         Spanning Tree Protocol (RSTP [802.1Q-2005]) is running
         throughout the attached bridged LAN, it should be safe to
         configure this inhibition time to 4 seconds. Note that, while
         an RBridge could determine what version of spanning tree is
         running on the physical link between it and any directly
         connected bridge by examination of the BPDUs it receives, it
         could not tell if inter-bridge links beyond those directly
         connected bridges were running classic Spanning Tree Protocol
         (STP), which might require the root change inhibition timer to
         be set to 30 seconds for safety.

      7. When an RBridge decides that one of its ports (or a set of its
         ports) P1 is on the same link as another of its ports (or set
         of its ports) P2, then the inhibition timers are merged to a
         single set of inhibition timers by using the maximum value of
         the corresponding timers.

      8. When an RBridge decides that a set of its ports that it had
         been treating as being on the same link are no longer on the
         same link, those ports will necessarily be on two or more links
         (one link per port in the limit). This is handled by cloning a
         copy of the timers for each of the two or more links the
         RBridge has decided these ports connect to.


R. Perlman, et al                                              [Page 11]

INTERNET-DRAFT                            RBridges: Appointed Forwarders


4. Inhibited Appointed Forwarder Behavior

   An Appointed Forwarder for a link is inhibited for VLAN-x unless (1)
   its DRB inhibition timer for that link, (2) its root inhibition time
   for that link, and (3) its VLAN inhibition timer for that link for
   VLAN-x, are all three expired.

   If a VLAN-x Appointed Forwarder for a link is inhibited and receives
   a TRILL Data frame whose encapsulated frame is in VLAN-x and would
   normally be egressed to that link, it decapsulates the native frame
   as usual. However, it does not output it to or queue it for that link
   although, if appropriate, it may output it to or queue it for other
   links.

   If a VLAN-x Appointed Forwarder for a link is inhibited and receives
   a native frame in VLAN-x that would normally be ingressed from that
   link, the native frame is ignored.

   An RBridge with an un-expired VLAN inhibition timer for VLAN-x is
   still required to indicate in TRILL Hellos it sends on VLAN-x whether
   it is Appointed Forwarder for that VLAN.

   Inhibition has no effect on the receipt or forwarding of TRILL Data
   frames.




























R. Perlman, et al                                              [Page 12]

INTERNET-DRAFT                            RBridges: Appointed Forwarders


5. Multiple Ports on the Same Link

   An RBridge may have multiple ports on the same link. Some of these
   ports may be suspended due to MAC address duplication as described in
   [RFCadj]. Suspended ports never ingress or egress native frames.

   If an RBridge has one or more non-suspended ports on a link and those
   ports offer end station service, that is, those ports are not
   configured as point-to-point or trunk ports, then that RBridge is
   eligible to be an Appointed Forwarder. It can become Appointed
   Forwarder either by default because it is DRB, or by appointment by
   the DRB as described in Sections 2.1 and 2.2.

   If an RBridge which is Appointed Forwarder for VLAN-x on a link has
   multiple non-suspended ports on that link, it may load share the task
   of ingressing and egressing VLAN-x native frames across those ports
   however it chooses, as long as there is no case in which a frame it
   egresses onto the link from one port can be ingressed on another
   port, creating a loop. If the RBridge is Appointed Forwarder for
   multiple VLANs, a straightforward thing to do would be to partition
   those VLANs among the ports it has on the link.































R. Perlman, et al                                              [Page 13]

INTERNET-DRAFT                            RBridges: Appointed Forwarders


6. Security Considerations

   This memo provides improved documentation of the TRILL Appointed
   Forwarder mechanism. It does not change the security considerations
   of the TRILL base protocol. See Section 6 of [RFCtrill].




7. IANA Considerations

   This document requires no IANA actions. RFC Editor: Please delete
   this section before publication.







































R. Perlman, et al                                              [Page 14]

INTERNET-DRAFT                            RBridges: Appointed Forwarders


8. References

   Normative and Informational references for this document are listed
   below.



8.1 Normative References

   [IS-IS] - ISO/IEC 10589:2002, Second Edition, "Intermediate System to
         Intermediate System Intra-Domain Routing Exchange Protocol for
         use in Conjunction with the Protocol for Providing the
         Connectionless-mode Network Service (ISO 8473)", 2002.

   [RFC1195] - Callon, R., "Use of OSI IS-IS for routing in TCP/IP and
         dual environments", RFC 1195, December 1990.

   [RFC2119] - Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
         Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFCtisis] - Eastlake, D., A. Banerjee, D. Dutt, R. Perlman, A.
         Ghanwani, "TRILL Use of IS-IS", draft-ietf-isis-trill-05, in
         RFC Editor's queue.

   [RFCtrill] - Perlman, R., D. Eastlake, D. Dutt, S. Gai, and A.
         Ghanwani, "RBridges: Base Protocol Specification", draft-ietf-
         trill-rbridge-protocol-16.txt, in RFC Editor's queue.

   [RFCadj] - Eastlake, D., R. Perlman, A. Ghanwani, D. Dutt, V. Manral,
         "RBridges: Adjacency", draft-ietf-trill-adj, work in progress.



8.2 Informative References

         None.
















R. Perlman, et al                                              [Page 15]

INTERNET-DRAFT                            RBridges: Appointed Forwarders


Authors' Addresses

   Radia Perlman
   Intel Labs
   2200 Mission College Blvd.
   Santa Clara, CA 95054 USA

   Phone: +1-408-765-8080
   Email: Radia@alum.mit.edu


   Donald Eastlake 3rd
   Huawei Technologies
   155 Beaver Street
   Milford, MA 01757 USA

   Phone: +1-508-333-2270
   Email: d3e3e3@gmail.com


   Ayan Banerjee
   Cisco Systems
   170 West Tasman Drive
   San Jose, CA 95134 USA

   Email: ayabaner@cisco.com


   Fangwei Hu
   ZTE Corporation
   889 Bibo Road
   Shanghai 201203
   China

   Phone: +86-21-68896273
   Email: hu.fangwei@zte.com.cn
















R. Perlman, et al                                              [Page 16]

INTERNET-DRAFT                            RBridges: Appointed Forwarders


Copyright and IPR Provisions

   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors. All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document. Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the BSD License.  The definitive version of an IETF
   Document is that published by, or under the auspices of, the IETF.
   Versions of IETF Documents that are published by third parties,
   including those that are translated into other languages, should not
   be considered to be definitive versions of IETF Documents. The
   definitive version of these Legal Provisions is that published by, or
   under the auspices of, the IETF. Versions of these Legal Provisions
   that are published by third parties, including those that are
   translated into other languages, should not be considered to be
   definitive versions of these Legal Provisions.  For the avoidance of
   doubt, each Contributor to the IETF Standards Process licenses each
   Contribution that he or she makes as part of the IETF Standards
   Process to the IETF Trust pursuant to the provisions of RFC 5378. No
   language to the contrary, or terms, conditions or rights that differ
   from or are inconsistent with the rights and licenses granted under
   RFC 5378, shall have any effect and shall be null and void, whether
   published or posted by such Contributor, or included with or in such
   Contribution.





















R. Perlman, et al                                              [Page 17]

