
TRILL Working Group                                        Radia Perlman
INTERNET-DRAFT                                                Intel Labs
Intended status: Informational                           Donald Eastlake
                                                                  Huawei
                                                          Anoop Ghanwani
                                                                 Brocade
Expires: September 6, 2011                                 March 7, 2011


                       RBridges: Multilevel TRILL
            <draft-perlman-trill-rbridge-multilevel-01.txt>


Abstract

   This document describes issues, and various possible approaches, to
   extending TRILL to use multiple levels of IS-IS.


Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.  Distribution of this document is
   unlimited.  Comments should be sent to the TRILL working group
   mailing list <rbridge@postel.org>.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html



Acknowledgements

   The helpful comments of the following are hereby acknowledged: David
   Michael Bond.







R. Perlman, et al                                               [Page 1]

INTERNET-DRAFT                                RBridges: Multilevel TRILL


Table of Contents

      1. Introduction............................................3
      1.1 TRILL Scalability Issues...............................3
      1.2 Improvements Due to Multilevel.........................4
      1.3 More on Areas..........................................4
      1.4 Terminology and Acronyms...............................5

      2. Multilevel TRILL Issues.................................6
      2.1 Non-zero Area Addresses................................6
      2.2 Aggregated versus Unique Nicknames.....................7
      2.3 Building Multi-Area Trees..............................9
      2.4 The RPF Check for Trees...............................10
      2.5 Area Nickname Acquisition.............................11
      2.6 Link state representation of areas....................11

      3. Area Partition.........................................13
      4. Multidestination Scope.................................14
      5. Co-Existence with Old RBridges.........................15

      6. Summary................................................16
      7. Security Considerations................................16
      8. IANA Considerations....................................16

      9. References.............................................17
      9.1 Normative References..................................17
      9.2 Informative References................................17

























R. Perlman, et al                                               [Page 2]

INTERNET-DRAFT                                RBridges: Multilevel TRILL


1. Introduction

   The IETF TRILL protocol [RFCtrill] [RFCadj] provides optimal pair-
   wise data frame forwarding without configuration, safe forwarding
   even during periods of temporary loops, and support for multipathing
   of both unicast and multicast traffic. TRILL accomplishes this by
   using [IS-IS] link state routing and encapsulating traffic using a
   header that includes a hop count. The design supports VLANs and
   optimization of the distribution of multi-destination frames based on
   VLANs and IP derived multicast groups. Devices that implement TRILL
   are called RBridges.

   Familiarity with [RFCtrill] is assumed in this document.



1.1 TRILL Scalability Issues

   There are multiple issues that might limit the scalability of a
   TRILL-based network:

   o  the routing computation load,
   o  the volatility of the LSP database creating too much control
      traffic,
   o  the volatility of the LSP database causing the TRILL network to be
      in an unconverged state too much of the time,
   o  the size of the LSP database,
   o  the size of the end node learning table (the table that remembers
      (egress RBridge, VLAN/MAC) pairs),
   o  the traffic due to upper layer protocols use of broadcast and
      multicast, and
   o  the hard limit of the number of RBridges, due to the 16-bit
      nickname space.

   Extending TRILL IS-IS to be multilevel (hierarchical) helps with some
   of these issues.

   IS-IS was designed to be multilevel [IS-IS] [RFC1195] be partitioned
   into "areas".  Routing within an area is known as "level 1 routing".
   Routing between areas is known as "level 2 routing".  The level 2 IS-
   IS network consists of level 2 routers and links between the level 2
   routers.  Level 2 routers may participate in one or more areas, in
   addition to their role as level 2 routers.

   Each area is connected to the level 2 area through one or more
   "border routers", which participate both as a router inside the area,
   and as a router inside the level 2 "area".





R. Perlman, et al                                               [Page 3]

INTERNET-DRAFT                                RBridges: Multilevel TRILL


1.2 Improvements Due to Multilevel

   Partitioning the network into areas reduces the size of the LSP
   database in each router, and stops volatility of the topology in one
   area from disrupting other areas.  Allowing TRILL to utilize IS-IS's
   hierarchy solves the first 4 issues above, but does not necessarily
   help the other 3 issues (size of end node learning table, traffic due
   to upper layer protocols using multicast, hard limit of 16-bit
   RBridge nicknames).

   We propose two variants of hierarchical or multilevel TRILL.  One we
   call the "unique nickname" variant.  The other we call the
   "aggregated nickname" variant. In the aggregated nickname variant,
   border RBridges replace either the ingress or egress nickname field
   in the TRILL header of unicaat packets with an aggregated nickname
   representing an entire area.

   The aggregated nickname variant has the following advantages:
   o  it solves the 16-bit RBridge nickname limit,
   o  it lessens the amount of inter-area routing information that must
      be passed in IS-IS,
   o  it greatly reduces the RPF information (since only the area
      nickname needs to appear, rather than all the ingress RBridges in
      that area), and
   o  it enables computation of trees such that the portion computed
      within a given area is rooted within that area.

   The unique nickname variant has the advantage that border RBridges do
   not need to do end node learning for end nodes in their own area.



1.3 More on Areas

   Each area is configured with an "area address", which is advertised
   in IS-IS messages, so as to avoid accidentally interconnecting areas.
   Note that although the area address had other purposes in CLNP, (IS-
   IS was originally designed for CLNP/DECnet), for TRILL the only
   purpose of the area address would be to avoid accidentally
   interconnecting areas.

   Currently, the TRILL specification says that the area address "must
   be zero".  If we change the specification so that the area address
   value of zero is a default, then most of IS-IS multilevel machinery
   works as originally designed.  However, there are some TRILL-specific
   issues, which we address below in this document.






R. Perlman, et al                                               [Page 4]

INTERNET-DRAFT                                RBridges: Multilevel TRILL


1.4 Terminology and Acronyms

   This document uses the acronyms defined in [RFCtrill] and the
   following additional acronym:

      DBRB - Designated Border RBridge














































R. Perlman, et al                                               [Page 5]

INTERNET-DRAFT                                RBridges: Multilevel TRILL


2. Multilevel TRILL Issues

   The TRILL-specific issues introduced by hierarchy include the
   following:

   a) configuration of non-zero area addresses, encoding them in IS-IS
      PDUs, and interworking with old RBridges that do not understand
      nonzero area addresses,
   b) nickname management,
   c) advertisement of filtering information (VLAN reachability, IP
      multicast addresses) across areas,
   d) computation of trees across areas for multi-destination frames,
   e) computation of RPF information for those trees, and
   g) compatibility, as much as practical, with existing, unmodified
      RBridges.  The most important form of compatibility is with
      existing TRILL fast path hardware. Changes that require upgrade to
      the slow path firmware/software are more tolerable.

   Filtering information is only an optimization, as long as
   multidestination frames are not prematurely filtered.  Thus, for
   instance, border RBridges could advertise they can reach all possible
   VLANs, and have an IP multicast router attached.  This would cause
   multidestination traffic to be transmitted to the border router, and
   possibly filtered there, when the traffic could have been filtered
   earlier based on VLAN or multicast group.



2.1 Non-zero Area Addresses

   The current TRILL base protocol specification [RFCtrill] says that
   the area address in IS-IS MUST be zero.  The purpose of the area
   address is to ensure that different areas are not accidentally hooked
   together.  Furthermore, zero is an invalid area address for layer 3
   IS-IS, so it was chosen as an additional safety mechanism to ensure
   that layer 3 IS-IS would not be confused with TRILL IS-IS.  However,
   TRILL uses a different multicast address and Ethertype to avoid such
   confusion, so it is not necessary to worry about this.

   Since current TRILL RBridges will reject any IS-IS messages with
   nonzero area addresses, the choices are; all RBridges must be
   upgraded, neighbors of old RBridges must remove the area address from
   IS-IS messages when talking to an old RBridge (which might cause
   inadvertent merging of areas), to ignore the problem of accidentally
   merging areas entirely, or to keep the fixed "area address" field as
   0 in TRILL, and add a new, optional TLV for "area name" that, if
   present, could be compared, by new RBridges, to prevent accidental
   merging




R. Perlman, et al                                               [Page 6]

INTERNET-DRAFT                                RBridges: Multilevel TRILL


2.2 Aggregated versus Unique Nicknames

   In the unique nickname variant, all nicknames across the campus must
   be unique.  In the aggregated nickname variant, RBridge nicknames are
   only of local significance within an area, and the only nickname
   externally (outside the area) visible is the "area nickname", which
   aggregates all the internal nicknames.

   The aggregated nickname approach eliminates the potential problem of
   nickname exhaustion, minimizes the amount of nickname information
   that would need to be forwarded between areas, minimizes the size of
   the forwarding table, and simplifies RPF calculation and RPF
   information.

   With unique cross-area nicknames, it would be intractable to have a
   flat nickname space with RBridges in different areas contending for
   the same nicknames.  Instead, each area would need to be configured
   with a block of nicknames.  Either some RBridges would need to
   announce that all the nicknames other than that block are taken (to
   prevent the RBridges inside the area from choosing nicknames outside
   the area's nickname block), or a new TLV would be needed to announce
   the allowable nicknames, and all RBridges in the area would need to
   understand that new TLV.

   Currently the encoding of nickname information in TLVs does not allow
   any aggregation.  The information could be encoded as ranges of
   nicknames to make this somewhat manageable; however, a new TLV for
   announcing nickname ranges would not be intelligible to old RBridges.

   In contrast, the aggregated nickname approach enables passing far
   less nickname information and works as follows:

   Each area would be assigned a 16-bit nickname. This would not be the
   nickname of any actual RBridge. Instead, it would be the nickname of
   the area itself.  Border RBridges would know the area nickname for
   their own area(s).

   In the following picture, R2 and R3 are area border RBridges.  A
   source S is attached to R1.  The two areas have nicknames 15961 and
   15918, respectively.  R1 has a nickname, say 27, and R4 has a
   nickname, say 44 (and in fact, they could even have the same
   nickname, since the RBridge nickname will not be visible outside the
   area).









R. Perlman, et al                                               [Page 7]

INTERNET-DRAFT                                RBridges: Multilevel TRILL


             Area 15961               level 2            Area 15918
     +-------------------+     +-----------------+    +-------------+
     |                   |     |                 |    |             |
     |  S--R1---Rx--Rz-----R2----Rb---Rc--Rd---Re--R3---Rk--R4---D  |
     |     27            |     |                 |    |     44      |
     |                   |     |                 |    |             |
     +-------------------+     +-----------------+    +-------------+

   Let's say that S transmits a packet to destination D, and let's say
   that D's location is learned by the relevant RBridges already.  The
   relevant RBridges have learned the following:

   1) R1 has learned that D is connected to nickname 15918
   2) R3 has learned that D is attached to nickname 44.

   The following sequence of events will occur:

   -  S transmits an Ethernet packet with source MAC = S and destination
      MAC = D.

   -  R1 encapsulates with a TRILL header with ingress RBridge = 27, and
      egress = 15918.

   -  R2 has announced in the level 1 IS-IS instance in area 16961, that
      it is attached to all the area nicknames, including 15918.
      Therefore, IS-IS routes the packet to R2. (Alternatively, if a
      distinguished range of nicknames is used for area, Level 1
      RBridges seeing such an egress nickname will know to route to the
      nearest border router.)

   -  R2, when transitioning the packet from level 1 to level 2,
      replaces the ingress RBridge nickname with the area nickname, so
      replaces 27 with 15961. Within level 2, the ingress RBridge field
      in the TRILL header will therefore be 15961, and the egress
      RBridge field will be 15918. Also R2 learns that S is attached to
      nickname 27 in area 15961.

   -  The packet is forwarded through level 2, to R3, which has
      advertised, in Level 2, reachability to the nickname 15918.

   -  R3, when forwarding into area 15918, replaces the egress nickname
      in the TRILL header with R4's nickname (44).  So, within the
      destination area, the ingress nickname will be 15961 and the
      egress nickname will be 44.

   -  R4, when decapsulating, learns that S is attached to nickname
      15961.

   Now suppose that D's location has not been learned by R1 and/or R3.
   What will happen, as it would in TRILL today, is that R1 will forward


R. Perlman, et al                                               [Page 8]

INTERNET-DRAFT                                RBridges: Multilevel TRILL


   the packet as a multidestination frame, choosing a tree.  As the
   multidestination frame transitions into level 2, R2 replaces the
   ingress nickname with the area nickname.

   Now suppose that R1 has learned the location of D (attached to
   nickname 15918), but R3 does not know where D is.  In that case, R3
   will turn the packet into a multidestination frame within the area.
   Care must be taken so that, in case R3 is not the Designated
   transitioner for that multidestination frame, but was on the unicast
   path, that another RBridge within that area not forward the now
   multidestination frame back into level 2.  Therefore, it would be
   desirable to have a marking, somehow, that indicates the scope of
   this packet to be "only this area".

   There is an issue with tree nicknames that would be a problem with
   the unique nickname variant, but is solved with the aggregated
   variant, as follows:

   Suppose nicknames were unique within the TRILL campus, and that the
   TRILL header was not rewritten by the border RBridges.  In that case,
   there would have to be globally known nicknames for the trees.
   Suppose there are k trees.  For all of the trees with nicknames
   located outside an area, the trees would all be rooted at (one of)
   the border RBridge(s).  Therefore, there would be no path splitting
   of multidestination with the area.

   In contrast, with the aggregated nickname solution, each border
   RBridge can have a mapping from the level 2 tree nickname to the
   level 1 tree nickname.  There need not even be agreement about the
   total number of trees; just that the border RBridge have some
   mapping, and replace the egress RBridge nickname (the tree name) when
   transitioning levels.

   Care must be taken that it be clear, when transitioning between level
   2 and area X, which (single) border RBridge will transition the
   packet between the levels.



2.3 Building Multi-Area Trees

   It is easy to build a multi-area tree by building a tree in each area
   separately, (including the level 2 "area"), and then having only a
   single border RBridge, say R1, in each area, attach to the level 2
   area.  R1 would forward all multidestination packets between that
   area and level 2.

   People might find this unacceptable, however, because of the desire
   to path split (not always sending all multidestination traffic
   through the same border RBridge).


R. Perlman, et al                                               [Page 9]

INTERNET-DRAFT                                RBridges: Multilevel TRILL


   Having multiple border RBridges introduces some complexity:

   a) calculating the RPF check when a multidestination frame originates
      outside the area (which border RBridge injected the frame into the
      area?)

   b) calculating the filtering information (which border RBridge will
      transition the frame into level 2?)

   This might be solvable if all RBridges are multilevel aware, however
   it is difficult to imagine how to ensure that old RBridges would
   calculate RPF and filtering information sensibly.

   Ignoring old RBridges for now, various possible solutions are

   a) elect one border RBridge for transitioning all multidestination
      frames between levels (call that the Designated Border RBridge
      (DBRB))

   b) allow the DBRB to appoint other border RBs to forward some subset
      of the inter-level frames. (as the DRB does, on a per-VLAN basis,
      on a link).  Make the appointment information visible to the other
      RBridges in the area so that they can calculate their RPF and
      filtering information.

   If b), then on what basis would the appointment be made?  Various
   possibilities are as follows:
      o  based on VLAN
      o  based on tree root
      o  based on ingress RBridge nickname

   The more flexibility that is allowed, the more complex announcement
   of information becomes, and the more complex the tree database
   becomes.  If appointment is made based on VLAN, then the RPF check
   would need to be based on (tree, VLAN, ingress nickname), rather than
   simply (tree, ingress nickname) as it is today.



2.4 The RPF Check for Trees

   For multidestination frames originating in R1's area, computation of
   the RPF check is done as today.  For multidestination frames
   originating outside R1's area, computation of the RPF check must be
   done based on one of the border RBridges (say R1, R2, or R3).

   An RBridge, say R4, located inside an area, must be able to know
   which of R1, R2, or R3 transitioned the frame into the area from
   level 2.  (or into level 2 from an area).



R. Perlman, et al                                              [Page 10]

INTERNET-DRAFT                                RBridges: Multilevel TRILL


   This could be done based on having the DBRB announce the assignments
   to all the RBs in the area.



2.5 Area Nickname Acquisition

   In the aggregated nickname variant, each area must acquire a unique
   area nickname.  It is probably simpler to allocate a block of
   nicknames (say, the top 2000) to be area addresses, and not used by
   any RBridges.

   The area nicknames need to be advertised and acquired through level
   2.

   Within an area, all the border RBridges must discover each other
   through the level 1 IS-IS database, by advertising, in their LSP "I
   am a border RBridge".

   Of the border RBridges, one will have highest priority (say R7).  It
   will be R7 that dynamically participates, in level 2, to acquire a
   nickname for the area.  R7 will give the area a pseudonode name, such
   as R7.5, within level 2.  So an area will appear, in level 2, as a
   pseudonode.

   The pseudonode will participate, in level 2, in acquiring a nickname
   for the area.

   Within level 2, all the border RBridges [for the area] advertise
   reachability to the pseudonode, which will mean connectivity to the
   area nickname.



2.6 Link state representation of areas

   Within an area, say area A, there is an election for the DBRB,
   (Designated Border RB), say R1.  This will be done through LSPs
   within area A.  The border RBs announce themselves, together with
   DBRB priority. (Note that the election of the DBRB cannot be done
   based on Hello messages, because the border RBs are not necessarily
   physical neighbors of each other.  They can, however, reach each
   other through connectivity within the area, which is why it will work
   to find each other through level 1 LSPs.)

   R1 acquires the area nickname (in the aggregated nickname approach),
   gives the area a pseudonode name (just like the DRB would give a
   pseudonode name to a link).  R1 advertises, in area A, what the
   pseudonode name for the area is (and the area nickname that R1 has
   acquired).


R. Perlman, et al                                              [Page 11]

INTERNET-DRAFT                                RBridges: Multilevel TRILL


   The pseudonode LSP initiated by R1 includes any information
   extraneous to area A that should be input into area A (such as area
   nicknames of external areas, or perhaps (in the unique nickname
   variant), all the nicknames of external RBs in the TRILL campus and
   filtering information such as IP multicast groups and VLANs).  All
   the other border RBs for the area announce (in their LSP) attachment
   to that pseudonode.

   Within level 2, R1 generates a level 2 LSP on behalf of the area,
   also represented as a pseudonode.  The same pseudonode name could be
   used within level 1 and level 2, for the area.  (There does not seem
   any reason why it would be useful for it to be different, but there's
   also no reason why it would need to be the same).  Likewise, all the
   area A border RBs would announce, in their level 2 LSPs, connection
   to the pseudonode.





































R. Perlman, et al                                              [Page 12]

INTERNET-DRAFT                                RBridges: Multilevel TRILL


3. Area Partition

   It is possible for an area to become partitioned, so that there is
   still a path from one section of the area to the other, but that path
   is via the level 2 area.

   An area will naturally break into two areas in this case.

   An area address might be configured to ensure two areas are not
   inadvertently connected.  That area address appears in Hellos and
   LSPs within the area.  If two chunks, connected only via level 2,
   were configured with the same area address, this would not cause any
   problems. (They would just operate as separate level 1 areas.)

   A more serious problem occurs if the level 2 area is partitioned in
   such a way that it healed by using a path through a level 1 area.
   TRILL will not attempt to solve this problem.  Within the level 1
   area, a single border RBridge will be the DBRB, and will be in charge
   of deciding which (single) RBridge will transition any particular
   multidestination frames between that area and level 2.  If the level
   2 area is partitioned, this will result in multidestination frames
   only reaching the portion of the TRILL campus reachable through the
   partition attached to the RBridge that transitions that frame.  It
   will not cause a loop.




























R. Perlman, et al                                              [Page 13]

INTERNET-DRAFT                                RBridges: Multilevel TRILL


4. Multidestination Scope

   It would be desirable to be able to mark a multidestination frame
   with a scope that indicates this packet should not exit the area.
   This is particularly true when, in the aggregated nickname variant, a
   unicast packet turns into a multidestination packet.

   This could be done by having two tree nicknames, for each tree; one
   being the tree "only for this area", and the other being for multi-
   area trees.

   Alternatively, a packet intended only for the area could be tunneled
   (within the area) to the RBridge Rx, that is the appointed
   transitioner for that form of packet (say, based on VLAN), with
   instructions that Rx only transmit the packet within the area, and Rx
   could initiate the multidestination frame within the area.  Since Rx
   introduced the frame, and is the only one allowed to transition that
   frame within levels, this would accomplish scoping of the packet to
   within the area.

   Since this case would only occur when unicast frames need to be
   turned into multidestination (because the border RBridge in the
   destination area does not know the location of the destination), the
   suboptimality of tunneling between the border RBridge that receives
   the unicast frame and the appointed level transitioner for that
   frame, would not be an issue.


























R. Perlman, et al                                              [Page 14]

INTERNET-DRAFT                                RBridges: Multilevel TRILL


5. Co-Existence with Old RBridges

   RBridges that are not multilevel aware have a problem with
   calculating RPF check and filtering information, since they would not
   be aware of assignment of border RBridge transitioning.

   A possible solution, as long as any old RBridges exist within an
   area, is to have the border RBridges elect a single DBRB (Designated
   Border RBridge), and have all inter-area traffic go through the DBRB
   (unicast as well as multidestination).  If that DBRB goes down, a new
   one will be elected, but at any one time, all inter-area traffic
   (unicast as well as multidestination) would go through that one DRBR.








































R. Perlman, et al                                              [Page 15]

INTERNET-DRAFT                                RBridges: Multilevel TRILL


6. Summary

   This draft outlines the issues and possible approaches to multilevel
   TRILL.  The variant involving area nicknames for aggregation has
   significant advantages in terms of scalability; not just of avoiding
   nickname exhaustion, but allowing, for instance, RPF checks to be
   aggregated based on an entire area.

   Some issues are not difficult, such as dealing with partitioned
   areas.  Some issues are more difficult, especially dealing with old
   RBridges.



7. Security Considerations

   TBD



8. IANA Considerations

   This document requires no IANA actions. RFC Editor: Please delete
   this section before publication.




























R. Perlman, et al                                              [Page 16]

INTERNET-DRAFT                                RBridges: Multilevel TRILL


9. References

   Normative and Informational references for this document are listed
   below.



9.1 Normative References

   [IS-IS] - ISO/IEC 10589:2002, Second Edition, "Intermediate System to
         Intermediate System Intra-Domain Routing Exchange Protocol for
         use in Conjunction with the Protocol for Providing the
         Connectionless-mode Network Service (ISO 8473)", 2002.

   [RFC1195] - Callon, R., "Use of OSI IS-IS for routing in TCP/IP and
         dual environments", RFC 1195, December 1990.

   [RFCtrill] - Perlman, R., D. Eastlake, D. Dutt, S. Gai, and A.
         Ghanwani, "RBridges: Base Protocol Specification", draft-ietf-
         trill-rbridge-protocol-16.txt, in RFC Editor's queue.

   [RFCadj] - Eastlake, D., R. Perlman, A. Ghanwani, D. Dutt, V. Manral,
         "RBridges: Adjacency", draft-ietf-trill-adj, work in progress.



9.2 Informative References

         None.























R. Perlman, et al                                              [Page 17]

INTERNET-DRAFT                                RBridges: Multilevel TRILL


Authors' Addresses

   Radia Perlman
   Intel Labs
   2200 Mission College Blvd.
   Santa Clara, CA 95054-1549 USA

   Phone: +1-408-765-8080
   Email: Radia@alum.mit.edu


   Donald Eastlake
   Huawei Technologies
   155 Beaver Street
   Milford, MA 01757 USA

   Phone: +1-508-333-2270
   Email: d3e3e3@gmail.com


   Anoop Ghanwani
   Brocade Communications Systems
   130 Holger Way
   San Jose, CA 95134 USA

   Phone: +1-408-333-7149
   Email: anoop@brocade.com

























R. Perlman, et al                                              [Page 18]

INTERNET-DRAFT                                RBridges: Multilevel TRILL


Copyright and IPR Provisions

   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors. All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document. Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the BSD License.  The definitive version of an IETF
   Document is that published by, or under the auspices of, the IETF.
   Versions of IETF Documents that are published by third parties,
   including those that are translated into other languages, should not
   be considered to be definitive versions of IETF Documents. The
   definitive version of these Legal Provisions is that published by, or
   under the auspices of, the IETF. Versions of these Legal Provisions
   that are published by third parties, including those that are
   translated into other languages, should not be considered to be
   definitive versions of these Legal Provisions.  For the avoidance of
   doubt, each Contributor to the IETF Standards Process licenses each
   Contribution that he or she makes as part of the IETF Standards
   Process to the IETF Trust pursuant to the provisions of RFC 5378. No
   language to the contrary, or terms, conditions or rights that differ
   from or are inconsistent with the rights and licenses granted under
   RFC 5378, shall have any effect and shall be null and void, whether
   published or posted by such Contributor, or included with or in such
   Contribution.





















R. Perlman, et al                                              [Page 19]

