


TRILL WG                                                  Radia. Perlman
Internet-Draft                                                Intel Labs
Intended status: Standards Track                             Fangwei. Hu
Expires: January 31, 2013                                ZTE Corporation
                                                    Donald. Eastlake 3rd
                                                       Huawei technology
                                                           July 30, 2012


                             TRILL Cloudlet
                    draft-perlman-trill-cloudlet-00

Abstract

   This draft addresses the problems of nickname exhaustion, size of
   endnode learning table in access RBs, and the size of the core TRILL
   network.  It does this by creating an invisible level of hierarchy at
   the edge that we refer to as a "cloudlet".

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 31, 2013.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2012 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of



Perlman, et al.         Expires January 31, 2013                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft               TRILL Cloudlet                    July 2012


   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Overview  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   3.  Smart Endnode . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   4.  Multi-homing  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   5.  Building a Cloudlet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   6.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   7.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   8.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   9.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7



































Perlman, et al.         Expires January 31, 2013                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft               TRILL Cloudlet                    July 2012


1.  Overview

   The IETF TRILL (Transparent Interconnection of Lots of Links)
   protocol implemented by devices called RBridges (Routing Bridges,
   [RFC6325]), provides optimal pair-wise data frame forwarding without
   configuration, safe forwarding even during periods of temporary
   loops, and support for multipathing of both unicast and multicast
   traffic.  TRILL accomplishes this by using IS-IS([RFC1195])
   ([RFC6165]) ([RFC6326bis])link state routing and encapsulating
   traffic using a header that includes a hop count.Devices that
   implement TRILL are called "RBridges" (Routing Bridges) or TRILL
   Switches.

   This draft addresses the problems of nickname exhaustion, size of
   endnode learning table in access RBs, and the size of the core TRILL
   network.  It does this by creating an invisible level of hierarchy at
   the edge that we refer to as a "cloudlet".

   A cloudlet looks to the core like a collection of endnodes attached
   to a core access RB.  The cloudlet can be a mixture of endnodes,
   hypervisors, switches, and simple RBs.  A cloudlet will not consume
   nicknames, nor introduce LSPs into the core.  In this draft we will
   build the concept from the simplest case; a cloudlet consisting of a
   single endnode, and expand the idea in subsequent sections.


2.  Terminology

   This document uses the acronyms defined in([RFC6325]) and the
   following phrase:

   Smart end node: An end node that can do TRILL encapsulation/
   decapsulation.

   Simple RBridge: An edge RBridge that assign its nickname to the smart
   end node attached.  It should response the querying from its attached
   smart end node.

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in ([RFC2119]).


3.  Smart Endnode

   Suppose endnode E is attached to RBridge R. E signals to R that E
   wishes to be a "smart endnode".  Let's take the figure 1 as the
   example.



Perlman, et al.         Expires January 31, 2013                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft               TRILL Cloudlet                    July 2012


                                  E------R

                                  figure1

   E, will do TRILL encapsulation/decapsulation and endnode learning of
   endnodes it is in communication with, freeing its attached RB, R,
   from learning the addresses of nodes corresponding with E. When E
   encapsulates, E uses R's nickname as "ingress" in the TRILL header.

   Although this draft is explaining the concept rather than exact
   details of packet formats, a logical way for E to signal R that E
   wishes to act as a smart endnode is by having E issue a TRILL-Hello,
   with a flag indicating that E wants to be a "smart endnode", and
   perhaps a flag indicating that E wishes to receive ESADI.  A logical
   way for R to respond is by including E in its neighbor list in R's
   TRILL-Hello, with a flag indicating that R hears E's Hello, but
   acknowledges that E is a smart endnode rather than a true RB
   neighbor.  R also includes R's nickname in its TRILL-Hello.

   The endnode E does not issue LSPs, nor does it receive LSPs.  It does
   the following:

   o  It keeps an endnode table of (MAC, nickname) of end nodes with
      which the smart end node is communicating.  Entries in this table
      are populated the same way that an edge RBridge populates the
      entries in its table:

      *  learning from (source, ingress) on packets it decapsulates

      *  from ESADI([TRILL-ESADI]), TRILL ESADI is an end station system
         distribution protocol, which can be used to distribute the
         (MAC,nickname) entry.

      *  by querying a directory,Smart end node E can get the (MAC,
         nickname) entry by querying a directory.  The RBridges which
         the smart end nodes are attached act as directory server.  Both
         the push and pull model are supported in this
         document([Directory]).  In push model, the RBridge pushes down
         the MAC and egress nickname mapping for the hosts which might
         communicate with hosts attached to the RBridge.  In pull
         model,smart end node sends a pull request to the RBridge if it
         has no the entry of (MAC, nickname) of the destination end
         node.

      *  by having some entries configured

   The Simple RBridge R does the following:




Perlman, et al.         Expires January 31, 2013                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft               TRILL Cloudlet                    July 2012


   o  It marks the port to smart end node E as being "leave
      encapsulated"

   o  For attached access ports, simple RBridge R keeps, for each such
      port, a set of MAC addresses of end nodes on those ports.  For
      each of those MAC addresses, R keeps a new flag indicating whether
      that MAC address is a "smart endnode".

   o  When receiving a packet with R's nickname as egress, if the
      destination MAC address in the enclosed packet is listed as "smart
      endnode", R leaves the packet encapsulated when forwarding to E.


4.  Multi-homing

   Now suppose E is attached to the TRILL campus in two places; to
   RBridges R1 and R2.

   There are two ways for this to work:

   (1)  E can choose either R1 or R2's nickname, when encapsulating a
        frame, whether the encapsulated frame is sent via R1 or R2.
        Most likely, E would always choose the same one, unless that one
        was unreachable, and then E would switch to the other.

   (2)  R1 and R2 might indicate, in their Hello, another nickname that
        attached end nodes may use if they are multihomed to R1 and R2,
        separate from R1 and R2's nicknames (which they would also list
        in their Hello).  This would be useful if there were many end
        nodes multihomed to the same set of RBridges.  This would be
        analogous to a pseudonode nickname; return traffic would go via
        the shortest path from the source to the endnode, whether it is
        R1 or R2.  If E loses connectivity to R2, then E would revert to
        using R1's nickname.  This does use a nickname, but hopefully
        would be shared by many end nodes multihomed to the same set of
        RBridges.

   (When end ndoe E loses connectivity to one of the RBridges, how to
   detect the connectionless and how to switch to another RBridge will
   be defined later in this document.)


5.  Building a Cloudlet

   Another level of functionality might be to build reasonably large
   cloudlets, with multiple hops of ordinary spanning tree bridges,
   and/or "simple RBridges".  A "simple RBridge" is one that only is
   aware of the topology of the cloudlet.  In other words, the cloudlet



Perlman, et al.         Expires January 31, 2013                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft               TRILL Cloudlet                    July 2012


   operates like a lower level of routing.  Inside the TRILL core,
   forwarding is based on nicknames.  Inside the cloudlet, forwarding is
   based on MAC addresses of the end nodes in the cloudlet, although the
   packet being forwarded may be encapsulated with a TRILL header.  If
   all end nodes in the cloudlet are smart end nodes, then packets
   inside the cloudlet would always be encapsulated.  If there in a
   "normal" endnode N, in the cloudlet, then N would issue
   unencapsulated packets, and the first simple RBridge R1, would
   encapsulate it, and R1 would maintain the endnode cache entries for
   end nodes communicating with N. Likewise, when R1 is forwarding to N,
   R1 would decapsulate the packet.

   RBridges within the cloudlet have to know whether the packet belongs
   in the cloudlet or the TRILL campus.  This is done based on the
   "egress nickname" in the encapsulated packet.  If the egress nickname
   is the nickname to be used by the cloudlet, then the packet is
   forwarded only within the cloudlet.  If the egress nickname is not
   one used by the cloudlet, the packet is forwarded to the "true
   RBridge" that attaches the cloudlet to the TRILL campus.  If the
   cloudlet is multihomed to R1 and R2, say, and the "ingress nickname"
   indicates R1's nickname, then the cloudlet forwards the encapsulated
   packet towards R1.  If the cloudlet is multihomed and is using a
   pseudonode nickname, then the cloudlet forwards to whichever of R1 or
   R2 is closer.


6.  Security Considerations

   For general TRILL Security Considerations, see([RFC6325]).


7.  Acknowledgements

   TBD


8.  IANA Considerations


9.  Normative References

   [Directory]
              Linda, D., Eastlake, D., Perlman, R., and I. Gashinsky,
              "TRILL Edge Directory Assistance Framework", raft-ietf-
              trill-directory-framework-00 (work in process), July 2012.

   [RFC1195]  Callon, R., "Use of OSI IS-IS for routing in TCP/IP and
              dual environments", RFC 1195, December 1990.



Perlman, et al.         Expires January 31, 2013                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft               TRILL Cloudlet                    July 2012


   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC6165]  Banerjee, A. and D. Ward, "Extensions to IS-IS for Layer-2
              Systems", RFC 6165, April 2011.

   [RFC6325]  Perlman, R., Eastlake, D., Dutt, D., Gai, S., and A.
              Ghanwani, "Routing Bridges (RBridges): Base Protocol
              Specification", RFC 6325, July 2011.

   [RFC6326bis]
              Eastlake, D., Banerjee, A., Dutt, D., Ghanwani, A., and R.
              Perlman, "Transparent Interconnection of Lots of Links
              (TRILL) Use of IS-IS",
              draft-eastlake-isis-rfc6326bis-07.txt, work in process,
              March 2012.

   [TRILL-ESADI]
              Zhai, H., Hu, F., Perlman, R., and D. Eastlake, "TRILL
              (Transparent Interconnection of Lots of Links): The ESADI
              (End Station Address Distribution Information) Protocol",
              draft-ietf-trill-esadi-00.txt (work in process),
              June 2012.


Authors' Addresses

   Radia Perlman
   Intel Labs
   2200 Mission College Blvd.
   Santa Clara, CA 95054-1549
   USA

   Phone: +1-408-765-8080
   Email: Radia@alum.mit.edu


   Fangwei Hu
   ZTE Corporation
   No.889 Bibo Rd
   Shanghai,   201203
   China

   Phone: +86 21 68896273
   Email: hu.fangwei@zte.com.cn






Perlman, et al.         Expires January 31, 2013                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft               TRILL Cloudlet                    July 2012


   Donald Eastlake,3rd
   Huawei technology
   155 Beaver Street
   Milford, MA 01757
   USA

   Phone: +1-508-634-2066
   Email: d3e3e3@gmail.com











































Perlman, et al.         Expires January 31, 2013                [Page 8]

