


Network Working Group                                         B. Nordman
Internet-Draft                                              S. Lanzisera
Intended status:  Standards Track             Lawrence Berkeley National
Expires:  April 26, 2012                                      Laboratory
                                                        October 24, 2011


                             Power Locator
                     draft-nordman-power-locator-00

Abstract

   This specification addresses how to request that a device should
   enter a "power locator" mode for a limited period of time.  The mode
   involves a device cycling between a low and high power level in a
   predictable manner so that a power metering device upstream in the
   power distribution system can sense the signal and so determine where
   the device draws its power from.  This will be useful in many types
   of buildings, particularly data centers and large commercial
   buildings.  This draft addresses operation of the device carrying out
   the request, but not detailed operation of the device that makes the
   request and interprets the results.

   This draft is an initial discussion document to generate feedback and
   improvement.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 26, 2012.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.




Nordman & Lanzisera      Expires April 26, 2012                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                Power Locator                 October 2011


   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


1.  Overview

   Management of energy use in buildings is often impeded by not knowing
   basic information about where the energy is used and for what
   purpose.  The quantity of electricity used is being addressed by the
   Energy Management Working Group, but there is no existing mechanism
   to help identify where in a power distribution tree a particular
   device is located.  In data centers, Power Distribution Units
   commonly have metering capability for each individual outlet.
   Metering for commercial buildings is becoming less expensive each
   year, so that measurement of entire electrical panels, or individual
   circuits, is increasingly common.

   As metering within buildings becomes more sophisticated, it is
   important to know what devices are on each metered circuit.  While
   this can be entered into a management system manually (if known), an
   automated solution would be much less costly, more reliable, and much
   easier to keep current.

   Many devices and components can modulate their own power use
   dynamically.  For example, processors can be sped up or slowed down;
   disks can be spun up or spun down; displays can be made brighter or
   dimmer (or even not lit at all); heaters in a printer can be engaged
   or disengaged; fans can be turned on or off, etc.  These changes
   normally occur for functional purposes, with components powered up as
   needed, and down when not, to save energy or reduce thermal burdens.
   However, they can be engaged for other purposes; in this case, to
   create a very low bit rate signal on the power line.

   This mechanism is cleanest if the device in question is otherwise
   completely idle, but can still be usefully invoked if it is engaging
   in modest, random utilization that induces power levels above the
   normal idle level.

   This draft describes a simple mechanism to aid device location for
   any device that has the ability to modulate its own power consumption
   on a timely basis.



Nordman & Lanzisera      Expires April 26, 2012                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                Power Locator                 October 2011


   The scope of this draft is any entity which is reachable via SNMP.


2.  Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].

2.1.  Theory of Operation

   This mechanism covers a building which has a management system (MS),
   meters, and individual devices.  The devices can receive power
   locator requests.

2.1.1.  Devices

   Devices that support this mechanism recieve an SNMP request, and if
   granted, alter their behavior for a specified period of time.

2.1.2.  Meters

   Meters may measure power for an individual outlet, an individual
   circuit breaker, or an entire section of a building.  That is, they
   may power one device, or many.  The meter reports power or energy
   data to the MS on a known fixed periodic basis.

2.1.3.  Management System

   The management system has the ability to identify devices that are or
   may be in the target building, has access to the data reported by
   meters in the building, and can send power locator requests to
   individual devices.

2.1.4.  Request

   The SNMP request is accomplished by a SET of each of the following
   values:

   Bitmap:  A 8 byte value for which each 1 bit indicates that the
      device should maximize power and each 0 bit indicates that it
      should minimize it.
   Length:  A one byte value which indicated the length of the bitmap;
      may be in the range 2..64.







Nordman & Lanzisera      Expires April 26, 2012                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                Power Locator                 October 2011


   Period:  A [ 3 / 4 ] byte value indicating the length of time of each
      bit period, measured in [ milliseconds / microseconds ].
   Duration:  The number of periods for the entire test.  The Duration
      value can be read to track the progress of the test, as the device
      will decrement it as the periods pass.  When the test is complete,
      duration is zero.  If the device refuses to grant the test
      request, then the duration is set immediately to zero.  If the
      request is granted, the activity begins immediately.

2.1.5.  Reporting

   The device may return any of the data items above via in SNMP GET.
   The following are also available:

   PowerDelta:  A value which indicates the estimated difference between
      the minimum and maximum power levels, measured in milliwatts.
      This is read-only.
   Duration:  As above, this counts down to zero over the course of the
      test.


3.  Discussion

   A management system has access to data from a series of meters that
   measure discrete portions of the electricity distribution system in a
   building.  It also has access to a list of IP addresses that may
   correspond to devices in the building.  Usually a subnet will cover a
   building (or portion thereof) and so all addresses in the subnet can
   be queried.  Alternatively, the router can be queried for all
   addresses it knows of, etc.

   The management system will direct one or more devices to modulate
   their power with a Period value typically twice the length of each
   meter reading period.  This ensures that every other reading will
   reflect only a maximum or minimum for the target device (the
   intermediate readings will be some combination of adjacent periods).
   If timing of devices and meters can be aligned, then devices may have
   a Period value equal to the meter reading period.

   The simplest bitmap would be simply "01" so that the device would
   alternate between low and high on a fixed period.  However, more
   complex patterns will provide a better signal, particularly in the
   face of periodic ordinary consumption.  In addition, complex patterns
   facilitate searching for multiple devices at the same time.

   Once a device is in its modulation mode, the management system will
   scan data from each meter to try to find which meter the signal is
   visible on.  The signal processing algorithm(s) used by management



Nordman & Lanzisera      Expires April 26, 2012                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                Power Locator                 October 2011


   systems are outside the scope of this draft.  Once the device is
   localized to a particular meter, the management system may set the
   duration value to zero to terminate the test, or may simply let it
   run its course.  If the device cannot be located, the test can be re-
   run.

   A management system may periodically re-run the test to track any
   devices that have moved.  The type of device may inform how often the
   test is re-run.

   For devices with internal batteries, there is the possibility of
   going to battery-only mode for low-power, and to battery charging for
   high power?  This would make the delta much larger for something like
   a notebook.

   This draft does not address how a device could or should modulate its
   power use.


4.  Open Issues

   SNMP uses a series of SETs.  I assume that the various values should
   be set with the duration being the last one.  The duration will count
   down to zero during the course of operation.  Is this the right way
   to use SNMP for this purpose?

   Should Period be measured in milliseconds or microseconds?  Four
   bytes at 1ms is a really long time; three bytes is odd.  Options seem
   to be milliseconds at 3B or 4B, or microseconds at 4B. Note that one
   AC cycle is 17 or 20 ms long (60 Hz and 50 Hz), so presumably no
   value less than this would be used, at least for AC power
   distribution.  The microsecond case would be the same but a higher
   starting value.  Should there be a aximum value for "Period"?

   Should any facility be provided for an IP device to proxy this
   ability for a non-IP device?  (Probably not) .

   How about devices with multiple power supplies?  Generally the signal
   will show up on both meters (if they are fed by different meters).
   If the device has the ability to shut off all but one supply, then
   each could be located separately, but this draft does not consider
   how to signal that behavior.

   SNMP is convenient, but alternative protocols could also be used.
   Are there any particularly suited to this?

   Should there be an explicit error variable?  In addition to the
   device rejecting the request, it may be or become disconnected from



Nordman & Lanzisera      Expires April 26, 2012                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                Power Locator                 October 2011


   mains power distribution (e.g. a notebook running on battery).

   Is "test" the right word to use?


5.  Security Considerations

   This mechanism introduces no information security vulnerabilities.
   It does create the possibility of limited extra energy use when
   invoked.  Invoking this mechanism on a large number of devices in
   synchrony could introduce instability into the local power
   distribution system.


6.  Privacy Considerations

   TBD


7.  Acknowledgement

   We would like to thank <get your name here>.


8.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.


Authors' Addresses

   Bruce Nordman
   Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory
   1 Cyclotron Road
   Berkeley, CA  94720
   USA

   Email:  BNordman@LBL.gov












Nordman & Lanzisera      Expires April 26, 2012                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                Power Locator                 October 2011


   Steven Lanzisera
   Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory
   1 Cyclotron Road
   Berkeley, CA  94720
   USA

   Email:  SMLanzisera@LBL.gov












































Nordman & Lanzisera      Expires April 26, 2012                 [Page 7]

