


Network Working Group                                            J. Falk
Internet-Draft                                               Return Path
Intended status: Informational                             March 4, 2011
Expires: September 5, 2011


    Redaction of Potentially Sensitive Data from Mail Abuse Reports
                     draft-jdfalk-marf-redaction-00

Abstract

   Email messages often contain information which might be considered
   private or sensitive, per either regulation or social norms.  When
   such a message becomes the subject of a report intended to be shared
   with other entities, the report generator may wish to redact or elide
   the sensitive portions of the message.  This memo suggests one method
   for doing so effectively.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 5, 2011.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as



Falk                    Expires September 5, 2011               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                  Redaction                     March 2011


   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Recommended Practice  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   3.  Security and Privacy Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   4.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4









































Falk                    Expires September 5, 2011               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                  Redaction                     March 2011


1.  Introduction

   [ARF] defines a message format for sending reports of abuse in the
   messaging infrastructure, with an eye toward automating both the
   generating and consumption of those reports.

   For privacy considerations it might be the policy of a report
   generator to redact, or obscure, portions of the report that might
   identify an end user that caused the report to be generated.
   Precisely how this is done is unspecified in [ARF] as it will
   generally be a matter of local policy.  That specification does
   admonish generators against being too over-zealous with this
   practice, as obscuring too much data makes the report inactionable.

   Previous redaction practices, such as replacing local-parts of
   addresses with a uniform string like "xxxxxxxx", often frustrated any
   kind of prioritizing or grouping of reports.

   Generally, it is assumed that the recipient fields of a message, when
   copied into a report, are to be obscured to protect the identify of
   an end user that submitted a complaint about a message.  However, it
   is also presumed that other data will be left intact, data that could
   be correlated against logs to determine the source of the message
   that drew a complaint.


2.  Recommended Practice

   To enable correlation of reports that might refer to a common but
   anonymous source, the following redaction practice is recommended:

   1.  Select an arbitrary string that will be used by an Administrative
       Domain (ADMD) that generates reports.  This string will not be
       changed except according to a key rotation policy or similar.
       Call this the "redaction key".
   2.  Identify string(s) (such as local-parts of email addresses) in a
       message that need to be redacted.  Call this the "private data".
   3.  Construct a new string that is a copy of the redaction key with
       the private data concatenated to it.
   4.  Compute a digest of that string with any hashing/digest algorithm
       such as SHA1.
   5.  Encode that hash with the base64 algorithm as defined in [MIME].
   6.  Replace the private data with the encoded hash when generating
       the report.

   This has the effect of obscuring the data in an irreversible way but
   still allows the report recipient to observe that numerous reports
   are about one particular end user.  Such detection enables the



Falk                    Expires September 5, 2011               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                  Redaction                     March 2011


   receiver to prioritize its reactions based on problems that appear to
   be focused on specific end users that may be under attack.


3.  Security and Privacy Considerations

   Security issues with respect to these reports are found in [ARF].

   While the method of redaction described in this document may somewhat
   reduce the likelihood of some types of private data from leaking
   between Administrative Domains, it is extremely unlikely that report
   generation software could ever be created to recognize all of the
   different ways that private information may be expressed through
   human written language.  If further protections are required,
   implementors may wish to consider establishing legal contracts or
   other non-technology-based agreements between the relevant entities.


4.  References

   [ARF]   Shafranovich, Y., Levine, J., and M. Kucherawy, "An
           Extensible Format for Email Feedback Reports", RFC 5965,
           August 2010.

   [MIME]  Freed, N. and N. Borenstein, "Multipurpose Internet Mail
           Extensions (MIME) Part One: Format of Internet Message
           Bodies", RFC 2045, November 1996.


Author's Address

   J.D. Falk
   Return Path
   100 Mathilda Place, Suite 100
   Sunnyvale, CA  94086
   US

   Email: ietf@cybernothing.org
   URI:   http://www.returnpath.net/












Falk                    Expires September 5, 2011               [Page 4]

