


Network Working Group                                           P. Kim
Internet-Draft                            Korea Polytechnic University
Intended status: Experimental                                   H. Han
Expires: September 1, 2010                                         KUT
                                                     February 28, 2010


            A Mechanism for Available Capacity Estimation     
                                
                   draft-pskim-ippm-capaest-00.txt

Abstract

   In this draft, a mechanism for available capacity estimation of an 
   end-to-end path is proposed to improve the estimation accuracy 
   compared with the existing IGI(Initial Gap Increasing)/PTR(Packet 
   Transmission Rate) mechanism. The proposed mechanism defines three 
   cases of the difference between the average output gap and the input 
   gap, and then reflects fully them, while the existing mechanism 
   reflected only two cases. Since three cases are handled respectively 
   by appropriate corresponding manners, the proposed mechanism can be 
   expected to reduce the detection error for the turning point. 
   Therefore, the end-to-end available capacity can be estimated more 
   accurate than the existing mechanism. 

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with 
   the provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other 
   documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts 
   as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in 
   progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 1, 2010.

Copyright Notice

Kim & Han              Expires September 1, 2010               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft  A Mechanism for Available Capacity Estimation  Feb 2010

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with 
   respect to this document.  Code Components extracted from this 
   document must include Simplified BSD License text as described in 
   Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without 
   warranty as described in the BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
   2.  Proposed Scheme . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.1 IGI/PTR Mechanism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.2 Measuring Bottleneck Link Capacity  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   2.3 Estimating Available Path Capacity  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   3.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   4.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
     4.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
     4.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7

1.  Introduction

   Understanding the dynamic properties of the end-to-end IP 
   performance metrics, such as capacity, delay, jitter, packet loss, 
   is beneficial for the proper resource management in existing wired 
   and emerging wireless Internet services[IEEE21][FMIPv6-MIH]. The 
   increasing trend in the wireless Internet services means that the 
   requested performance for a certain service might not be guaranteed, 
   not only because of the air interface bandwidth limitation, but also 
   due to a limitation in the transport network's available capacity. 
   Measuring IP performance metrics is a very challenging task due to 
   the heterogeneity of the current systems and the different traffic 
   characteristics of different data flows[RFC2330]. In the recent 
   decade, the IP Performance Metrics (IPPM) working group defined a 
   set of standard metrics and has developed schemes for accurately 
   measuring these performance metrics. Among them, this draft 
   considers the available capacity measurement[RFC5136]. The available 
   capacity of an end-to-end path is its remaining capacity, that is, 
   the amount of traffic that can be sent along the path without 
   congesting it. This available capacity between two hosts is an 
   important network parameter for improving Quality of Service (QoS) 
   in many distributed applications, such as the overlay construction 
   of peer to peer system, optimization of resource utilization, 


Kim & Han              Expires September 1, 2010               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft  A Mechanism for Available Capacity Estimation  Feb 2010

   optimization of dynamic server selection, socket buffer sizing, 
   admission control, and congestion control. Therefore, recently, the 
   area of end-to-end available capacity estimation has attracted 
   considerable interest. As a result, several mechanisms for the 
   available capacity estimation have been developed based on active 
   measurements[Hu]. 
  
   Among existing mechanisms for available capacity estimation, the 
   IGI(Initial Gap Increasing)/PTR(Packet Transmission Rate) mechanism 
   has been proposed recently[Hu]. The ultimate objective is to 
   experimentally determine the input gap value at some point for which 
   the average output gap is equal to the input gap. At this point, the 
   probing packets are considered to interleave nicely with the 
   competing traffic, and the average rate of the packet train equals 
   the available capacity on the bottleneck link. This point is called 
   the "turning point". At the turning point, the input gap value for 
   which the average output gap is equal to the input gap is the right 
   value to use for estimating the available capacity. However, there 
   are some issues in the existing IGI/PTR mechanism. After performing 
   a measurement, three cases can be defined according to the 
   difference between the average output gap and the input gap. These 
   three cases have respectively different relationship between the 
   average rate of the probing packet train and the available capacity. 
   However, the existing mechanism did not reflect fully these three 
   cases in order to reduce the detection latency of the turning point. 
   That is, two of three cases are handled in the same way, which can 
   introduce the detection error for the turning point since these two 
   cases handled in the same way are absolutely different. Thus, the 
   available capacity can be estimated inaccurately although the 
   measurement latency can be reduced.
   
   Therefore, to reduce the detection error of the turning point and 
   enhance the accuracy of the available capacity estimation, a new 
   mechanism is proposed based on the IGI/PTR mechanism. The proposed 
   mechanism reflects fully three cases, while the existing mechanism 
   reflected only two cases. Since three cases are handled 
   respectively by appropriate corresponding manners, the proposed 
   mechanism can be expected to reduce the detection error for the 
   turning point. Therefore, the end-to-end available capacity can be 
   estimated more accurate than existing mechanism. In order to verify 
   the proposed mechanism and to compare with the existing mechanism, 
   experiments are performed, which shows the proposed mechanism is 
   more accurate than the existing mechanism.
 
2.  Proposed Mechanism
   
2.1  Existing IGI/PTR Mechanism

   More recently, the IGI(Initial Gap Increasing)/PTR(Packet 


Kim & Han              Expires September 1, 2010               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft  A Mechanism for Available Capacity Estimation  Feb 2010

   Transmission Rate) mechanism was proposed for the available 
   capacity estimation and shown to be much faster than existing 
   mechanisms with similar measurement accuracy but with shorter 
   measurement latency. This mechanism is based on a single-hop gap 
   model that captures the relationship between the competing traffic 
   and the probing packet train. As a sequence of probing packet trains 
   from the source travel through the network, packets belonging to the 
   competing traffic may be inserted between them, thus increasing the 
   gap at the destination. As a result, the average output gap value at 
   the destination may be a function of the competing traffic rate, 
   making it possible to estimate the amount of competing traffic. That 
   is, the average output gap can be used to determine the competing 
   traffic capacity and hence the available capacity on the 
   end-to-end path assuming that the bottleneck link capacity along the
   end-to-end path is known. At some point, the average output gap 
   equals the input gap as gaps in a probing packet train increase. 
   This point is called the "turning point". At the turning point, the
   input gap value for which the average output gap is equal to the 
   input gap is the right value to use for estimating the available 
   capacity.
   
   However, there are some issues in the existing IGI/PTR mechanism. 
   After performing the measurement, three cases are defined according 
   to the difference between the average output gap and the input gap. 
   These three cases mean that the average output gap at the 
   destination is (a) larger than, (b) equal to, (c) less than the 
   input gap at the source. These three cases have respectively 
   different relationship between the average rate of the probing 
   packet train and the available capacity. However, the existing  
   mechanism did not reflect fully these three cases in order to reduce 
   the measurement latency. That is, both (b) and (c) cases are handled 
   in the same way, which can introduce the detection error for the 
   turning point since (b) and (c) cases are absolutely different. 
   Therefore, the available capacity can be estimated inaccurately 
   although the measurement latency can be reduced.

   In this draft, a new mechanism for available capacity estimation 
   mechanism is proposed to improve the estimation accuracy compared 
   with the existing mechanism. As mentioned before, since (b) and (c) 
   cases handled in the same way are absolutely different, they should 
   be handled by respectively.

2.2  Measuring Bottleneck Link Capacity

   As shown in [Hu], the end-to-end available capacity is defined 
   as the difference between the bottleneck link capacity along an 
   end-to-end path and the competing traffic. The bottleneck link 
   capacity in the path determines the end-to-end capacity which is the 
   maximum IP layer rate that the path can transfer from source to 


Kim & Han              Expires September 1, 2010               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft  A Mechanism for Available Capacity Estimation  Feb 2010

   destination. In other words, the capacity of a path establishes an 
   upper bound on the IP layer throughput that a user can expect to get 
   from that path. There are diverse measurement mechanisms for the 
   bottleneck link capacity. Therefore, the bottleneck link capacity 
   can measured from one of existing mechanisms.

2.3  Estimating Available Path Capacity
   
   There are several important probing parameters such as probing 
   packet size, number of probing packet in packet train, and input gap 
   to get correct measurement. Among them, input gap in a probing 
   packet train is the most important parameter to control for accurate 
   available capacity estimation. The source sends a sequence of 
   probing packet trains with adjusting input gap. The difference 
   between the average output gap and the input gap is observed for 
   each train. Then, the turning point is detected for estimating the 
   available capacity.

   (a) Detection of turning point

   After performing a measurement, three cases are defined according to 
   the difference between the average output gap and the input gap. 
   Three cases are called 'Red', 'Yellow', 'Green' cases which have 
   respectively different relationship between the average rate of the 
   probing packet train and the available capacity as follows: 

   - Red : The average rate of the packet train is more than the 
     available capacity with the following condition:

     average output gap > input gap +  delta/2.

   - Yellow : The average rate of the packet train is similar to the 
     available capacity with the following condition:

     |average output gap - input gap | < delta.

   - Green :  The average rate of the packet train is less than the 
     available capacity with the following condition:

     average output gap < input gap - delta/2.

   Above three cases are handled respectively as follows:

   (1) Handling of 'Red' case
   
   The measurement is repeated with the increased input gap. After 
   then, three cases observed once again. For each case, the 
   measurement is repeated with adjusting input gap as follows:



Kim & Han              Expires September 1, 2010               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft  A Mechanism for Available Capacity Estimation  Feb 2010

   - Red : increased input gap
   - Yellow : same input gap as previous measurement 
   - Green : decreased input gap

   In the existing mechanism, the measurement is repeated with the same 
   input gap as previous measurement for 'Green' case. 

   (2) Handling of 'Yellow' case
   
   The measurement is repeated with the same input gap as previous 
   measurement. After then, three cases are observed once again and 
   then handled respectively as follows:

   - Red : measurement with increased input gap
   - Yellow : measurement finished (turning point detected)
   - Green : measurement with decreased input gap

   In the existing mechanism, the measurement is finished for 'Green' 
   case.

   (3) Handling of 'Green' case
  
   The measurement is repeated with the decreased input gap. In the 
   existing mechanism, the measurement is repeated with the same input 
   gap in this case. After then, three cases are observed once again 
   and then handled respectively as follows:

   - Red : measurement with increased input gap
   - Yellow : measurement finished (turning point detected)
   - Green : measurement with decreased input gap

   In the existing mechanism, the measurement is finished for 'Green' 
   case.
 
   As shown in three cases, the proposed mechanism handles 'Yellow' and 
   'Green' cases respectively while the existing mechanism handles them 
   in the same way.

   (b) Computing available capacity

   When the turning point is detected, the measurement is finished and 
   then the end-to-end available capacity can be estimated as follows.
   The end-to-end available capacity is obtained by subtracting the 
   competing traffic capacity from the bottleneck link capacity.

   As mentioned before, the bottleneck link capacity can be measured 
   from one of existing mechanisms. Then, the competing traffic 
   capacity can be computed using the average output gap and the input 
   gap at the turning point, and the bottleneck link capacity.
   
 
Kim & Han              Expires September 1, 2010               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft  A Mechanism for Available Capacity Estimation  Feb 2010

 
3.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no IANA actions.

4.  References

4.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2330] V. Paxson, G. Alimes, J. Mahdavi and M. Mathis, "Framework 
             for IP Performance Metrics," IETF RFC 2330, May 1998.

   [RFC5136] P. Chimento, J. Ishac, "Defining Network Capacity," IETF 
             RFC 5136, Feb 2008.

4.2.  Informative References

   [IEEE21]	IEEE802.21/D09.00, "Draft standard for local and 
            metropolitan area networks : Media independent handover
            services," Feb 2008.            

   [FMIPv6-MIH]	Q. B. Mussabbir, W. Yao, "Optimized FMIPv6 handover 
           using IEEE 802.21 MIH services in vehicular networks," IEEE 
           Trans. on Vehicular Technology, Vol. 56, No. 6, 
           pp. 3397~3407, 2007.            

   [Hu]     N. Hu and P. Steenkiste, "Evaluation and characterization 
            of available bandwidth probing techniques," IEEE JSAC, Vol. 
            21, No. 6, pp. 879-894, 2003.
            
Author's Address

   Pyungsoo Kim
   Department of Electronics Engineering,
   Korea Polytechnic University,
   2121 Jungwang-Dong, Shiheung City,
   Gyeonggi-Do  429-793
   KOREA

   Phone: +82 31 8041 0489
   EMail: poongdou@gmail.com

   Youn-Hee Han
   KUT
   Gajeon-Ri, 307, Byeongcheon-Myeon
   Cheonan, Chungnam
   KOREA

   Phone: +82 41 560 1486
   Email: yhhan@kut.ac.kr

Kim & Han              Expires September 1, 2010               [Page 7]
