


MIF Working Group                                                 P. Kim
Internet-Draft                                                       KPU
Intended status: Experimental                                   
Expires: September 7, 2011                                 March 6, 2011
                                                     


   A Measurement Scheme of IP Performance Metrics for Mobile Networks
                with Multiple Access Network Interfaces     
               draft-pskim-mif-performance-metrics-00.txt

Abstract

   This draft proposes a measurement scheme of IP performance metrics 
   for mobile networks with multiple interfaces in heterogeneous 
   wireless networks. In the proposed scheme, mobile nodes (MNs) can 
   get IP performance metrics irrespective of the presence or absence 
   of measurement functionality. Since the multihomed mobile router 
   (MMR) with heterogeneous wireless multiple interfaces measures IP 
   performance metrics on behalf of the MNs inside the mobile network, 
   the proposed scheme does not require MNs to be involved in measuring 
   IP performance metrics. MNs can get measured IP performance metrics 
   from the MMR using L3 messages. Therefore, the proposed scheme can 
   reduce burden and power consumption of MNs with limited resource and 
   battery power since MNs don't measure directly IP performance 
   metrics. In addition, the proposed scheme can reduce considerably 
   traffic overhead over wireless links on multiple measurement paths 
   since signaling messages and injected testing traffic are reduced.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 7, 2011.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

Kim                    Expires September 7, 2011                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft        Measurement of IPPMs for MIF              Mar 2011

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
   2.  Links on End-to-End Path  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   3.  Proposed Measurement Scheme . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
     3.1 Functional Entities on End-to-End Path  . . . . . . . . . . 5
     3.2 Operation Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   4.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   5.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
     5.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
     5.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7

1.  Introduction

   Today's mobile hosts often have wireless multiple access network 
   interfaces such as WLAN(802.11a/b/g), WMAN(802.16e, WiBro), 
   WWAN(3G, HSDPA), WPAN(802.15) to access the Internet. This means that 
   mobile hosts have the ability to attach to multiple networks
   simultaneously. Currently, the multiple interfaces (MIF) working 
   group in IETF is describing the issues of attaching to multiple 
   networks on hosts and document existing practice [MIF-PS]. Once 
   wireless multiple interfaces are offered, users may want to select 
   the most appropriate set of wireless interface(s) depending on the 
   network environment, particularly in wireless networks which are 
   mutable and less reliable than wired networks. Users may also want to 
   select the most appropriate wireless interface per communication type 
   or to combine a set of interfaces to get sufficient bandwidth or more 
   bandwidth using bandwidth aggregation mechanism [KIM2009].

   In the near future, airplanes, automobiles, and even people will 
   carry entire networks of IP devices that connect to the Internet, 
   which is called the mobile network. To deal with the mobility 
   support of mobile networks, the IETF created a set of Network 
   Mobility (NEMO) protocols. Through NEMO protocols, mobile nodes (MNs) 
   on the mobile network are unaware of their network's mobility; 
   however, they are provided with uninterrupted Internet access even 
   when the network changes its attachment point to the Internet 
   [RFC3963].
   

Kim                    Expires September 7, 2011                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft        Measurement of IPPMs for MIF              Mar 2011

   Meanwhile, measuring IP performance metrics, such as delay, jitter, 
   bandwidth, packet loss, etc., is a very challenging task due to the 
   heterogeneity of the current systems and the different traffic 
   characteristics of different data flows [RFC2330][KIM2009]. In the 
   recent decade, the IP Performance Metrics (IPPM) working group has 
   defined a set of standard metrics and developed schemes for 
   accurately measuring these performance metrics. 

   In this draft, a measurement scheme of IP performance metrics is 
   considered for the mobile network in heterogeneous wireless 
   networks. There can be often many MNs in the mobile network. The 
   mobile router (MR) of the mobile network is capable of changing its 
   point of attachment to the Internet without disrupting higher layer 
   connections of attached devices. To consider heterogeneous wireless 
   networks, the MR is assumed to be multi-homing, that is, have 
   heterogeneous multiple wireless interfaces and thus called the 
   multihomed MR (MMR). The MMR enables the multi-path communication 
   outside the mobile network. Thus, MNs inside the mobile network can 
   select the most appropriate communication path depending on the 
   network environment and then communicate with corresponding hosts, 
   such as the IPTV server, media streaming server, web server, FTP 
   server, etc, via the MMR. If MNs want to understand the condition of 
   multiple communication paths, they will measure directly IP 
   performance metrics for each path. Therefore, all MNs inside the 
   mobile network are required to be involved in measuring IP 
   performance metrics and thus have to implement measurement 
   functionality, which can be somewhat burdensome and power 
   consumptive for MNs with limited resource and battery power. In 
   addition, there can be the number of measurement signaling messages 
   and injected testing traffic as shown in the active measurement 
   techniques [RFC2330][Kim2009], which can cause considerable traffic 
   overhead over wireless links on measurement paths.

   Therefore, in this paper, a measurement scheme of IP performance 
   metrics is proposed for the mobile network in heterogeneous wireless 
   networks. In the proposed scheme, when MNs inside the mobile network 
   want to understand the condition of multiple communication paths 
   outside the mobile network, they can get IP performance metrics 
   irrespective of the presence or absence of measurement 
   functionality. That is, the proposed scheme does not require the MN 
   to be involved in measuring IP performance metrics. Instead, the MMR 
   measures IP performance metrics on behalf of the MNs inside the 
   mobile network. Then, MNs can get measured IP performance metrics 
   from the MMR using L3 messages. These L3 messages can be defined 
   newly or reused by existing Internet Control Message Protocol (ICMP) 
   messages in [RFC4443]. The proposed scheme can reduce burden and 
   power consumption of MNs with limited resource and battery power 
   since MNs don't measure directly IP performance metrics. 
   In addition, the proposed scheme can reduce considerably traffic 
   overhead over wireless links on measurement paths since signaling 

Kim                    Expires September 7, 2011                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft        Measurement of IPPMs for MIF              Mar 2011

   messages and injected testing traffic are reduced.

2.  Links on End-to-End Path
   
   This draft considers the mobile network in heterogeneous wireless 
   networks. The mobile router (MR) is capable of changing its point of 
   attachment to the mobile network, moving from one link to another 
   link. To consider heterogeneous wireless networks, the MR is 
   assumed to be multi-homing and thus called the multihomed MR (MMR). 
   The MMR has heterogeneous multiple network interfaces which are 
   categorized by internal and external wireless interfaces. With the 
   consideration of coverage and bandwidth, internal wireless 
   interfaces attached to MNs inside the mobile network would be 
   WLAN(802.11a/b/g) and external wireless interfaces attached to 
   external base stations would be WMAN(802.16e, WiBro) and WWAN(3G, 
   HSDPA). Therefore, the MMR enables the multi-path communication 
   outside the mobile network through these heterogeneous wireless 
   interfaces. Meanwhile, MNs inside the mobile network are assumed 
   to have single wireless interface or heterogeneous multiple wireless 
   interfaces. Corresponding hosts (CHs) can be the IPTV server, media 
   streaming server, web server, FTP server, etc. MNs inside the mobile 
   network can communicate with CHs on multiple paths via the MMR. The 
   end-to-end multi-path from MNs inside the mobile network to CHs 
   outside the mobile network via the MMR consists of following three 
   links.

   Inside the mobile network, the WLAN(802.11a/b/g) will be generally 
   adopted as an air technology due to high transmission speed and 
   moderate coverage. Thus, MNs with WLAN interface can communicate via 
   the MMR with internal WLAN interface inside the mobile network.
   Outside the mobile network, WMAN(802.16e, WiBro) and WWAN(3G, HSDPA) 
   will be generally adopted as an air technology due to wide coverage. 
   Thus, the MMR with external WMAN and WWAN interfaces can communicate 
   via corresponding base stations (BSs). However, in this wireless 
   link, it is difficult to expect higher transmission speed than that 
   of the wireless link between MNs and MMR using WLAN. The link 
   between external BSs and CHs consists generally of routers with high 
   processing speed and wired networks with high transmission speed. 

3.  Proposed Measurement Scheme

   If MNs inside the mobile network measure directly IP performance 
   metrics, they are required to be involved in the measurement 
   procedure and thus have to implement measurement functionality, 
   which can be somewhat burdensome and power consumptive for MNs with 
   limited resource and battery power. In addition, there can be the 
   number of measurement signaling messages and injected testing 
   traffic, which can cause considerable traffic overhead over the 
   wireless links, such as link between MN and MMR, and link between 
   MMR and external BS, on measurement paths. In addition, as 

Kim                    Expires September 7, 2011                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft        Measurement of IPPMs for MIF              Mar 2011

   mentioned previous section, the wireless link between MMR and 
   external BS is likely to be overloaded network link, that is, 
   "bottleneck link". Moreover, if there are many mobile networks 
   connected to external BS, this link is likely to be "tight link".  
   This means that IP performance metrics of the end-to-end 
   multi-path might be mostly influenced by the wireless link between 
   MMR and external BS.

   With the consideration of these problems, a measurement scheme of IP
   performance metrics is proposed for the mobile network in 
   heterogeneous wireless networks. In the proposed scheme, when MNs 
   inside the mobile network want to understand the condition of 
   multiple communication paths outside the mobile network, they can 
   get IP performance metrics irrespective of the presence or absence 
   of measurement functionality. Since the MMR with heterogeneous 
   wireless interfaces measures IP performance metrics on behalf of the 
   MNs inside the mobile network, the proposed scheme does not require 
   MNs to be involved in measuring IP performance metrics.

3.1  Functional Entities on End-to-End Path

   Functional entities on the end-to-end measurement path consist of 
   MNs, MMR, and measurement server. MNs inside the mobile network are 
   assumed to have a single wireless interface or heterogeneous 
   multiple wireless interfaces. When MNs want to get IP performance 
   metrics to understand the condition of multiple communication paths, 
   they can request to the MMR using the L3 message. Also, MNs can get 
   IP performance metrics that the MMR provides periodically. The MMR 
   measures IP performance metrics on behalf of the MNs inside the 
   mobile network. Since the MMR have heterogeneous external wireless 
   interfaces such as WMAN  and WWAN, the MMR enables the multi-path 
   communication outside the mobile network and thus can measure IP 
   performance metrics for all paths through these heterogeneous 
   external wireless interfaces. The measurement server is a host that 
   receives testing traffic, calculates performance statistics, and 
   response results of IP performance metrics to the MMR.

3.2  Operation Procedure

   On the multi-path between the MMR and the measurement server, IP 
   performance metrics can be measured using existing measurement 
   schemes. Existing measurement schemes can be classified into two 
   categories: passive measurement and active measurement. Passive 
   measurement schemes use the trace history of existing data 
   transmission. While potentially very efficient and accurate, their 
   scope is limited to network paths that have recently carried user 
   traffic. Active measurement schemes, on the other hand, require 
   injecting testing traffic into network in order to realize 
   measurements. The basic idea of active measurement is that the MMR 
   injects test traffic into the multi-path to the measurement server. 

Kim                    Expires September 7, 2011                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft        Measurement of IPPMs for MIF              Mar 2011

   Then, the measurement server receives testing traffic, calculates 
   performance statistics, and response results of IP performance 
   metrics to the MMR. The MMR receives and stores them to provide for 
   MNs inside the mobile network.

   When MNs want to get IP performance metrics from the MMR to 
   understand the condition of multiple communication paths, following 
   two methods can be available:

   - Unsolicited Reqeust and Response : Irrespective of the request of 
     MNs, the MMR broadcasts periodically measured IP performances 
     metrics to MNs inside the mobile network.
   - Solicited Request and Response : A specific MN requests and then 
     the MMR unicasts measured IP performance metrics to the 
     corresponding MN.

   Request and Response messages can be defined by the Internet Control 
   Message Protocol (ICMP) message format in [RFC4443]. For example, 
   for unsolicited request and response, the unsolicited router 
   advertisement (RA) message format in [RFC2461] can be reused by the 
   modification of type field. For solicited request and response, 
   route solicitation (RS) and router advertisement (RA) message 
   formats in [RFC2461] can be reused by the modification of type 
   field. Using obtained IP performance metrics, MNs can understand the 
   condition of multiple communication paths for heterogeneous multiple 
   wireless interfaces. Then, MNs may want to select the most 
   appropriate path per communication type. If the condition of all 
   communication paths is unfavorable, MNs with heterogeneous multiple 
   wireless interfaces can connect to the corresponding BS directly, 
   not via the MMR.

   The proposed scheme can reduce burden and power consumption of MNs 
   with limited resource and battery power since MNs don't measure 
   directly IP performance metrics. In addition, the proposed scheme 
   can reduce considerably traffic overhead over wireless links on 
   measurement paths since signaling messages and injected testing 
   traffic are reduced.

4.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no IANA actions.

5.  References

5.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2330] V. Paxson, G. Alimes, J. Mahdavi and M. Mathis, "Framework 
             for IP Performance Metrics," IETF RFC 2330, May 1998.



Kim                    Expires September 7, 2011                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft        Measurement of IPPMs for MIF              Mar 2011

   [RFC3963] Thubert, P., A. Petrescu, R. Wakikawa and V. Devarapalli, 
             "Network Mobility (NEMO) Basic Support Protocol," RFC 3963, 
             Jan 2005.

   [RFC4443] Conta, A., S. Deering, M. Gupta, "Internet Control Message 
             Protocol (ICMPv6) for the Internet Protocol Version 6 (IPv6) 
             Specification," IETF RFC 4443, March 2006.

   [RFC2461] Narten, T., E. Nordmark, W. Simpson, "Neighbor Discovery for 
             IP Version 6 (IPv6)," IETF RFC 2461, December 1998.

5.2.  Informative References

   [MIF-PS]  Blanchet, M. and P. eite, "Multiple Interfaces and 
             Provisioning Domains Problem Statement", 
             draft-ietf-mif-problem-statement-09.txt (work
             in progress), Oct 2010.

   [KIM2009] P. S. Kim and J. H. Choi, "A new mechanism for available 
             bandwidth estimation," Journal of Convergence Information 
             Technology, vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 72~76, 2009.            

   [IEEE21]  IEEE802.21/D09.00, "Draft standard for local and 
             metropolitan area networks : Media independent handover
             services," Feb 2008.            

Author's Address

   Pyung-Soo Kim
   Department of Electronics Engineering,
   Korea Polytechnic University,
   2121 Jungwang-Dong, Shiheung City,
   Gyeonggi-Do  429-793
   KOREA

   Phone: +82 31 8041 0489
   EMail: poongdou@gmail.com














Kim                    Expires September 7, 2011                [Page 7]
