

                                                   
Network Working Group                                            P. Kim
Internet Draft                                                      KPU
Intended status: Informational                                    
Expires: April 17, 2014                                October 18, 2013



         Name Space and System for LISP Internet Architecture 
               draft-pskim-uribis-namesystem-lisp-00.txt

Abstract

   This draft suggests a name space and system for the locator/
   identifier split Internet architecture. The suggested name system 
   considers a host-centric for the current stage as well as an 
   object-centric for the next stage. Firstly, a name space for various 
   communication objects is defined. To consider scalability and 
   distributed architecture, the format of the name space consists of 
   object category, local name, domain name, and parameters. Secondly, 
   registries and servers are introduced to manage mapping between 
   identifier and object names with one-to-many relationship. Then, 
   name registration and resolution using these registries and servers 
   are described. 
   
   
Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 17, 2014.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2012 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.


   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
 
Kim                    Expires April 17, 2014                  [Page 1]
Internet-Draft       Name Space and System for LISP        October 2013

   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must


Internet-Draft         An Object-Centric Name Space           July 2012

   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
   2.  A Name Space for Various Communication Objects  . . . . . . . 3
   3.  Name System for Registration and Resolution . . . . . . . . . 4
     3.1.  Components and Functions . . . . . . . . . . . .  . . . . 4
     3.2.  Name Registration and Resolution . .. . . . . . . . . . . 5
   4.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   5.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
     5.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
     5.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7


1.  Introduction

   In the locator/identifier split Internet architecture[LISP], the 
   identifier plays a role of a unique identifier for communication 
   end-point and locator plays a role of a topological and routable 
   address in the network.

   Although the identifier is performing a primary role at the data 
   plane as well as the control plane in existing architectures, its 
   format has generally a human-unfriendly form such as self-certifying 
   public key, self-allocating fixed-length string, etc. Thus, a human 
   readable name space should be required for binding and resolution.
   The name space can be classified by "host-centric" as well as 
   "object-centric". The host-centric name space names only host as 
   shown in well-known Domain Name System (DNS) and AKARI [AKARI].
   On the other hand, the object-centric name space can name various
   communication objects such as user, file, device, service, content, 
   context as well as host, as shown in MobilityFirst[MF] and 
   4WARD[4WARD]. This means that communication objects would not be 
   limited by the host. In this case, a name space should be designed 
   with consideration of the scalability for tremendous communication 
   objects.

   In addition, as the registration and resolution between identifier 
   
Kim                    Expires April 17, 2014                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft       Name Space and System for LISP        October 2013  
      
   and locator has been required in [AKARI][MF][4WARD][MF][FIRMS], a 
   name system should be also required in order to take care of the 
   functions necessary to perform the management of mapping between 
   name and identifier, including ensuring that names are unique, and 
   managing the list of identifers and names. According to the name 
   resolution method, the name system can be classified by 
   "lookup-by-name" and "route-by-name". The lookup-by-name based 
   approach uses an indirection system as DNS. The name system using 
   lookup-by-name has been adopted for object-centric name space such 
   as MobilityFirst, 4WARD as well as host-centric name space such as 
   DNS, AKARI. The route-by-name based approach does not require an 
   indirection system and perform the name based routing, which has 
   been adopted for Content-Centric Network(CCN)[CCN] and Data-Oriented 
   Network Architecture(DONA)[DONA]

   In this draft, an object-centric name space and a lookup-by-name 
   based name system are suggested for the locator/identifier split 
   Internet architecture. A name space is designed with the 
   consideration of an object-centric name system for the next stage.
   That is, at the current stage, the main role of the name system is 
   that users can perform the resolution of object names to get 
   corresponding identifier (and vice versa) for only the connection 
   before communication, which is similar to the lookup-by-name method 
   used for DNS, AKARI, 4WARD, MobilityFirst. Whereas, at the next 
   stage, the name system is required for communication as well as 
   connection, which is similar to the route-by-name method used for 
   CCN and DONA. Firstly, a name space for various communication 
   objects is defined. To consider scalability and hierarchical 
   architecture, the format of the name space consists of object 
   category, local name, domain name, and parameters. Secondly, a name 
   system with name registration and resolution is designed to manage
   mapping between identifier and object names with one-to-many 
   relationship.

   In general, the name space for the networking system defines the
   structure of the name system and the rules for creating names. The
   name space is the most abstract among main functions of a name
   system. It is also the most fundamental part of the name system,
   since it actually describes how the names are created.

2.  A Name Space for Various Communication Objects
   
   For a name space, various communication objects are considered such
   as user, file, device, service, content, and more. In addition, the
   name space architecture will be hierarchical for the scalability and
   flat for the semantic, which can be represented by mixing the
   network access identifier (NAI)[RFC4282] and the uniform resource
   identifier (URI)[RFC2396]. Ultimately, the name space can consists
   of object category, local name, domain name, and parameter as
   follows:

Kim                    Expires April 17, 2014                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft       Name Space and System for LISP        October 2013  
  
  
       <object category>://<local name>@<domain name>:<parameters> 

     - Object category : Category of objects such as user, file, 
              device, service, content, context, etc.
     - Local name (Flat): Semantic name of object.
     - Domain name (Hierarchical) : Name of domain where the user 
              subscribes to the communication service for objects or 
              the object is logically associated
     - Parameters (Option) : Parameters can be appended according to 
              object category

   Example:

     device://temperature@future.com:sensor:room:peter:Irvine-92614

     - Objejct category : device
     - Local name : temperature
     - Domain name : future.com
     - Parameters : sensor, room, peter, Irvine-92614 (Naming a sensor 
       at Peter's room with address 'Irvine-92614')

     content://billiejean.mp3@music.com:audio:Jackson

     - Objejct category : content
     - Local name : billiejean.mp3
     - Domain name : mobile.com
     - Parameters : audio, Jackson (Naming an audio file of singer 
       'Jackson')

   Based on the designed name space, a name system will be designed 
   using indirection approach. Name registries, that is, name servers 
   should be distributed according to communication object 
   categorization. For timely binding, a fast propagation mechanism of 
   binding update should be required. In addition, for the resolution, 
   a parsing mechanism for name should be also required.
   
3.  Name System for Registration and Resolution

3.1  Components and Functions
   
   In the suggested name system, the name registration allows users to 
   specify which identifier uses which object with object name (and 
   vice versa). The name registration is coupled tightly with the 
   object category used for object names. In addition to the name 
   registration, the name resolution is also needed for user to find 
   identifier that corresponds to object names for actual connection 
   and communication. Actually, the name resolution is the most 
   well-known aspect of name systems, because it is where most of the 
   "heavy lifting" of a name system occurs[TCP/IP]. The name space is 

Kim                    Expires April 17, 2014                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft       Name Space and System for LISP        October 2013  

   generally set up once, and the name registration occurs only when 
   object names must be created or changed. On the other hand, every 
   user of a name system instructs identifier he or she uses to perform 
   the name resolution, hundreds or even thousands of times a day.

   For the name registration and resolution in the suggested name 
   system, servers and registries are required and distributed. 
   Basically, there are object name servers (ONSs) to manage mapping 
   database between identifier and object names. In addition, there are
   a couple of registries to manage these ONSs; domain name server 
   registry (DNSR) and object name server registry (ONSR). The DNSR 
   stores and manages information on the binding between domain names 
   and locators of ONSRs for corresponding domain. The OSNR stores and 
   manages information on the binding between object categories and 
   locators of ONSs in the same domain. The ONS stores and distributes 
   information on the binding between identifier and object names with 
   one-to-many relationship for corresponding object categories such as 
   user, file, device, service, content, context, etc., of active hosts 
   that belong to the administrative domain managed by the DNSR and 
   ONSR.

3.2  Name Registration and Resolution

   The hosts register their identifiers with the ONS when they first 
   connect to an edge network (i.e., when the user of the host 
   subscribes to the communication service). The hosts also send 
   identifier update requests to the ONS when they change their 
   identifiers or other information. To register an object name, a 
   request must be made to have the name assignment added to the ONS. 
   That is, hosts send name registration requests to the ONS when 
   object names corresponding to identifier, and other information must 
   be created or changed. The ONS thus stores dynamic information on
   object names and identifier that change often due to the activation 
   of different objects. That is, the identifier is dynamically mapped 
   to different object names with one-to-many relationship. The binding 
   information about the ONSs stored in the ONSR and the ONSRs stored 
   in the DSNR does not change frequently because ONSs and ONSRs are
   generally fixed nodes that are not changing their locators. The ONSs 
   can be organized in a distributed structure, similar to that of DNS, 
   for storing and retrieving static mapping information. Thus, the ONS 
   record size does not grow as fast as the number of hosts. The 
   smaller the size of the ONS mapping table, the faster the search and 
   retrieval process for ONS records.

   Consider the procedure of the suggested name system through an 
   example that a correspondent host (CH) wants to communicate with a 
   mobile host (MH) with the following object name:

    device://temperature@future:com:sensor:car:michelle:6VAD286

  
Kim                    Expires April 17, 2014                  [Page 5]

Internet-Draft       Name Space and System for LISP        October 2013  

   which is naming a sensor object at Michelle's car with plate number 
   6VAD286 and has a semantic name temperature and a domain name 
   "future.com". First of all, it is assumed that the MH's ONS must 
   have registered its locator in the ONSR. In addition, for the name 
   resolution of identifier and object names to be successful, the MH 
   must have performed the name registration of identifier and object 
   names with one-to-many relationship through the name registration 
   procedure in Section 3.2. Dynamic information on one-to-many 
   relationship of identifier and object names is stored in the ONS. 
   Then, to communicate with the MH, the CH has to perform the name 
   resolution to get corresponding identifier. The CH can get the MH's
   identifier from the domain name lookup, the object category lookup, 
   and the identifier lookup as follows.

   Domain Name Lookup : The CH first sends a domain name lookup query 
   to the DNSR to get ONSR's locator using the domain name part 
   "future.com". Then, the DNSR searches its record and finds ONSR's 
   locator and subsequently replies to the CH.

   Object Category Lookup : The CH then sends an object category lookup 
   query to  the ONSR to get ONS's locator using the object category 
   device. Then, the DNSR searches its record and finds ONS's locator 
   and subsequently replies to the CH.

   Identifier Lookup : The CH then sends identifier lookup query to the 
   ONS to get corresponding identifier for the local name "temperature" 
   with parameters "sensor", "car", "Michelle" and "6VAD286". Then, the 
   ONS searches its record and then finds and subsequently replies to 
   the CH. After obtaining identifier of the MH, the CH can either 
   directly start data communication.

4.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no IANA actions.

5.  References

5.1.  Normative References

   [LISP]    D. Farinacci, V. Fuller, D. Meyer, and D. Lewis, Locator/
             ID Separation Protocol (LISP), IETF Draft : 
             draft-farinacci-lisp-24.txt, 2013.

   [RFC4282] B. Aboba, M. Beadles, J. Arkko, P. Eronen, "The Network 
             Access Identifier," RFC 4282, December 2005.

   [RFC2396] T. Berners-Lee, R. Fielding, L. Masinter, "Uniform 
             Resource Identifiers (URI): Generic Syntax," RFC 2396, 
             August 1998.


Kim                    Expires April 17, 2014                  [Page 6]

Internet-Draft       Name Space and System for LISP        October 2013  

5.2.  Informative References

   [MF]      D. Raychaudhuri, K. Nagaraja, and A. Venkataramani, 
             "MobilityFirst: a robust and trustworthy mobility-centric 
             architecture for the future internet," ACM SIGMOBILE 
             Mobile Computing and Communications Review, vol. 16, 
             no. 3, pp. 2~13, 2012.

   [4WARD]   M. Brunner, H. Abramowicz, N. Niebert, and L. M. Correia, 
             "4WARD: A European Perspective towards the Future 
             Internet," IEICE Transactions on Communications, vol. 
             E93-B, no. 3, pp. 442~445, 2013.          

   [AKARI]   V. P. Kafle and M. Inoue, "ID/Locator split-based mobility 
             scheme for heterogeneous new generation network," 
             Wireless Personal Communications, vol. 61, no. 4, 
             pp. 753~764, 2013.            

   [MOFI]    S.J. Koh and H. Jung, "Mobile Oriented Future Internet 
             (MOFI): Architectural Design and Implementations," ETRI 
             Journal, vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 666~676, 2013.

   [FIRMS]   M. Menth, M. Hartmann, and M. Hoing, "FIRMS: A mapping 
             system for future Internet routing," IEEE Journal on 
             Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 28, no. 8, pp. 
             1326~1331, 2010.         

   [CCN]     D. Perino and M. Varvello, "A reality check for content 
             centric networking," in Proc. of the ACM SIGCOMM workshop 
             on Information-centric networking (ICN), 2011, pp. 44~49.

   [DONA]    T. Koponen, M. Chawla, B.-G. Chun, A. Ermolinskiy, K. H. 
             Kim, S. Shenker, and I. Stoica, "A data-oriented (and 
             beyond) network architecture," in Proc. of the 2007 
             Conference on Applications, Technologies, Architectures, 
             and Protocols for Computer Communications (SIGCOMM), 2007, 
             pp. 181~192.

   [TCP/IP]  C. M. Kozierok, The TCP/IP Guide: A Comprehensive, 
             Illustrated Internet Protocols Reference, No Starch Press, 
             2005.

Author's Address

   Pyung Soo Kim
   Korea Polytechnic University,
   2121 Jungwang-Dong, Shiheung City,
   Gyeonggi-Do  429-793, KOREA
   Phone: +82 31 8041 0489
   EMail: poongdou@gmail.com

Kim                    Expires April 17, 2014                  [Page 7]