



Network Working Group                                            E. Ivov
Internet-Draft                                                     Jitsi
Intended status: Standards Track                           E.K. Rescorla
Expires: September 12, 2013                                   RTFM, Inc.
                                                               J. Uberti
                                                                  Google
                                                          March 11, 2013


Trickle ICE: Incremental Provisioning of Candidates for the Interactive
               Connectivity Establishment (ICE) Protocol
                    draft-ivov-mmusic-trickle-ice-01

Abstract

   This document describes an extension to the Interactive Connectivity
   Establishment (ICE) protocol that allows ICE agents to send and
   receive candidates incrementally rather than exchanging complete
   lists.  With such incremental provisioning, ICE agents can begin
   connectivity checks while they are still gathering candidates and
   considerably shorten the time necessary for ICE processing to
   complete.

   The above mechanism is also referred to as "trickle ICE".

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 12, 2013.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.





Ivov, et al.           Expires September 12, 2013               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                Trickle ICE                     March 2013


   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   2.  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   3.  Incompatibility with Standard ICE . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   4.  Determining Support for Trickle ICE . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     4.1.  Unilateral Use of Trickle ICE (Half Trickle)  . . . . . .   7
   5.  Sending the Initial Offer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     5.1.  Encoding the SDP  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   6.  Receiving the Initial Offer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     6.1.  Sending the Initial Answer  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
     6.2.  Forming check lists and beginning connectivity
           checks  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
     6.3.  Encoding the SDP  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   7.  Receiving the Initial Answer  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   8.  Performing Connectivity Checks  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
     8.1.  Check List and Timer State Updates  . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   9.  Discovering and Sending Additional Local Candidates . . . . .  12
     9.1.  Pairing newly learned candidates and updating
           check lists . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
     9.2.  Encoding the SDP for Additional Candidates  . . . . . . .  14
     9.3.  Announcing End of Candidates  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
     9.4.  Receiving an End Of Candidates Notification . . . . . . .  16
   10. Receiving Additional Remote Candidates  . . . . . . . . . . .  16
   11. Concluding ICE Processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16
   12. Subsequent Offer/Answer Exchanges . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17
   13. Interaction with ICE Lite . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17
   14. Example Flow  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  18
   15. Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
   16. Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
   17. References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
     17.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
     17.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
   Appendix A.  Open issues  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  21
     A.1.  MID/Stream Indices in SDP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  21
     A.2.  Starting checks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  21
   Appendix B.  Changes From Earlier Versions  . . . . . . . . . . .  21
     B.1.  Changes From draft-ivov-00  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  21



Ivov, et al.           Expires September 12, 2013               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                Trickle ICE                     March 2013


     B.2.  Changes From draft-rescorla-01  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  22
     B.3.  Changes From draft-rescorla-00  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  23
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  23

1.  Introduction

   The Interactive Connectivity Establishment (ICE) protocol [RFC5245]
   describes mechanisms for gathering, candidates, prioritizing them,
   choosing default ones, exchanging them with the remote party, pairing
   them and ordering them into check lists.  Once all of the above have
   been completed, and only then, the participating agents can begin a
   phase of connectivity checks and eventually select the pair of
   candidates that will be used in the following session.

   While the above sequence has the advantage of being relatively
   straightforward to implement and debug once deployed, it may also
   prove to be rather lengthy.  Gathering candidates or candidate
   harvesting would often involve things like querying STUN [RFC5389]
   servers, discovering UPnP devices, and allocating relayed candidates
   at TURN [RFC5766] servers.  All of these can be delayed for a
   noticeable amount of time and while they can be run in parallel, they
   still need to respect the pacing requirements from [RFC5245], which
   is likely to delay them even further.  Some or all of the above would
   also have to be completed by the remote agent.  Both agents would
   next perform connectivity checks and only then would they be ready to
   begin streaming media.

   All of the above could lead to relatively lengthy session
   establishment times and degraded user experience.

   The purpose of this document is to define an alternative mode of
   operation for ICE implementations, also known as "trickle ICE", where
   candidates can be exchanged incrementally.  This would allow ICE
   agents to exchange host candidates as soon as a session has been
   initiated.  Connectivity checks for a media stream would also start
   as soon as the first candidates for that stream have become
   available.

   Trickle ICE allows reducing session establishment times in cases
   where connectivity is confirmed for the first exchanged candidates
   (e.g.  where the host candidates for one of the agents are directly
   reachable from the second agent).  Even when this is not the case,
   running candidate harvesting for both agents and connectivity checks
   all in parallel allows to considerably reduce ICE processing times.







Ivov, et al.           Expires September 12, 2013               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                Trickle ICE                     March 2013


   It is worth pointing out that before being introduced to the IETF,
   trickle ICE had already been included in specifications such as XMPP
   Jingle [XEP-0176] and it has been in use in various implementations
   and deployments.

   In addition to the basics of trickle ICE, this document also
   describes how support for trickle ICE needs to be discovered, how
   regular ICE processing needs to be modified when building and
   updating check lists, and how trickle ICE implementations should
   interoperate with agents that only implement [RFC5245] processing.

   This specification does not define usage of trickle ICE with any
   specific signalling protocol, contrary to [RFC5245] which contains a
   usage for ICE with SIP.  Such usages would have to be specified in
   separate documents such as for example
   [I-D.ivov-mmusic-trickle-ice-sip].

   Trickle ICE does however reuse and build upon the SDP syntax defined
   by vanilla ICE.

2.  Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].

   This specification makes use of all terminology defined by the
   protocol for Interactive Connectivity Establishment in [RFC5245].

   Vanilla ICE:  The Interactive Connectivity Establishment protocol as
      defined in [RFC5245].

   Candidate Harvester:  A module used by an ICE agent to obtain local
      candidates.  Candidate harvesters use different mechanisms for
      discovering local candidates.  Some of them would typically make
      use of protocols such as STUN or TURN.  Others may also employ
      techniques that are not referenced within [RFC5245].  UPnP based
      port allocation and XMPP Jingle Relay Nodes [XEP-0278] are among
      the possible examples.

   Trickled Candidates:  Candidates that a trickle ICE agent is sending
      subsequently to but within the context defined by an offer or an
      answer.  Trickled candidates can be sent in parallel with
      candidate harvesting and connectivity checks.

   Trickling/Trickle (v.):  The act of sending trickled candidates.





Ivov, et al.           Expires September 12, 2013               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                Trickle ICE                     March 2013


   Half Trickle:  A trickle ICE mode of operation where the offerer
      gathers its first generation of candidates strictly before
      creating and sending the offer.  Once sent, that offer can be
      processed by vanilla ICE agents and does not require support for
      this specification.  It also allows trickle ICE capable answerers
      to still gather candidates and perform connectivity checks in a
      non-blocking way, thus roughly offering "half" the advantages of
      trickle ICE.  The mechanism is mostly meant for use in cases where
      support for trickle ICE cannot be confirmed prior to sending a
      first offer.

   Full Trickle:  Regular mode of operation for trickle ICE agents, used
      in opposition to the half trickle mode of operation.

3.  Incompatibility with Standard ICE

   The ICE protocol was designed to be fairly flexible so that it would
   work in and adapt to as many network environments as possible.  It is
   hence important to point out at least some of the reasons why,
   despite its flexibility, the specification in [RFC5245] would not
   support trickle ICE.

   [RFC5245] describes the conditions required to update check lists and
   timer states while an ICE agent is in the Running state.  These
   conditions are verified upon transaction completion and one of them
   stipulates that:

      If there is not a pair in the valid list for each component of the
      media stream, the state of the check list is set to Failed.

   This could be a problem and cause ICE processing to fail prematurely
   in a number of scenarios.  Consider the following case:

   o  Alice and Bob are both located in different networks with Network
      Address Translation (NAT).  Alice and Bob themselves have
      different address but both networks use the same [RFC1918] block.

   o  Alice sends Bob the candidate 10.0.0.10 which also happens to
      correspond to an existing host on Bob's network.

   o  Bob creates a check list consisting solely of 10.0.0.10 and starts
      checks.

   o  These checks reach the host at 10.0.0.10 in Bob's network, which
      responds with an ICMP "port unreachable" error and per [RFC5245]
      Bob marks the transaction as Failed.





Ivov, et al.           Expires September 12, 2013               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                Trickle ICE                     March 2013


   At this point the check list only contains Failed candidates and the
   valid list is empty.  This causes the media stream and potentially
   all ICE processing to Fail.

   A similar race condition would occur if the initial offer from Alice
   only contains candidates that can be determined as unreachable (per
   [I-D.keranen-mmusic-ice-address-selection]) from any of the
   candidates that Bob has gathered.  This would be the case if Bob's
   candidates only contain IPv4 addresses and the first candidate that
   he receives from Alice is an IPv6 one.

   Another potential problem could arise when a non-trickle ICE
   implementation sends an offer to a trickle one.  Consider the
   following case:

   o  Alice's client has a non-trickle ICE implementation

   o  Bob's client has support for trickle ICE.

   o  Alice and Bob are behind NATs with address-dependent filtering
      [RFC4787].

   o  Bob has two STUN servers but one of them is currently unreachable

   After Bob's agent receives Alice's offer it would immediately start
   connectivity checks.  It would also start gathering candidates, which
   would take long because of the unreachable STUN server.  By the time
   Bob's answer is ready and sent to Alice, Bob's connectivity checks
   may well have failed: until Alice gets Bob's answer, she won't be
   able to start connectivity checks and punch holes in her NAT.  The
   NAT would hence be filtering Bob's checks as originating from an
   unknown endpoint.

4.  Determining Support for Trickle ICE

   According to [RFC5245] every time an agent supporting trickle ICE
   generates an offer or an answer, it MUST include the "trickle" token
   in the ice-options attribute.  Syntax for this token is defined in
   Section 5.1.

   Additionally, in order to avoid interoperability problems such as
   those described in Section 3, it is important that trickle ICE
   negotiation is only attempted in cases where the remote party
   actually supports this specification.  Agents that receive offers or
   answers can verify support by examining them for the "trickle" ice-
   options token.  However, agents that are about to send a first offer,
   have no immediate way of doing this.  This means that usages of
   trickle for specific protocols would need to either:



Ivov, et al.           Expires September 12, 2013               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                Trickle ICE                     March 2013


   o  Provide a way for agents to verify support of trickle ICE prior to
      initiating a session.  XMPP's Service discovery [XEP-0030] is an
      example for one such mechanism;

   o  Make support for trickle ICE mandatory so that support could be
      assumed the agents.

   Alternately, for cases where a protocol provides neither of the
   above, agents may either rely on provisioning/configuration, or use
   the half trickle procedure described in Section 4.1.

   Note that out-of-band discovery semantics and half trickle are only
   necessary prior to session initiation, or in other words, when
   sending the initial offer.  Once a session is established and trickle
   ICE support is confirmed for both parties, either agent can use full
   trickle for subsequent offers.

4.1.  Unilateral Use of Trickle ICE (Half Trickle)

   The idea of using half trickle is about having the caller send a
   regular, vanilla ICE offer, with a complete set of candidates.  This
   offer still indicates support for trickle ice, so the answerer is
   able to respond with an incomplete set of candidates and continue
   trickling the rest.  Half trickle offers will typically contain an
   end-of-candidates indication.

   The mechanism can be used in cases where there is no way for an agent
   to verify in advance whether a remote party supports trickle ice.
   Because it contains a full set of candidates, its first offer can
   thus be handled by a regular vanilla ICE agent, while still allowing
   a trickle one to use the optimisation defined in this specification.
   This prevents negotiation from failing in the former case while still
   giving roughly half the trickle ICE benefits in the latter (hence the
   name of the mechanism).

   Use of half trickle is only necessary during an initial offer/answer
   exchange.  Once both parties have received a session description from
   their peer, they can each reliably determine trickle ICE support and
   use it for all subsequent offer/answer exchanges.

   It is worth pointing out that using half trickle may actually bring
   more than just half the improvement in terms of user experience.
   This can happen in cases where an agent starts gathering candidates
   upon user interface cues that a call is pending, such as activity on
   a keypad or the phone going off hook.  This would mean a part or all
   candidate harvesting could have completed before the agent actually
   needs to send the offer.  Given that the answerer will be able to
   trickle candidates, both agents will be able to start connectivity



Ivov, et al.           Expires September 12, 2013               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                Trickle ICE                     March 2013


   checks and complete ICE processing earlier than with vanilla ICE and
   potentially even as early as with full trickle.

   However, such anticipation is not not always possible.  For example,
   a multipurpose user agent or a WebRTC web page where communication is
   a non-central feature (e.g.  calling a support line in case of a
   problem with the main features) would not necessarily have a way of
   distinguishing between call intentions and other user activity.
   Still, even in these cases, using half trickle would be an
   improvement over vanilla ICE as it would optimize performance for
   answerers.

5.  Sending the Initial Offer

   An agent starts gathering candidates as soon as it has an indication
   that communication is imminent (e.g.  a user interface cue or an
   explicit request to initiate a session).  Contrary to vanilla ICE,
   implementations of trickle ICE do not need to gather candidates in a
   blocking manner.  Therefore, unless half trickle is being used,
   agents SHOULD generate and transmit their initial offer as early as
   possible, in order to allow the remote party to start gathering and
   trickling candidates.

   Trickle ICE agents MAY include any set of candidates in an offer.
   This includes the possibility of generating one with no candidates,
   or one that contains all the candidates that the agent is planning on
   using in the following session.

   For optimal performance, it is RECOMMENDED that an initial offer
   contains host candidates only.  This would allow both agents to start
   gathering server reflexive, relayed and other non-host candidates
   simultaneously, and it would also enable them to begin connectivity
   checks.

   If the privacy implications of revealing host addresses are a
   concern, agents MAY generate an offer that contains no candidates and
   then only trickle candidates that do not reveal host addresses (e.g.
   relayed candidates).

   Prior to actually sending an initial offer, agents MAY verify if the
   remote party supports trickle ICE, where such mechanisms actually
   exist.  If absence of such support is confirmed agents MUST fall back
   to using vanilla ICE or abandon the entire session.

   All trickle ICE offers and answers MUST indicate support of this
   specification, as explained in Section 5.1.





Ivov, et al.           Expires September 12, 2013               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                Trickle ICE                     March 2013


   Calculating priorities and foundations, as well as determining
   redundancy of candidates work the same way they do with vanilla ICE.

5.1.  Encoding the SDP

   The process of encoding the SDP [RFC4566] is mostly the same as the
   one used by vanilla ICE.  Still, trickle ICE does require a few
   differences described here.

   Agents MUST indicate support for Trickle ICE by including the
   "trickle" token for the "a=ice-options" attribute:


       a=ice-options:trickle



   As mentioned earlier in this section, Offers and Answers can contain
   any set of candidates, which means that a trickle ICE session
   description MAY contain no candidates at all.  In such cases the
   agent would still need to place an address in the "c=" line(s).  If
   the use of a host address there is undesirable (e.g.  for privacy
   reasons), the agent MAY set the connection address to IP6 ::. In this
   case it MUST also set the port number to 9 (Discard).  There is no
   need to include a fictitious candidate for the IP6 :: address when
   doing so.

   It is worth noting that the use of IP6 :: has been selected over IP4
   0.0.0.0, even though [RFC3264] already gives the latter semantics
   appropriate for such use.  The reason for this choice is the historic
   use of 0.0.0.0 as a means of putting a stream on hold [RFC2543] and
   the ambiguity that this may cause with legacy libraries and
   applications.

   It is also worth mentioning that use of IP6 :: here does not
   constitute any kind of indication as to the actual use of IPv6
   candidates in a session and it can very well appear in a negotiation
   that only involves IPv4 candidates.

6.  Receiving the Initial Offer

   When an agent receives an initial offer, it will first check if it
   indicates support for trickle ICE as explained in Section 4.  If this
   is not the case, the agent MUST process the offer according to the
   [RFC5245] procedures or standard [RFC3264] processing in case no ICE
   support is detected at all.





Ivov, et al.           Expires September 12, 2013               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft                Trickle ICE                     March 2013


   It is worth pointing out that in case support for trickle ICE is
   confirmed, an agent will automatically assume support for vanilla ICE
   as well even if the support verification procedure in [RFC5245]
   indicates otherwise.  Specifically, such verification would indicate
   lack of support when the offer contains no candidates.  The IP6 ::
   address present in the c= line in that case would not "appear in a
   candidate attribute".  Obviously, a fallback to [RFC3264] is not
   required when this happens.

   If, the offer does indicate support for trickle ICE, the agent will
   determine its role, start gathering and prioritizing candidates and,
   while doing so it will also respond by sending its own answer, so
   that both agents can start forming check lists and begin connectivity
   checks.

6.1.  Sending the Initial Answer

   An agent can respond to an initial offer at any point while gathering
   candidates.  The answer can again contain any set of candidates
   including none or all of them.  Unless it is protecting host
   addresses for privacy reasons, the agent would typically construct
   this initial answer including only them, thus allowing the remote
   party to also start forming checklists and performing connectivity
   checks.

   The answer MUST indicate support for trickle ICE as described by
   Section 4.

6.2.  Forming check lists and beginning connectivity checks

   After exchanging offer and answer, and as soon as they have obtained
   local and remote candidates, agents will begin forming candidate
   pairs, computing their priorities and creating check lists according
   to the vanilla ICE procedures described in [RFC5245].  Obviously in
   order for candidate pairing to be possible, it would be necessary
   that both the offer and the answer contained candidates.  If this was
   not the case agents will still create the check lists (so that their
   Active/Frozen state could be monitored and updated) but they will
   only populate them once they actually have the candidates.

   Initially, all check lists will have their Active/Frozen state set to
   Frozen.









Ivov, et al.           Expires September 12, 2013              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft                Trickle ICE                     March 2013


   Trickle ICE agents will then also attempt to unfreeze the check list
   for the first media stream (i.e.  the first media stream that was
   reported to the ICE implementation from the using application).  If
   this checklist is still empty however, agents will continue examining
   media streams in the order they were reported and will unfreeze the
   first non-empty checklist.

   Respecting the order in which lists have been reported to an ICE
   implementation, or in other words, the order in which they appear in
   SDP, is helpful so that checks for the same media stream is more
   likely to be performed simultaneously by both agents.

6.3.  Encoding the SDP

   The process for encoding the SDP at the answerer is identical to the
   process followed by the offerer for both full and lite
   implementations, as described in Section 5.1.

7.  Receiving the Initial Answer

   When receiving an answer, agents will follow vanilla ICE procedures
   to determine their role and they would then form check lists (as
   described in Section 6.2) and begin connectivity checks .

8.  Performing Connectivity Checks

   For the most part, trickle ICE agents perform connectivity checks
   following vanilla ICE procedures.  Of course, the asynchronous nature
   of candidate harvesting in trickle ICE would impose a number of
   changes described here.

8.1.  Check List and Timer State Updates

   The vanilla ICE specification requires that agents update check lists
   and timer states upon completing a connectivity check transaction.
   During such an update vanilla ICE agents would set the state of a
   check list to Failed if the following two conditions are satisfied:

   o  all of the pairs in the check list are either in the Failed or
      Succeeded state;

   o  if at least one of the components of the media stream has no pairs
      in its valid list.

   With trickle ICE, the above situation would often occur when
   candidate harvesting and trickling are still in progress and it is
   perfectly possible that future checks will succeed.  For this reason
   trickle ICE agents add the following conditions to the above list:



Ivov, et al.           Expires September 12, 2013              [Page 11]

Internet-Draft                Trickle ICE                     March 2013


   o  all candidate harvesters have completed and the agent is not
      expecting to learn any new candidates;

   o  the remote agent has sent an end-of-candidates indication for that
      check list as described in Section 9.3.

   Vanilla ICE requires that agents then update all other check lists,
   placing one pair in each of them into the Waiting state, effectively
   unfreezing the check list.  Given that with trickle ICE, other check
   lists may still be empty at that point, a trickle ICE agent SHOULD
   also maintain an explicit Active/Frozen state for every check list,
   rather than deducing it from the state of the pairs it contains.
   This state should be set to Active when unfreezing the first pair in
   a list or when that couldn't happen because a list was empty.

9.  Discovering and Sending Additional Local Candidates

   After an offer or an answer have been sent, agents will most likely
   continue discovering new local candidates as STUN, TURN and other
   non-host candidate harvesting mechanisms begin to yield results.
   Whenever an agent discovers such a new candidate it will compute its
   priority, type, foundation and component id according to normal
   vanilla ICE procedures.

   The new candidate is then checked for redundancy against the existing
   list of local candidates.  If its transport address and base match
   those of an existing candidate, it will be considered redundant and
   will be ignored.  This would often happen for server reflexive
   candidates that match the host addresses they were obtained from
   (e.g.  when the latter are public IPv4 addresses).  Contrary to
   vanilla ICE, trickle ICE agents will consider the new candidate
   redundant regardless of its priority.  [TODO: is this OK?  if not we
   need to check if the existing candidate was already used in conn
   checks, cancel them, and then restart them with the new candidate ...
   and in this specific case there's probably no point to do that].

   Then, if no remote candidates are currently known for this same
   stream, the new candidate will simply be added to the list of local
   candidates.

   Otherwise, if the agent has already learned of one or more remote
   candidates for this stream and component, it will begin pairing the
   new local candidates with them and adding the pairs to the existing
   check lists according to their priority.

9.1.  Pairing newly learned candidates and updating check lists





Ivov, et al.           Expires September 12, 2013              [Page 12]

Internet-Draft                Trickle ICE                     March 2013


   Forming candidate pairs will work the way it is described by the
   vanilla ICE specification.  Actually adding the new pair to a check
   list however, will happen according to the rules described below.

   If the new pair's local candidate is server reflexive, the server
   reflexive candidate MUST be replaced by its base before adding the
   pair to the list.  Once this is done, the agent examines the check
   list looking for another pair that would be redundant with the new
   one.  If such a pair exists and its state is:

   Succeeded:   the newly formed pair is ignored.

   Frozen or Waiting:   the agent chooses the pair with the higher
      priority local candidate, places it in the state that the old pair
      was in (i.e.  Frozen or Waiting) and removes the other one as
      redundant.

   Failed:   the agent chooses the pair with the higher priority local
      candidate, places it in the Waiting state and removes the other
      one as redundant.

   In-Progress:   The agent cancels the in-progress transaction (where
      cancellation happens as explained in Section 7.2.1.4 of
      [RFC5245]), then it chooses the pair with the higher priority
      local candidate, places it in the Waiting state and removes the
      other one as redundant.

   For all other pairs, including those with a server reflexive local
   candidate that were not found to be redundant:

   o  if all check lists are empty and in the Frozen state, or in other
      words, if this is the first pair the agent is adding to any check
      list, both the pair and its containing check list will be placed
      in an Active state.

   o  if this check list is Frozen then the new pair will also be
      assigned a Frozen state.

   o  else if the check list is Active and it is either empty or
      contains only candidates in the Succeeded and Failed states, then
      the new pair's state is set to Waiting.

   o  else if the check list is non-empty and Active, then the new pair
      state will be set to

      Frozen:   if there is at least one pair in the list whose
            foundation matches the one in the new pair and whose state
            is neither Succeeded nor Failed (eventually the new pair



Ivov, et al.           Expires September 12, 2013              [Page 13]

Internet-Draft                Trickle ICE                     March 2013


            will get unfrozen after the the on-going check for the
            existing pair concludes);

      Waiting:   if the list contains no pairs with the same foundation
            as the new one, or, in case such pairs exist but they are
            all in either the Succeeded or Failed states.

9.2.  Encoding the SDP for Additional Candidates

   To facilitate interoperability an ICE agent will encode additional
   candidates using the vanilla ICE SDP syntax.  For example:


       a=candidate:2 1 UDP 1658497328 198.51.100.33 5000 typ host



   Given that such lines do not provide a relationship between the
   candidate and the m line that it relates to, signalling protocols
   using trickle ICE MUST establish that relation themselves using an
   MID [RFC3388].  Such MIDs use "media stream identification", as
   defined in [RFC3388], to identify a corresponding m-line.  When
   creating candidate lines usages of trickle ICE MUST use the MID if
   possible, or the m-line index if not.  Obviously, agents MUST NOT
   send individual candidates prior to generating the corresponding SDP
   session description.

   The exact means of transporting additional candidates to a remote
   agent is left to the protocols using trickle ICE.  It is important to
   note, however, that these candidate exchanges are not part of the
   offer/answer model.

9.3.  Announcing End of Candidates

   Once all candidate harvesters for a specific media stream complete,
   or expire, the agents will generate an "end-of-candidates" indication
   for that stream and send it to the remote agent via the signalling
   channel.  Such indications are sent in the form of a media-level
   attribute that has the following form: end-of-candidates.


               a=end-of-candidates



   The end-of-candidates indications can be sent as part of an offer,
   which would typically be the case with half trickle initial offers,
   they can accompany the last candidate an agent can send for a stream,



Ivov, et al.           Expires September 12, 2013              [Page 14]

Internet-Draft                Trickle ICE                     March 2013


   and they can also be sent alone (e.g.  after STUN Binding requests or
   TURN Allocate requests to a server timeout and the agent has no other
   active harvesters).

   Controlled trickle ICE agents SHOULD always send end-of-candidates
   indications once harvesting for a media stream has completed unless
   ICE processing terminates before they've had a chance to do so.
   Sending the indication is necessary in order to avoid ambiguities and
   speed up ICE conclusion.  This is necessary in order to avoid
   ambiguities and speed up ICE conclusion.  Controlling agents on the
   other hand MAY sometimes conclude ICE processing prior to sending
   end-of-candidates notifications for all streams.  This would
   typically be the case with aggressive nomination.  Yet it is
   RECOMMENDED that controlling agents do send such indications whenever
   possible for the sake of consistency and keeping middle boxes and
   controlled agents up-to-date on the state of ICE processing.

   When sending end-of-candidates during trickling, rather than as a
   part of an offer or an answer, it is the responsibility of the using
   protocol to define means that can be used to relate the indication to
   one or more specific m-lines.

   Receiving an end-of-candidates notification allows an agent to update
   check list states and, in case valid pairs do not exist for every
   component in every media stream, determine that ICE processing has
   failed.  It also allows agents to speed ICE conclusion in cases where
   a candidate pair has been validates but it involves the use of lower-
   preference transports such as TURN.  In such situations some
   implementations may choose to wait in case higher-priority candidates
   are received and end-of-candidates provides an indication that this
   is not going to happen.

   An agent MAY also choose to generate an end-of-candidates event
   before candidate harvesting has actually completed, if the agent
   determines that harvesting has continued for more than an acceptable
   period of time.  However, an agent MUST NOT send any more candidates
   after it has send an end-of-candidates notification.

   When performing half trickle agents SHOULD send end-of-candidates
   together with their initial offer unless they are planning on
   potentially sending additional candidates in case the remote party
   turns out to actually support trickle ICE.

   When end-of-candidates is sent as part of an offer or an answer it
   can appear as a session-level attribute, which would be equivalent to
   having it appear in all m-lines.





Ivov, et al.           Expires September 12, 2013              [Page 15]

Internet-Draft                Trickle ICE                     March 2013


   Once an agent sends the end-of-candidates event, it will update the
   state of the corresponding check list as explained in section
   Section 8.1.  Past that point agents MUST NOT send any new
   candidates.  Once an agent has received an end-of-candidates
   indication, it MUST also ignore any newly received candidates for
   that media stream.  Adding new candidates to the negotiation is hence
   only possible through an ICE restart.

   It is important to note that This specification does not override
   vanilla ICE semantics for concluding ICE processing.  This means that
   even if end-of-candidates indications are sent agents will still have
   to go through pair nomination.  Also, if pairs have been nominated
   for components and media streams, ICE processing will still conclude
   even if end-of-candidate indications have not been received for all
   streams.

9.4.  Receiving an End Of Candidates Notification

   When an agent receives an end-of-candidates notification for a
   specific check list, they will update its state as per Section 8.1.
   In case the list is still in the Active state after the update, the
   agent will persist the the fact that an end-of-candidates
   notification has been received for and take it into account in future
   list updates.

   [TODO would we like to say anything about nomination?  in general
   this would be up to implementers but is there a need for some basic
   guidelines?]

10.  Receiving Additional Remote Candidates

   At any point of ICE processing, a trickle ICE agent may receive new
   candidates from the remote agent.  When this happens and no local
   candidates are currently known for this same stream, the new remote
   candidates are simply added to the list of remote candidates.

   Otherwise, the new candidates are used for forming candidate pairs
   with the pool of local candidates and they are added to the local
   check lists as described in Section 9.1.

   Once the remote agent has completed candidate harvesting, it will
   send an end-of-candidates event.  Upon receiving such an event, the
   local agent MUST update check list states as per Section 8.1.  This
   may lead to some check lists being marked as Failed.

11.  Concluding ICE Processing





Ivov, et al.           Expires September 12, 2013              [Page 16]

Internet-Draft                Trickle ICE                     March 2013


   This specification does not directly modify the procedures ending ICE
   processing described in Section 8 of [RFC5245], and trickle ICE
   implementations will follow the same rules.

12.  Subsequent Offer/Answer Exchanges

   Either agent MAY generate a subsequent offer at any time allowed by
   [RFC3264].  When this happens agents will use [RFC5245] semantics to
   determine whether or not the new offer requires an ICE restart.  If
   this is the case then agents would perform trickle ICE as they would
   in an initial offer/answer exchange.

   The only differences between an ICE restart and a brand new media
   session are that:

   o  during the restart, media can continue to be sent to the
      previously validated pair.

   o  both agents are already aware whether or not their peer supports
      trickle ICE, and there is no longer need for performing half
      trickle or confirming support with other mechanisms.

13.  Interaction with ICE Lite

   Behaviour of Trickle ICE capable ICE lite agents does not require any
   particular rules other than those already defined in this
   specification and [RFC5245].  This section is hence added with an
   informational purpose only.

   A Trickle ICE capable ICE Lite agent would generate offers or answers
   as per [RFC5245].  Both will indicate support for trickle ICE
   (Section 5.1) and given that they will contain a complete set of
   candidates (the agent's host candidates) these offers and answers
   would also be accompanied with an end-of-candidates notification.

   When performing full trickle, a full ICE implementation could send an
   offer or an answer with no candidates and an IP6 :: connection line
   address.  After receiving an answer that identifies the remote agent
   as an ICE lite implementation, the offerer may very well choose to
   not send any additional candidates.  The same is also true in the
   case when the ICE lite agent is making the offer and the full ICE one
   is answering.  In these cases the connectivity checks would be enough
   for the ICE lite implementation to discover all potentially useful
   candidates as peer reflexive.  The following example illustrates one
   such ICE session:


           ICE Lite                                          Bob



Ivov, et al.           Expires September 12, 2013              [Page 17]

Internet-Draft                Trickle ICE                     March 2013


            Agent
              |   Offer (a=ice-lite a=ice-options:trickle)    |
              |---------------------------------------------->|
              |                                               |no cand
              |         Answer (a=ice-options:trickle)        |trickling
              |<----------------------------------------------|
              |              Connectivity Checks              |
              |<--------------------------------------------->|
     peer rflx|                                               |
    cand disco|                                               |
              |                                               |
              |<=============== MEDIA FLOWS =================>|



                             Figure 1: Example

   In addition to reducing signaling traffic this approach also removes
   the need to discover STUN bindings, or to make TURN or UPnP
   allocations which may considerably lighten ICE processing.

14.  Example Flow

   A typical successful trickle ICE exchange with an Offer/Answer
   protocol would look this way:


           Alice                                            Bob
             |                     Offer                     |
             |---------------------------------------------->|
             |            Additional Candidates              |
             |---------------------------------------------->|
             |                                               |
             |                     Answer                    |
             |<----------------------------------------------|
             |            Additional Candidates              |
             |<----------------------------------------------|
             |                                               |
             | Additional Candidates and Connectivity Checks |
             |<--------------------------------------------->|
             |                                               |
             |<=============== MEDIA FLOWS =================>|



                             Figure 2: Example





Ivov, et al.           Expires September 12, 2013              [Page 18]

Internet-Draft                Trickle ICE                     March 2013


15.  Security Considerations

   [TODO]

16.  Acknowledgements

   The authors would like to thank Bernard Adoba, Christer Holmberg,
   Enrico Marocco, Flemming Andreasen, Jonathan Lennox and Martin
   Thomson for their reviews and suggestions on improving this document.

17.  References

17.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC3264]  Rosenberg, J. and H. Schulzrinne, "An Offer/Answer Model
              with Session Description Protocol (SDP)", RFC 3264, June
              2002.

   [RFC4566]  Handley, M., Jacobson, V., and C. Perkins, "SDP: Session
              Description Protocol", RFC 4566, July 2006.

   [RFC5245]  Rosenberg, J., "Interactive Connectivity Establishment
              (ICE): A Protocol for Network Address Translator (NAT)
              Traversal for Offer/Answer Protocols", RFC 5245, April
              2010.

17.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.ivov-mmusic-trickle-ice-sip]
              Ivov, E., Marocco, E., and C. Holmberg, "A Session
              Initiation Protocol (SIP) usage for Trickle ICE", draft-
              ivov-mmusic-trickle-ice-sip-00 (work in progress), January
              2013.

   [I-D.keranen-mmusic-ice-address-selection]
              Keraenen, A. and J. Arkko, "Update on Candidate Address
              Selection for Interactive Connectivity Establishment
              (ICE)", draft-keranen-mmusic-ice-address-selection-01
              (work in progress), July 2012.

   [RFC1918]  Rekhter, Y., Moskowitz, R., Karrenberg, D., Groot, G., and
              E. Lear, "Address Allocation for Private Internets", BCP
              5, RFC 1918, February 1996.





Ivov, et al.           Expires September 12, 2013              [Page 19]

Internet-Draft                Trickle ICE                     March 2013


   [RFC2543]  Handley, M., Schulzrinne, H., Schooler, E., and J.
              Rosenberg, "SIP: Session Initiation Protocol", RFC 2543,
              March 1999.

   [RFC3261]  Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., Camarillo, G., Johnston,
              A., Peterson, J., Sparks, R., Handley, M., and E.
              Schooler, "SIP: Session Initiation Protocol", RFC 3261,
              June 2002.

   [RFC3388]  Camarillo, G., Eriksson, G., Holler, J., and H.
              Schulzrinne, "Grouping of Media Lines in the Session
              Description Protocol (SDP)", RFC 3388, December 2002.

   [RFC3840]  Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., and P. Kyzivat,
              "Indicating User Agent Capabilities in the Session
              Initiation Protocol (SIP)", RFC 3840, August 2004.

   [RFC4787]  Audet, F. and C. Jennings, "Network Address Translation
              (NAT) Behavioral Requirements for Unicast UDP", BCP 127,
              RFC 4787, January 2007.

   [RFC5389]  Rosenberg, J., Mahy, R., Matthews, P., and D. Wing,
              "Session Traversal Utilities for NAT (STUN)", RFC 5389,
              October 2008.

   [RFC5766]  Mahy, R., Matthews, P., and J. Rosenberg, "Traversal Using
              Relays around NAT (TURN): Relay Extensions to Session
              Traversal Utilities for NAT (STUN)", RFC 5766, April 2010.

   [XEP-0030]
              Hildebrand, J., Millard, P., Eatmon, R., and P. Saint-
              Andre, "XEP-0030: Service Discovery", XEP XEP-0030, June
              2008.

   [XEP-0115]
              Hildebrand, J., Saint-Andre, P., Troncon, R., and J.
              Konieczny, "XEP-0115: Entity Capabilities", XEP XEP-0115,
              February 2008.

   [XEP-0176]
              Beda, J., Ludwig, S., Saint-Andre, P., Hildebrand, J.,
              Egan, S., and R. McQueen, "XEP-0176: Jingle ICE-UDP
              Transport Method", XEP XEP-0176, June 2009.

   [XEP-0278]
              Camargo, T., "XEP-0278: Jingle Relay Nodes", XEP XEP-0278,
              June 2011.




Ivov, et al.           Expires September 12, 2013              [Page 20]

Internet-Draft                Trickle ICE                     March 2013


Appendix A.  Open issues

   At the time of writing of this document the authors have no clear
   view on how and if the following list of issues should be addressed.

A.1.  MID/Stream Indices in SDP

   This specification does not currently define syntax for candidate-to-
   stream bindings although it says that they should be implemented with
   MID or a stream index.  Yet, it is reasonable to assume that most
   usages would need to do this within the SDP and it may make sense to
   agree on the format.  Here's one possible way to do this:


         a=mid:1
         a=candidate:1 1 UDP 1658497328 192.168.100.33 5000 typ host
         a=candidate:2 1 UDP 1658497328 96.1.2.3 5000 typ srflx
         a=mid:2
         a=candidate:2 1 UDP 1658497328 96.1.2.3 5002 typ srflx
         a=end-of-candidates



A.2.  Starting checks

   Normally Vanilla ICE implementations would first activate a check
   list, validate at least one pair in every component and only then
   unfreeze all other checklists.  With trickle ICE this would be
   suboptimal since, candidates can arrive randomly and we would be
   wasting time waiting for a checklist to fill (almost as if we were
   doing vanilla ICE).  We need to decide if unfreezing everything
   solely based on foundation is good enough.

Appendix B.  Changes From Earlier Versions

   Note to the RFC-Editor: please remove this section prior to
   publication as an RFC.

B.1.  Changes From draft-ivov-00

   o  Specified that end-of-candidates is a media level attribute which
      can of course appear as session level, which is equivalent to
      having it appear in all m-lines.  Also made end-of-candidates
      optional for cases such as aggressive nomination for controlled
      agents.






Ivov, et al.           Expires September 12, 2013              [Page 21]

Internet-Draft                Trickle ICE                     March 2013


   o  Added an example for ICE lite and trickle ICE to illustrate how,
      when talking to an ICE lite agent doesn't need to send or even
      discover any candidates.

   o  Added an example for ICE lite and trickle ICE to illustrate how,
      when talking to an ICE lite agent doesn't need to send or even
      discover any candidates.

   o  Added wording that explicitly states ICE lite agents have to be
      prepared to receive no candidates over signalling and that they
      should not freak out if this happens.  (Closed the corresponding
      open issue).

   o  It is now mandatory to use MID when trickling candidates and using
      m-line indexes is no longer allowed.

   o  Replaced use of 0.0.0.0 to IP6 :: in order to avoid potential
      issues with RFC2543 SDP libraries that interpret 0.0.0.0 as an on-
      hold operation.  Also changed the port number here from 1 to 9
      since it already has a more appropriate meaning.  (Port change
      suggested by Jonathan Lennox).

   o  Closed the Open Issue about use about what to do with cands
      received after end-of-cands.  Solution: ignore, do an ice restart
      if you want to add something.

   o  Added more terminology, including trickling, trickled candidates,
      half trickle, full trickle,

   o  Added a reference to the SIP usage for trickle ICE as requested at
      the Boston interim.

B.2.  Changes From draft-rescorla-01

   o  Brought back explicit use of Offer/Answer.  There are no more
      attempts to try to do this in an O/A independent way.  Also
      removed the use of ICE Descriptions.

   o  Added SDP specification for trickled candidates, the trickle
      option and 0.0.0.0 addresses in m-lines, and end-of-candidates.

   o  Support and Discovery.  Changed that section to be less abstract.
      As discussed in IETF85, the draft now says implementations and
      usages need to either determine support in advance and directly
      use trickle, or do half trickle.  Removed suggestion about use of
      discovery in SIP or about letting implementing protocols do what
      they want.




Ivov, et al.           Expires September 12, 2013              [Page 22]

Internet-Draft                Trickle ICE                     March 2013


   o  Defined Half Trickle.  Added a section that says how it works.
      Mentioned that it only needs to happen in the first o/a (not
      necessary in updates), and added Jonathan's comment about how it
      could, in some cases, offer more than half the improvement if you
      can pre-gather part or all of your candidates before the user
      actually presses the call button.

   o  Added a short section about subsequent offer/answer exchanges.

   o  Added a short section about interactions with ICE Lite
      implementations.

   o  Added two new entries to the open issues section.

B.3.  Changes From draft-rescorla-00

   o  Relaxed requirements about verifying support following a
      discussion on MMUSIC.

   o  Introduced ICE descriptions in order to remove ambiguous use of
      3264 language and inappropriate references to offers and answers.

   o  Removed inappropriate assumption of adoption by RTCWEB pointed out
      by Martin Thomson.

Authors' Addresses

   Emil Ivov
   Jitsi
   Strasbourg  67000
   France

   Phone: +33 6 72 81 15 55
   Email: emcho@jitsi.org


   Eric Rescorla
   RTFM, Inc.
   2064 Edgewood Drive
   Palo Alto, CA  94303
   USA

   Phone: +1 650 678 2350
   Email: ekr@rtfm.com







Ivov, et al.           Expires September 12, 2013              [Page 23]

Internet-Draft                Trickle ICE                     March 2013


   Justin Uberti
   Google
   747 6th St S
   Kirkland, WA  98033
   USA

   Phone: +1 857 288 8888
   Email: justin@uberti.name










































Ivov, et al.           Expires September 12, 2013              [Page 24]
