A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3601

        Title:      Text String Notation for Dial Sequences and
                    Global Switched Telephone Network (GSTN) /
                    E.164 Addresses
        Author(s):  C. Allocchio
        Status:     Standards Track
        Date:       September 2003
        Mailbox:    Claudio.Allocchio@garr.it
        Pages:      10
        Characters: 18572
        Updates/Obsoletes/SeeAlso:    None

        I-D Tag:    draft-allocchio-gstn-05.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3601.txt


This memo describes the full set of notations needed to represent
a text string in a Dial Sequence.  A Dial Sequence is normally
composed of Dual Tone Multi Frequency (DTMF) elements, plus
separators and additional "actions" (such as "wait for
dialtone", "pause for N secs", etc.) which could be needed to
successfully establish the connection with the target service:
this includes the cases where subaddresses or DTMF menu navigation
apply.

This is now a Proposed Standard Protocol.

This document specifies an Internet standards track protocol for
the Internet community, and requests discussion and suggestions
for improvements.  Please refer to the current edition of the
"Internet Official Protocol Standards" (STD 1) for the
standardization state and status of this protocol.  Distribution
of this memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.

