


Network Working Group                                        P. O'Hanlon
Internet-Draft                                      University of Oxford
Intended status: Informational                               K. Carlberg
Expires: January 10, 2013                                            G11
                                                            July 9, 2012


  Congestion control algorithm for lower latency and lower loss media
                               transport
                      draft-ohanlon-rmcat-dflow-00

Abstract

   This memo provides an initial design for a congestion control
   algorithm, for media transport, which aims to provide for lower delay
   and lower loss communications.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 10, 2013.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2012 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.



O'Hanlon & Carlberg     Expires January 10, 2013                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft       DFlow media congestion control            July 2012


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Conventions, Definitions and Acronyms . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   3.  Background  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
     3.1.  TFRC  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
     3.2.  Delay-Based schemes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   4.  Objectives  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   5.  Design Outline  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
     5.1.  Congestion Detection  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   6.  Further Work  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   7.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   8.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   9.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
     9.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
     9.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8


































O'Hanlon & Carlberg     Expires January 10, 2013                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft       DFlow media congestion control            July 2012


1.  Introduction

   This memo outlines DFlow, a congestion control algorithm that aims to
   minimise delay and loss by using delay-based techniques.  The scheme
   is based upon TCP Friendly Rate Control (TFRC) [RFC5348], and adds a
   delay-based congestion detection scheme which feeds into a
   'congestion event history' mechanism based upon TFRC's loss history.
   This then provides for a 'congestion event rate' which drives the TCP
   equation.

   Low delay congestion control is important for real-time streams as
   high delay can render the communication unacceptable [ITU.G114.2003].
   Unfortunately on today's Internet many paths have an excess of
   buffering which can lead to persistent high latencies, which has
   become known as the Bufferbloat phenomenon.  These problems are
   particularly apparent with loss-based congestion control schemes such
   as TCP, as they operate by filling the queues on a path till loss
   occurs, thus maximising the delay.  The unfortunate consequence is
   that loss-based approaches not only lead to high delay for their own
   packets but also introduce delays and losses for all other flows that
   traverse those filled queues.

   Thus when competing with TCP, without the widespread deployment of
   Active Queue Management, it is not possible to maintain low delay as
   TCP will do its best to keep the queues full and maximise the delay.
   Furthermore when competing with TCP other flows will incur losses
   which should be used to operate a loss-based algorithm whilst in the
   presence of the TCP flows.

   However there are a many paths where the flows are not competing
   directly with TCP and where delay may be minimised.

   The DFlow scheme can transport media with low delay and loss on paths
   where there is no direct competion with TCP in the same queue.
   Though we are currently testing some techniques to enable it compete
   with loss-based schemes (at the expense of delay) but they will be
   included in a later version of the draft.  In simulations it has been
   seen to be reasonably fair when competing with other DFlow streams.


2.  Conventions, Definitions and Acronyms

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC
   2119 [RFC2119].





O'Hanlon & Carlberg     Expires January 10, 2013                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft       DFlow media congestion control            July 2012


3.  Background

   Whilst the existing standard for media transport, Real-time Transport
   Protocol (RTP) [RFC3550], suggest that congestion control should be
   employed, in practice many systems tend to use fixed or variable bit
   rate UDP and do very little or no adaptation to their network
   environment.  Most of the existing work on realtime congestion
   control algorithms has been rooted in TCP-friendly approaches but
   with smoother adaptation cycles.  TCP congestion control is
   unsuitable for interactive media for a number of reasons including
   the fact that it is loss-based so it maximises the latency on a path,
   it changes its transmit rate to quickly for multimedia, and favours
   reliability over timeliness.  Various TCP-friendly congestion control
   algorithms such as TFRC [RFC5348], Sislem's LDA+, and Choi's TFWC
   have been devised for unreliable media transport, that attempt to
   smooth the short-term variation in sending rate.  More recently there
   have been development of some delay-based schemes which aim to
   provide for low delay.

3.1.  TFRC

   TFRC is a rate based receiver driven congestion control algorithm
   which utilises the Padhye TCP equation to provide a TCP-friendly
   rate.  The sender explicitly sets the transmission rate, using the
   TCP equation driven by the loss event rate which is measured and fed
   back by the receiver, where a loss event consists of one or more
   packet losses within a single RTT.  It utilises a weighted smoothed
   loss event rate, and EWMA smoothed RTT, as input to the TCP Equation
   which enables it to achieve a smoother rate adaptation that provides
   for a more suitable transport for multimedia.  TFRC was primarily
   aimed at streaming media delivery where a smooth rate and TCP-
   friendliness are more important than low latency operation.

   However there are number of issues with TFRC as regards media
   transport:

   Loss-based operation:  Firstly since it is a loss-based based scheme
      the latency is maximised which is a problem for real-time
      transport over heavily buffered paths.  The other problem with
      loss-based protocols is that they rely on a certain level of
      packet loss which can be an issue for media traffic since
      retransmissions are problematic.  This problem is more of a
      concern as rates decrease since the TCP equation requires a
      corresponding increase in loss rates.







O'Hanlon & Carlberg     Expires January 10, 2013                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft       DFlow media congestion control            July 2012


   Bursty media flows:  Many media flows exhibit bursty behaviour due to
      a number of factors.  Firstly there may be negative bursts (i.e.
      gaps) due to silence or low motion which can lead oscillatory
      behaviours due to the its data-limited and/or idle behaviours.
      Secondly there may be postive bursts (i.e. larger than normal) can
      also be due to the bursty nature of the media and codec (e.g.
      I-frames) which can be lead to drops or increased latency.  Whilst
      the current version of TFRC [RFC5348] has attempted to address
      these issues, they are still a concern.

   Small RTTs environments:  When operating in low RTT environments
      (<5ms), such as a LAN, TFRC has can have problems with scheduling
      packet transmissions as interpacket timings can be lower than
      application level clock granularity.  Furthermore these conditions
      can Whilst the current version of TFRC [RFC5348] has attempted to
      address these issues, they can still be a concern in low RTT
      environments.

   Variable packet sizes:  As originally designed TFRC will only operate
      correctly when packet sizes are close to MTU size, and when the
      packet sizes are much smaller fairness issues arise.  Although
      there have been attempts to address this problem for small packets
      [RFC4828] it is not clear how to deal with flows that do vary
      their packet sizes substantially.  Though this issue is only
      really a marked problem with lower bit rate video flows or
      variable packet rate audio.

3.2.  Delay-Based schemes

   In the last few years there has been a renewed interest in the use of
   delay based congestion control for media, with a slightly different
   emphasis to that of the history of TCP approaches such as Jain's
   CARD, Crowcroft and Jon's Tri-S, Brakmo's Vegas, and more recently
   Tan et al's Compound TCP.  Whilst the goal with these media based
   transports is to actually minimise the latency of the flow, as
   opposed to just using delay as an early indication of loss.  This is
   of particular relevance on paths with large queues, as is the case
   with a number of today's Internet paths.  In 2007 Ghanbari et al did
   some pioneering work on delay-based video congestion control using
   fuzzy logic based systems.  Recently there has been on going activity
   in the IETF as part of the Low Extra Delay Background Transport
   (LEDBAT) Working Group which aims to provide a less than best effort
   delay-based transport with lower delay.  More recently Google
   published a contribution to the Real-Time Communication in WEB-
   browsers (RTCWeb) Working Group, which has now been spun off to the
   new BOF on RTP Media Congestion Avoidance Techniques (rmcat).





O'Hanlon & Carlberg     Expires January 10, 2013                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft       DFlow media congestion control            July 2012


4.  Objectives

   The objectives of DFlow are to provide for low delay and low loss
   media transport when possible.  We also aim to provide (in a future
   version of the draft) mechanisms to provide for better burst
   management, and loss-mode operation (the key being the switch from
   loss-mode back to delay-mode).

   Lower Delay:  The one-way delay should be kept well within the
      acceptable levels of 150ms, and MUST NOT exceed 400ms
      [ITU.G114.2003].

   Lower Loss:  For media transport is important to minimise loss as it
      is usually not possible to retransmit within the delay budget for
      many connections.  Whilst modern codecs can tolerate some loss it
      is beneficial to avoid it.  The benefit of low delay congestion
      control is that since it aims to operate within the queuing
      boundaries it generally avoids loss.

   Smoothness:  The media rate should aim to be smooth within the
      constraints of the media, codec, and the network path.  A smooth
      rate generally provides for a more palatable media consumption.

   Fairness:  The system should aim to be reasonably fair with TCP flows
      and itself.  Initially we aim for self fairness and we will aim to
      tackle TCP fairness when we have sufficiently robust loss-mode
      operation.

   [Burst Management]:  [Due in later rev] We aim to work on mechanisms
      to manage the bursty nature of media allowing it maintain a
      smoother quality.  A smooth rate generally provides for a more
      palatable media consumption.

   [Loss-based mode]:  [Due in later rev] We aim to wrok on mechanisms
      to allow the system to compete with loss-based congestion control
      and maintain throughput, though without additional network support
      it is understood that the delay (and loss) would be largely beyond
      control.


5.  Design Outline

   At this stage DFlow utilises the core aspects of TFRC, such as its
   rate based operation, utilisation of the TCP equation, and its
   smoother rate.  It also utilises similar packet contents and
   signalling mechanisms.  However as the design evolves we realise that
   DFlow may become quite separate from TFRC.




O'Hanlon & Carlberg     Expires January 10, 2013                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft       DFlow media congestion control            July 2012


5.1.  Congestion Detection

   The delay-based detection algorithm operates by sampling the one-way
   delay (OWD) of each packet arrival by comparing the send timestamp
   with the receive time.  The OWD is sampled over a small set time
   period, sample_period, (typically 100ms) and the minima stored as the
   BaseDelay over a longer period, base_period, (typically 5-10xRTT).
   The current OWD is then compared to the BaseDelay and if it exceeds a
   set threshold, CDthresh, (typically around 50ms) then the packet is
   considered for the next stage of detection.  The following test is
   based upon the gradient of the delay change over two sample_periods,
   indicating that delay is on the increase, if it is positive then a
   'congestion event' is logged.  The minima of the OWDs are used to
   reduce noise of the measurements, which is beneficial in the case of
   variable link types such as Wifi.


   If ((BaseDelayMinNxRTT - OWD) > CDthresh AND
                     DelayIncreaseOver2RTTs > 0)
           DelayCongestionEvent = True

                                 Figure 1

   This algorithm then provides input to the 'congestion interval
   history' (or TFRC's 'loss interval history') mechanism, which is
   combined with normal input from the TFRC packet loss detection
   mechanisms, from which a 'congestion event rate' is derived which is
   then fed into the TCP equation to determine the send rate.

   Note that we disable TFRC's oscillation reduction mechanism from
   Section 4.5 [RFC5348] as it adversely affects the delay-based
   operation.

   We have performed some simulations of the above mechanism in
   operation and have found it to be reasonable fair to itself, though
   it is not as smooth as TFRC.


6.  Further Work

   The design is still under development and there is clearly more work
   to be done.  But we are seeking feeback on these ideas and future
   directions.


7.  IANA Considerations

   This document makes no requests of IANA.



O'Hanlon & Carlberg     Expires January 10, 2013                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft       DFlow media congestion control            July 2012


8.  Security Considerations

   With a congestion control algorithm an attacker can attempt to
   interfere with the protocol to cause rate changes.  However
   encryption of the protocol will protect it against such threats.


9.  References

9.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC4828]  Floyd, S. and E. Kohler, "TCP Friendly Rate Control
              (TFRC): The Small-Packet (SP) Variant", RFC 4828,
              April 2007.

   [RFC5348]  Floyd, S., Handley, M., Padhye, J., and J. Widmer, "TCP
              Friendly Rate Control (TFRC): Protocol Specification",
              RFC 5348, September 2008.

9.2.  Informative References

   [ITU.G114.2003]
              International Telecommunications Union, "One-way
              transmission time", ITU-T Recommendation G.707, May 2003.

   [RFC3550]  Schulzrinne, H., Casner, S., Frederick, R., and V.
              Jacobson, "RTP: A Transport Protocol for Real-Time
              Applications", STD 64, RFC 3550, July 2003.


Authors' Addresses

   Piers O'Hanlon
   University of Oxford
   Oxford Internet Institute
   1 St Giles
   Oxford  OX1 3JS
   United Kingdom

   Email: piers.ohanlon@oii.ox.ac.uk








O'Hanlon & Carlberg     Expires January 10, 2013                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft       DFlow media congestion control            July 2012


   Ken Carlberg
   G11
   1600 Clarendon Blvd
   Arlington  VA
   USA

   Email: carlberg@g11.org.uk












































O'Hanlon & Carlberg     Expires January 10, 2013                [Page 9]

