Versions: 02

Network Working Group                                            C. Reed
Internet-Draft                                                       OGC
Intended status: Informational                          January 10, 2011
Expires: July 9, 2011
     
        URN Namespace for the Defence Geospatial Information Working
                                   Group (DGIWG)
                               draft-reed-urn-dgiwg-02

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with 
   the provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as 
   Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on July 8, 2010.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal Provisions
   Relating to IETF Documents (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info)
   in effect on the date of publication of this document.  Please
   review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights and
   restrictions with respect to this document.












Reed                    Expires July 9, 2011                    [Page 1]

Internet-Draft           URN DGIWG Namespace                January 2011

Abstract

   This document describes the Namespace Identifier (NID) for Uniform
   Resource Namespace (URN) resources published by the Defence 
   Geospatial Information Working Group (DGIWG). DGIWG defines 
   and manages resources that utilize this URN name model.  

   Management activities for these and other resource types are provided
   by the Defence Geospatial Information Working Group (DGIWG) Registry
   System (DRS). For the processes that DGIWG uses to manage this and 
   other registries, see the DGIWG Concept of Operations.



Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  URN Specification for "dgiwg" NID  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .4
   3.  Examples  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   4.  Namespace Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   5.  Community Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   6.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   7.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   8.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7



























Reed                    Expires July 9, 2011                    [Page 2]

Internet-Draft           URN dgiwg Namespace                January 2011

1. Introduction

   The DGIWG is a multi-national body responsible to the Defence
   organizations of member nations for coordinated advice and policy
   recommendations on standards and practices for geospatial information
   and support services. The DGIWG creates standards and recommended
   practices required to enable the provision, exchange and exploit
   geospatial information. It supports the requirements of NATO and the
   other alliances that its member nations participate in, including UN
   sanctioned peace keeping.

   The DGIWG has and continues to define standards, processes and
   procedures for the use of international standards in the DGIWG
   community.

   The DGIWG geospatial standards are built upon the generic and
   abstract standards for geographic information defined by the
   International Organization for Standardization (ISO TC/211). The
   DGIWG makes use of the service specifications endorsed by the Open
   Geospatial Consortium (OGC).

   The DGIWG defines information components for use in the development
   of product specifications and application schemas for military
   geospatial data. The DGIWG also establishes service specifications,
   encoding formats and testing methodologies to meet military
   geospatial intelligence requirements.

   Some of the solutions being developed by the DGIWG need XML
   namespaces that are managed so that they are unique and persistent.
   To assure that the uniqueness is absolute, the registration of a
   specific Namespace ID (NID) for use by the DGIWG was deemed
   appropriate. Therefore, a full and complete registration will follow
   the namespace specification process as defined in [RFC3406].




















Reed                       Expires July 9, 2011                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft              URN dgiwg Namespace             January 2011


2. URN Specification for "dgiwg" NID

   Namespace ID: dgiwg

   Registration Information:

      registration version number: 1
      registration date: YYYY-MM-DD  [RFC Editor, please replace with
                                   the date of publication of this RFC]

   Declared registrant of the namespace:

      Registering organization: Defence Geospatial Information Working
                                Group
      Name:     The Secretary (attn: Mr Paul Burton)
      Address:  Defence Geospatial Information Working Group (DGIWG) UK 
                     Hydrographic Office Admiralty Way, TAUNTON Somerset
                     TA1 2DN
                     United Kingdom   

   Designated contact:

      Role:     The DGIWG Registry Services Administrator
      Email:    dgiwg-urn-admin@dgiwg.org

   Declaration of syntactic structure:

      The Namespace Specific String (NSS) of all URNs that use the 
      "dgiwg" NID will have the following structure:

         urn:dgiwg:{DGIWGresource}:{ResourceSpecificString}

      where the "DGIWGresource" is a US-ASCII string that conforms to
      the URN syntax requirements [RFC2141] and defines a specific
      class of resource type.  Each resource type has a specific
      labeling scheme that is covered by "ResourceSpecificString",
      which also conforms to the naming requirements of [RFC2141].
      The only exception is that the character ":" shall not be used
      as part of the "DGIWGResource" string. This is to avoid possible
      confusion. Further, "DGIWGResource" is case sensitive.

      The DGIWG maintains a naming authority, the DGIWG Registration
      System  (DRS) that will manage the assignment of "DGIWGresources"
      and the specific registration values assigned for each resource
      class. Other DGIWG Standards documents will define the
      "ResourceSpecificStrings" for a given "DGIWG  resource".







Reed                         Expires July 89, 2011               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                URN dgiwg Namespace            January 2011

   Relevant ancillary documentation:

      The DGIWG defines a number of specific lists of information
      elements that can be combined with the models in product
      specifications and application schema. These are maintained by
      the DGIWG. More information about the DRS and the registration
      activities and procedures to be followed can be found in the
      document "Concept of Operations for Registration", which provides
      the procedures for the DGIWG registration of geographical items.
      http://portal.dgiwg.org/files/?artifact_id=3526 . This is a 
      stable URI.

   Identifier uniqueness considerations:

      The DRS will manage resources using the "dgiwg" NID and will be
      the authority for managing the resource type identifiers and
      subsequent strings associated with them.  In the associated
      procedures, the DRS will ensure the uniqueness of the strings
      or shall permit secondary responsibility for management of well
      defined sub-trees. URNs issued by the DRS may not be reassigned

      The DGIWG may permit use of experimental type values that will not
      be registered.  As a consequence, multiple users may end up using
      the same value for separate uses.  As experimental usage is only
      intended for testing purposes, this should not be a real issue.

   Identifier persistence considerations:

      The DRS will provide clear documentation of the registered uses of
      the "dgiwg" NID.  The DRS will establish a registry for
      DGIWGresources.  Each DGIWGresource will have a separate
      description in the registry and may have its own sub-registry.

      The registries and information will be published and maintained by
      the DRS on its web site.

   Process of identifier assignment:

      As defined in the DGIWG Concept of Operations for Registration,
      the DRS will provide procedures for registration of each type of
      Resource that it maintains.  Each such resource may have three
      types of registration activities:
          1.  Registered values associated with DGIWG specifications
              or services
          2.  Registration of values or sub-registries to other
              entities
          3.  Name models for use in experimental purposes






Reed                         Expires July 9, 2011               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                URN dgiwg Namespace           January 2011

   Process for identifier resolution:

      The namespace is not listed with an RDS; this is not relevant.

   Rules for Lexical Equivalence:

      No special considerations; the rules for lexical equivalence of
      [RFC2141] apply.

   Conformance with URN Syntax:

      No special considerations.

   Validation mechanism:

      None specified.  URN assignment will be handled by procedures
      implemented in support of DRS activities.

   Scope:

      Global

3. Examples

   The following examples are representative urns that could be
   assigned by the DRS.  They may not be the actual strings that would
   be assigned.

   Example 1

      DGIWGresource "crs"
      Syntax: "urn:dgiwg:crs:<crs name>"
   
   ResourceSpecificString: simple string with name of the coordinate
   reference system defined in a sub-registry
   
      Use: Defines the urn to be used for queries to a DGIWG
      crs registry that provides URIs for crs.
   
   Example 2
   
     DGIWGresource "dfdd" 
     Syntax: "urn:dgiwg:fad:dfdd<fad_code>:<fad_name>" 

     The DGIWG maintains a feature and attribute data (FAD) registry
     that contains registers of geographic information concepts used to 
     characterize aspects of real world phenomena for different
     information communities. (https://www.dgiwg.org/FAD/registers.jsp)





Reed                          Expires July 9, 2011              [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                 URN DGIWG Namespace          January 2011

        urn:dgiwg:fad:dfdd:Aerodrome:aerodrome 

        urn:dgiwg:fad:dfdd:Helipad:helipad 

        urn:dgiwg:fad:dfdd:AerodromeMoveAreaLighting:aerodrome
              movement-area-lighting

4. Namespace Considerations

   The Defence Geospatial Information Working Group is developing a 
   variety of applications and services.  Some of these services
   require that supporting information (e.g., data descriptions,
   attributes, etc.) be fully specified.  For proper operation,
   descriptions of the needed supporting information must exist and
   be available in a unique, reliable, and persistent manner.  These
   dependencies provide the basis of need for namespaces, in one form or
   another.

   As the work is ongoing and the Defence Geospatial Information 
   Working Group covers many technical areas, the possibility of binding 
   to various other namespace repositories has been deemed impractical. 
   Each object or description, as defined by the DGIWG, could possibly
   be related to multiple different other namespaces, so further
   conflicts of association could occur.  Thus the intent is to utilize
   the Defence  Geospatial Information Working Group Registration
   System, operated by the DGIWG, as the naming authority for DGIWG
   defined objects and descriptions.

5. Community Considerations

   The objects and descriptions required for registration services
   defined by the DGIWG are publicly available for use by other
   organizations.  The DGIWG will provide public access and support for
   name requests by other organizations.  This support can be enabled
   in a timely and responsive fashion as new objects and descriptions
   are produced.  These will be enabled in a fashion similar to current
   IANA processes. A description of the DGIWG collaboration process is
   available on the DGIWG website http://www.dgiwg.org/dgiwg/ .

6. Security Considerations

   There are no additional security considerations other than those
   normally associated with the use and resolution of URNs in general.










Reed                      Expires July 9, 2011                  [Page 7]
Internet-Draft             URN DGIWG Namespace              January 2011

7. IANA Considerations

   This document registers with IANA a new formal URN Namespace ID,
   "dgiwg", following the procedures as defined in RFC 3406 [RFC3406].
   The completed registration template is in Section 2 of this document.
   The affected IANA registry is currently located at: 
   http://www.iana.org/assignments/urn-namespaces.

8. Normative and Informative References

8.1   Normative:

   [RFC2141]  Moats, R., "URN Syntax", RFC 2141, May 1997.

   [RFC3406]  Daigle, L., van Gulik, D., Iannella, R., and P. Faltstrom,
                      "Uniform Resource Names (URN) Namespace Definition
                      Mechanisms", BCP 66, RFC 3406, October 2002.

   [ISO/IEC 646:1991] Information technology - ISO 7-bit coded
                      character set for information interchange

8.2   Informative

   [DGIWG TCR-07-048] "Concept of Operations for Registration,
                      ConOps for Registers", March 2008.


Author's Address

   Carl Reed, PhD
   OGC, Inc.
   2536 West Prospect
   Fort Collins, CO
   US

   Email: creed@opengeospatial.org















Reed                         Expires July 9, 2011                   Page 8]
