Versions: 00

Network Working Group                                                           C. Reed
Internet-Draft                                                                                  OGC
Intended status: Informational                                       October 15, 2009
Expires: April 14 2010
     
URN Namespace for the Defence Geospatial Information Working
                                     Group (DGIWG)
                                 draft-reed-urn-dgiwg-00

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 14, 2010.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2009 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents in effect on the date of
   publication of this document (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info).
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.

Reed                                Expires April 14, 2010                            [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                  URN DGIWG Namespace               October 2009

Abstract

   This document describes the Namespace Identifier (NID) for Uniform
   Resource Namespace (URN) resources published by the Defence 
   Geospatial Information Working Group (DGIWG). DGIWG defines 
   and manages resources that utilize this URN name model.  

   Management activities for these and
   other resource types are provided by the Defence Geospatial Information
   Working Group (DGIWG) Registry System (NRS).  For the processes 
   that DGIWG uses to manage this and other registries, see the DGIWG 
   Concept of Operations.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  URN Specification for "dgiwg" NID  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   3.  Examples  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   4.  Namespace Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   5.  Community Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   6.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   7.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .7
   8.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .7














Reed                                      Expires April 14, 2010                       [Page 2]

 

Internet-Draft                    URN dgiwg Namespace                 October 2009

1. Introduction

   The DGIWG is a multi-national body responsible to the Defence
   organizations of member nations for coordinated advice and policy
   recommendations on standards and practices for geospatial information
   and support services. The DGIWG creates standards and recommended
   practices required to enable the provision, exchange and exploit
   geospatial information. It supports the requirements of NATO and the
   other alliances that its member nations participate in, including UN
   sanctioned peace keeping.

   DGIWG has and continues to define standards, processes and
   procedures for the use of international standards in the DGIWG
   community.

   The DGIWG geospatial standards are built upon the generic and abstract 
   standards for geographic information defined by the International 
   Organization for Standardization (ISO TC/211). DGIWG makes use of 
   the service specifications endorsed by the Open Geospatial Consortium 
   (OGC).

   DGIWG defines information components for use in the development of
   product specifications and application schemas for military geospatial 
   data. DGIWG also establishes service specifications, encoding formats
   and testing methodologies to meet military geospatial intelligence 
   requirements.

   Some of the solutions being developed by DGIWG need XML
   namespaces that are managed so that they are unique and persistent.  To
   assure that the uniqueness is absolute, the registration of a specific
   Namespace ID (NID) for use by DGIWG was deemed appropriate.
   Therefore, a full and complete registration will follow the namespace
   specification process as defined in [RFC3406].








Reed                                 Expires April 14, 2010                            [Page 3]

 
Internet-Draft                   URN dgiwg Namespace                  October 2009


2. URN Specification for "dgiwg" NID


  Namespace ID:
  The NID "dgiwg" is requested.

  Registration Information:
    registration version number: 1
    registration date: YYYY-MM-DD  [RFC Editor, please replace with the
                                        data of publication of this RFC]

  Declared registrant of the namespace:
    Registering organization
    Name:  The Secretary (attn: Mr Paul Burton)
     Defence Geospatial Information Working Group (DGIWG) UK 
     Hydrographic Office Admiralty Way, TAUNTON Somerset
     TA1 2DN
     United Kingdom   
                                           

  Designated contact:
    Role:     DGIWG Registry Services Administrator
    Email:   dgiwg-urn-admin@dgiwg.org

  Declaration of syntactic structure:
  The Namespace Specific String (NSS) of all URNs that use the "nena"
  NID will have the following structure:

  urn:dgiwg:{DGIWGresource}:{ResourceSpecificString}

   where the "DGIWGresource" is a US-ASCII string that conforms to the
   URN syntax requirements [RFC2141] and defines a specific class of
   resource type.  Each resource type has a specific labeling scheme
   that is covered by "ResourceSpecificString", which also conforms to
   the naming requirements of [RFC2141].

   DGIWG maintains a naming authority, the DGIWG Registration
   System  (NRS) that will manage the assignment of DGIWGresources"
   and the specific registration values assigned for each resource class. 
   Other DGIWG Standards documents will define the
   "ResourceSpecificStrings" for a given "DGIWG  resource".

Reed                           Expires April 14, 2010                                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft             URN dgiwg Namespace                        October 2009


   Relevant ancillary documentation:
   DGIWG defines a number of specific lists of information elements that
   can be combined with the models in product specifications and 
   application schema. These are maintained by the DGIWG 
   More information about NRS and the
   registration activities and procedures to be followed are defined in
   document on the "Concept of Operations for Registration", which
    provides the procedures for the DGIWG registration of geographical 
   items. http://portal.dgiwg.org/files/?artifact_id=3526

   Identifier uniqueness considerations:

   The NRS will manage resources using the "dgiwg" NID and will be the
   authority for managing the resources and subsequent strings
   associated.  In the associated procedures, NRS will ensure the
   uniqueness of the strings themselves or shall permit secondary
   responsibility for management of well-defined sub-trees.

   DGIWG may permit use of experimental type values that will not be
   registered.  As a consequence, multiple users may end up using the
   same value for separate uses.  As experimental usage is only intended
   for testing purposes, this should not be a real issue.

   Identifier persistence considerations:
   The NRS will provide clear documentation of the registered uses of the
   "dgiwg" NID.  NRS will establish a registry for DGIWGresources.  Each
   DGIWGresource will have a separate description in the registry and may
   have its own sub-registry.

   The registries and information will be published and maintained by
   NRS on its web site.

   Process of identifier assignment:
   The NRS will provide procedures for registration of each type of
   Resource that it maintains.  Each such resource may have three types of
   registration activities:
   1.  Registered values associated with DGIWG specifications or services
   2.  Registration of values or sub-registries to other entities
   3.  Name models for use in experimental purposes


Reed                               Expires April 14, 2010                              [Page 5]

Internet-Draft               URN dgiwg Namespace                      October 2009

   Process for identifier resolution:
   The namespace is not listed with an RDS; this is not relevant.

   Rules for Lexical Equivalence:
   No special considerations; the rules for lexical equivalence of
   [RFC2141] apply.

   Conformance with URN Syntax:
   No special considerations.

   Validation mechanism:
   None specified.  URN assignment will be handled by procedures
   implemented in support of NRS activities.

   Scope:
   Global

3. Examples

   The following examples are representative urns that could be assigned
   by the NRS.  They may not be the actual strings that would be assigned.

  Example 1

 DGIWGresource "crs"
   Syntax: "urn:dgiwg:crs:<crs name>"
   
   ResourceSpecificString: simple string with name of the coordinate
   reference system defined in a sub-registry
   
    Use: Defines the urn to be used for queries to a DGIWG
    crs registry that provides URIs for crs.

   Examples 2
   
  DGIWGresource "dfdd" 
     Syntax: "urn:dgiwg:fad:dfdd<fad_code>:<fad_name>" 

     DGIWG maintains a feature and attribute data (FAD) registry that 
     contains registers of geographic information concepts used to 
     characterize aspects of real world phenomena for different information 
     communities. (https://www.dgiwg.org/FAD/registers.jsp)

Reed                                Expires April 14, 2010                             [Page 6]

Internet-Draft              URN DGIWG Namespace                   October 2009

        urn:dgiwg:fad:dfdd:Aerodrome:aerodrome 

        urn:dgiwg:fad:dfdd:Helipad:helipad 

        urn:dgiwg:fad:dfdd:AerodromeMoveAreaLighting:aerodrome
              movement area lighting

4. Namespace Considerations

   The Defence Geospatial Information Working Group is developing a 
   variety of applications and services.  Some of these services require that
   supporting information (e.g., data descriptions, attributes, etc.) be
   fully specified.  For proper operation, descriptions of the needed
   supporting information must exist and be available in a unique,
   reliable, and persistent manner.  These dependencies provide the
   basis of need for namespaces, in one form or another.

   As the work is ongoing and the Defence Geospatial Information 
   Working Group covers many technical areas, the possibility of binding 
   to various other namespace repositories has been deemed impractical. 
   Each object or description, as defined by DGIWG, could possibly be 
   Related to multiple different other namespaces, so further conflicts of
   association could occur.  Thus the intent is to utilize the Defence 
   Geospatial Information Working Group Registration System, operated 
   by DGIWG, as the naming authority for DGIWG-defined objects and 
   descriptions.

5. Community Considerations

   The objects and descriptions required for registration services defined by
   DGIWG are publicly available for use by other organizations.  DGIWG
   will provide public access and support for name requests by other
   organizations.  This support can be enabled in a timely and responsive
   fashion as new objects and descriptions are produced.  These will be
   enabled in a fashion similar to current IANA
   processes.

6. Security Considerations

   There are no additional security considerations other than those
   normally associated with the use and resolution of URNs in general.

7. IANA Considerations
Reed                             Expires April 14, 2010                                [Page 7]
Internet-Draft               URN DGIWG Namespace                  October 2009

   This document adds a new entry in the urn-namespaces registry.  The
   namespace should be "dgiwg".  The defining document is this RFC.  The
   entry can be found at: http://www.iana.org/assignments/urn-namespaces
   and any associated mirrors.

8. Informative References

   [RFC2141]  Moats, R., "URN Syntax", RFC 2141, May 1997.

   [RFC3406]  Daigle, L., van Gulik, D., Iannella, R., and P. Faltstrom,
              "Uniform Resource Names (URN) Namespace Definition
              Mechanisms", BCP 66, RFC 3406, October 2002.

   [ISO/IEC 646:1991] Information technology - ISO 7-bit coded
             character set for information interchange

    DGIWG Concept of Operations for Registration, TCR-07-048-ed0.1-
                ConOps for Registers, March 2008.


Author's Address

   Carl Reed, PhD
   OGC, Inc.
   2536 West Prospect
   Fort Collins, CO
   US

   Email: creed@opengeospatial.org















Reed                              Expires April 14, 2010                               [Page 8]
