
INTERNET-DRAFT                               C. Lindsey
DKIM Working Group                           University of Manchester
Intended status: Informational               September 15, 2010

                          DKIM, MLMs and From
                <draft-lindsey-dkim-mailinglists-00.txt>

Abstract

   It is proposed that a Mailing List Manager (MLM) may, under
   certain circumstances, replace the From header field of a message
   before forwarding it in order to prevent its being discarded by
   over-zealous DKIM verifiers/receivers.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on March 15th, 2011.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


                           Table of Contents

1.  Introduction ..................................................    2
2.  The Proposal ..................................................    2
3.  Normative References ..........................................    4
4.  AUthor's Address ..............................................    4


C. H. Lindsey                                                   [Page 1]

Internet-Draft            DKIM, MLMs and From         September 15, 2010



1.  Introduction

   This memo is to be read in conjunction with [KUCHERAWY].  Readers are
   presumed to be familiar with that document and with the terminology
   used therein.

   [KUCHERAWY] describes some problems which can arise when a mail
   message is DKIM-signed by a domain which has declared a strict policy
   such as "discardable", and gives advice on how to deal with these
   problems. This memo proposes an additional tool whereby the MLM
   replaces the From header field with a variant that will not cause the
   forwarded message to be discarded by subsequent agents on the grounds
   that it contains no signature from the originating domain.

   The tool is described by way of additional text which it is proposed
   should be added to [KUCHERAWY].

2.  The Proposal

   Within [KUCHERAWY], add a new section 5.2.1 (or alternatively a new
   section 5.3, with the subsequent sections renumbered), containing the
   following text:

START OF ADDITIONAL TEXT

   Nevertheless, this document is only advisory, and an MLM may be faced
   with an originating ADMD that declines to divide its messages into
   appropriate streams (2.5), each with an appropriate ADSP policy;
   or with an author who is not permitted to create any extra stream
   (5.4);
   or with a receiver that is unwilling to accept his signed
   [AUTH_RESULTS] header field.
   Moreover, having regard to the importance of getting messages
   transmitted reliably to all recipients on his list, an MLM may be
   unwilling to accept the advice to reject certain mail outright (5.2).

   In that case (and only for messages signed by domains declaring a
   strict ADSP policy and for which he is about to invalidate the
   existing signature) he may change the From header field on the
   message to contain his own domain in its <domain> (i.e. after the
   '@'). This will surely prevent discarding of the message on account
   of that strict ADSP policy, but it must be regarded as a "method of
   last resort" since it can raise further difficulties (see below).
   Moreover, it must be used with a signed [AUTH_RESULTS] header field
   (5.6 and 5.7).

   In order that recipients will still recognize the message as coming
   from the original author, any <display-name> in the original From
   header field should be retained (or possibly augmented), and the
   original <addr> should be somehow encoded in the new <addr>. It is
   recommended that this be done by means of the "percent hack" which is
   nowadays normally deprecated, but is still implemented (when so

C. H. Lindsey                                                   [Page 2]

Internet-Draft            DKIM, MLMs and From         September 15, 2010

   configured) in several current MTAs. For example, the oreiginal From
   header field

        From: Joe Doe <joe@doe.example>

   would be replaced by

        From: Joe Doe <joe%doe.example@mlm.example>

   Moreover, except where the original author had provided some Reply-To
   header field, or where the policy of the MLM was to provide a Reply-
   To pointing to the list submission address, the MLM should insert a
   new Reply-To taken from the original From header field, e.g.:

        Reply-To: Joe Doe <joe@doe.example>

   Nevertheless, any MLM who chooses to adopt this technique needs to
   accept some additional responsibilities, and to be aware of some
   problems:

   1. He should implement the percent hack so that replies sent to the
      new From header field (especially where no Reply-To header field
      could be inserted) will be forwarded by the MLM to the original
      author.

   2. He should refrain from forwarding to addresses for which he has
      not previously created a new From header field, otherwise he will
      have created an "open relay".

   3. This is especially hard to do for lists which accept messages from
      non-subscribers (how long should he continue to forward to such
      occasional authors?) Even when submission is restricted to list
      subscribers, he still has to decide how long to continue to
      forward to them after they have unsubscribed.

   4, Recipeints on the list will be faced with some From header fields
      in an unfamiliar (percentified) format, though generating a reply
      address by hand is not difficult once one has twigged the
      notation.

   5. Percentified addresses (which may later cease to work) may get
      written into users' address books. Moreover, a given author may
      get listed in the address book twice, in both its percentified an
      unpercentified forms.

   For these reasons, an MLM must weigh the advantages and disadvantages
   very carefully before adopting this protocol.

END OF ADDITIONAL TEXT

   Some further small changes to [KUCHERAWY] are also proposed:




C. H. Lindsey                                                   [Page 3]

Internet-Draft            DKIM, MLMs and From         September 15, 2010

   1. In 1.4, change the last sentence of the first paragraph to read:

           An attempt has been made to prefer imposing changes to
           behaviour at the signer and verifier rather than at the MLM,
           though the MLM may have to fix matters himself if faced with
           uncooperative signers or verifiers.

   2. In 3.3, under "Other header fields:", after the first sentence,
      insert

           Even the "From" may sometines be replaced (5.2.1).

3.  Normative References



      [KUCHERAWY] "DKIM And Mailing Lists", draft-ietf-dkim-mailinglists-
           02, August 10, 2010.

4.  AUthor's Address


        Charles. H. Lindsey
        5 Clerewood Avenue
        Heald Green
        Cheadle
        Cheshire SK8 3JU
        United Kingdom
        Phone: +44 161 436 6131
        Email: chl@clerew.man.ac.uk


   Comments on this draft should be sent to the mailing list of the DKIM
   Working Group at

        ietf-dkim@mipassoc.org



















C. H. Lindsey                                                   [Page 4]

