Network Working Group                                       Gunnar Dickfeld
Internet-Draft                                             Miriam Ortseifen
Category: Informational                Deutsche Bundesbank (member of ESCB)
Creation Date                                                    13-03-2012
Expiration Date                                                  14-09-2012
Filename                       draft-bundesbank-eurosystem-namespace-00.txt


                A Uniform Resource Name (URN) Namespace
                      for Eurosystem Messaging

Status of this Memo

This memo provides information for the Internet community. It does not spe-
cify an Internet standard of any kind.  Distribution of this memo is unli-
mited.

Copyright Notice

Copyright (c) 2012 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the document 
authors. All rights reserved. 

Abstract

This document describes a Uniform Resource Name (URN) namespace that is ma-
naged by Deutsche Bundesbank (member of ESCB) for usage within messages 
standardized by the Eurosystem.

1 Introduction
The European System of Central Banks (ESCB) is composed of the European 
Central Bank (ECB) and the national central banks (NCBs) of all 27 EU Mem-
ber States (Article 107.01 of the Treaty) whether they have adopted the eu-
ro or not. One central bank belonging to ESCB is Deutsche Bundesbank.
For further information on the tasks of the ESCB and of the Eurosystem 
please refer to www.ecb.int. 
The ESCB provides the market infrastructures TARGET2. It is an interbank 
payment system for the real-time processing of cross-border transfers 
throughout the European Union. In addition the ESCB is currently implement-
ing TARGET2-Securities, a future securities settlement platform which of-
fers a new, harmonised and centralised method of settling securities in 
central bank money. The TARGET2-Securities project was initiated by the Eu-
rosystem as platform-owner in 2006. TARGET2-Securities is currently under 
development. Four central banks of the Eurosystem - Deutsche Bundesbank, 
Banque de France, Banca d'Italia and Banco de Espana (4CB) - are entrusted 
with the development and the operation of the platform.
The future users of TARGET2-Securities will communicate and exchange infor-
mation with the platform via messages (a set of structured information) 
following the ISO 20022 Standard. 
The goal of the requested namespace is to ensure the stability and unique-
ness of the names of various items that are used within the messages ex-
changed between the Eurosystem and the users of TARGET2-Securities. 

It is essential that names of items (such as the XML schema describing the 
message itself) can be used to identify the resource even years after the 
message has been exchanged.

The same resource may exist in multiple physical locations, and thus mul-
tiple URL's, but only a single URN.

2.  Specification Template

Namespace ID:

   "eurosystem"

Registration Information:

   Version 1
   Date: 2012-01-09

Declared registrant of the namespace:

          Deutsche Bundesbank (member of ESCB)
          Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14
          60431 Frankfurt
          GERMANY

Declaration of syntactic structures:

The structure of the Namespace Specific String is a flat space <URN chars> 
[1] which has no knowable structure outside of the context of the Eurosys-
tem community internal resolver.  Future changes to the assignment methods 
may allow others to assign sub-spaces of the flat namespace but again, this 
knowledge is only valid internally and should never be inferred or relied 
upon externally.

Relevant ancillary Documentation:

None

Identifier uniqueness considerations:

Identifiers are assigned by Eurosystem URN Registration that guarantees un-
iqueness.  This is simply achieved by keeping track of already assigned 
names and comparing all new proposed names to the database ones. If the 
name already exists a new one has to be proposed.

Identifiers persistence considerations:

Assigned URNs will not be reused and will remain valid beyond the lifecyle 
of the referenced resources. However, it should be noted that although the 
URNs remain valid, the status of the referenced resource 
may change.

Process of identifiers assignment:

Names are granted via proprietary registration procedures.

Process for identifier resolution:

Eurosystem URNs are resolved via URN resolvers run under Eurosystem respon-
sibility.

Rules for lexical equivalence:

No special consideration.

Conformance with URN syntax:

No special consideration.

Validation mechanism:

None specified.

Scope:

This namespace is reserved to the Eurosystem and its community.

3.  Examples

The following examples are not guaranteed to be real.  They are listed for 
pedagogical reasons only.

   urn:eurosystem:xsd:reda.012.001.01

4.  Security Considerations

Since the URNs in this namespace are opaque there are no additional securi-
ty considerations other than those normally associated with the use and 
resolution of URNs in general.

It is noted however that attempting to resolve a Eurosystem URN through a 
resolver other than the one provided by Eurosystem is error prone. In any 
case, it is not considered authoritative.

5.  IANA Considerations

IANA is requested to assign a formal NID.

6. Notice of Compliance / License Notice

6.a

This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the provisions
of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

6.b

This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal Provisions
Relating to IETF Documents (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in 
effect on the date of publication of this document. Please review these 
documents carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with
respect to this document. Code Components extracted from this document
must include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
described in the Simplified BSD License.


7.  Authors' Addresses

Deutsche Bundesbank
Gunnar Dickfeld
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14
60431 Frankfurt 

EMail: iso20022@bundesbank.de

Deutsche Bundesbank
Miriam Ortseifen
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14
60431 Frankfurt 

EMail: iso20022@bundesbank.de

www.bundesbank.de

8.  Lid Guidelines

Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering Task 
Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that other groups 
may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months and 
may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any time. It 
is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference material or to cite 
them other than as "work in progress.
The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html.

The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

9.  Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (Cc) The Internet Society (2012).  All Rights Reserved.

This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to others, 
and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it or assist in 
its implementation may be prepared, copied, published and distributed, in 
whole or in part, without restriction of any kind, provided that the above 
copyright notice and this paragraph are included on all such copies and de-
rivative works.  However, this document itself may not be modified in any 
way, such as by removing the copyright notice or references to the Internet 
Society or other Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose 
of developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for copy-
rights defined in the Internet Standards process must be followed, or as 
required to translate it into languages other than English.
The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be revoked 
by the Internet Society or its successors or assignees.

This document and the information contained herein is provided on an "AS 
IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE 
DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO 
ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY 
RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PAR-
TICULAR PURPOSE.

Acknowledgement

Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the Inter-
net Society.








Expiration Date                                                  14-09-2012
