


Network Working Group                                            J. Dong
Internet-Draft                                                   Q. Zeng
Intended status: Standards Track                     Huawei Technologies
Expires: January 12, 2012                                       J. Heitz
                                                           Ericsson Inc.
                                                                K. Patel
                                                           Cisco Systems
                                                               R. Shakir
                                                Cable&Wireless Worldwide
                                                           July 11, 2011


   One-time Extended Community Based Outbound Route Filter for BGP-4
              draft-dong-idr-one-time-ext-community-orf-01

Abstract

   This document defines a new Outbound Router Filter (ORF) type for
   BGP, termed "One-time Extended Community Outbound Route Filter",
   which would allow a BGP speaker to send to its BGP peer a route
   refresh request with a set of extended-community-based filters to
   make the peer re-advertise only the specific routes matching the
   filters to the speaker.  This ORF-type enables a BGP speaker to
   refresh some specific routes without requiring its peer to re-
   advertise the whole Adj-RIB-Out, which makes the route refresh
   operation more efficient and reduces the impact on network stability.
   This filter does not change the outbound route filters on BGP peers
   and should only be used for one-time filtering.

Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference



Dong, et al.            Expires January 12, 2012                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft    One-time Extended Community Based ORF        July 2011


   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 12, 2012.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

































Dong, et al.            Expires January 12, 2012                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft    One-time Extended Community Based ORF        July 2011


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   2.  One-time Extended Community ORF-Type  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   3.  Operations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   4.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   5.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   6.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   7.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8









































Dong, et al.            Expires January 12, 2012                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft    One-time Extended Community Based ORF        July 2011


1.  Introduction

   The Outbound Route Filtering Capability defined in [RFC5291] provides
   a mechanism for a BGP speaker to send to its BGP peer a set of
   Outbound Route Filters (ORFs) that can be used by its peer to filter
   its outbound routing updates to the speaker.

   During some network operations, a BGP speaker only needs to retrieve
   some routes with specific extended communities from its peer, but
   sending plain ROUTE-REFRESH will lead to the peer re-advertising its
   whole Adj-RIB-Out.  Such a large amount of updates includes a lot of
   unnecessary routes which would result in waste of processing
   resources and bandwidth.  With the increase of IPv6 deployment, this
   problem could be more significant.  Even configured with the ORF
   mechanism as defined in [RFC5291], on receipt of a ROUTE-REFRESH
   message, the peer will re-advertise all the routes matching the
   current outbound route filters, i.e., the whole Adj-Rib-Out for this
   BGP speaker.  Since in this case the BGP speaker does not want to
   change the outbound route filters on its peer, this requirement
   cannot be met by the current ORF mechanism.

   This document defines a new Outbound Router Filter (ORF) type for
   BGP, termed "One-time Extended Community Outbound Route Filter",
   which would allow a BGP speaker to send to its BGP peer a route
   refresh request with a set of Extended Community based filters to
   make the peer re-advertise only the specific routes matching the
   filters to the speaker.  This ORF-type enables a BGP speaker to
   retrieve routes with specific Extended Communities without requiring
   its peer to re-advertise the whole Adj-RIB-Out, which makes such
   route refresh operation more efficient and also reduces the impact on
   network stability.  This filter does not change the outbound route
   filters on BGP peers and should only be used for one-time filtering.

   One use case of one-time Extended Community ORF would be to refresh
   routes with specific Route Target (RT) Extended Community.  For
   example, on receipt of routes with specific RTs, according to local
   policies some attributes of the routes may be changed, or some routes
   may be discarded.  When later such local policies are changed or
   removed, the routes impacted by such policies need to be refreshed
   and processed according to the new local policies.  With the whole
   Adj-RIB-Out route refresh it would result in a lot of unnecessary
   routes being re-advertised, and this would be a waste of the
   processing resource and bandwidth.  In this case, one-time Extended
   Community ORF would be quite useful to request only routes matching
   specific RTs to be re-advertised.

   Another use case is network maintenance or verification.  During
   maintenance, it may be revealed that some routes may be incorrect.  A



Dong, et al.            Expires January 12, 2012                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft    One-time Extended Community Based ORF        July 2011


   refresh of a small segment of the routing table can help to correct
   those routes without requiring a refresh of the total routing table.


2.  One-time Extended Community ORF-Type

   This document defines a new ORF type: One-time Extended Community
   ORF.  Value of this ORF-Type is to be assigned by IANA.

   In the following description, the sending speaker sends a one-time-
   ORF request and the receiving speaker receives it and sends back the
   routes to satisfy the request.

   As specified in the [RFC5291], an ORF entry is a tuple of the form
   <AFI/SAFI, ORF-Type, Action, Match, ORF-value>.  An ORF consists of
   one or more ORF entries that have a common AFI/SAFI and ORF-Type.  An
   ORF is identified by <AFI/SAFI, ORF-Type>.

   The ORF entry consists of a single Extended Community, encoded as
   either 8 octets [RFC4360], or 20 octets [RFC5701].  The encoding of
   the type-specific part is as below:

                +------------------------------------------+
                |   Ext-community Length (1 octet)         |
                +------------------------------------------+
                |   Ext-community value (8 or 20 octets)   |
                +------------------------------------------+

   The "Ext-community Length" field contains length in octets of the
   extended community in the "Ext-community value" field.

   Since the semantics of this new ORF-Type is "one-time filtering" and
   has no impact on existing ORFs, the Action field is irrelevant and
   MUST be ignored on receipt.

   The MATCH field of the One-time Extended Community ORF SHOULD be set
   to PERMIT on the sender and SHOULD be ignored on the receiver.  This
   is the same as defined in Extended-Community ORF
   [I-D.chen-bgp-ext-community-orf].

   The ORF entries of this type would only be used as one-time filters
   that MUST not change any previously installed ORF entry on the
   receiving speaker.


3.  Operations

   The capability negotiation of <AFI/SAFI, One-time Extended Community



Dong, et al.            Expires January 12, 2012                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft    One-time Extended Community Based ORF        July 2011


   ORF> MUST NOT delay the advertisement of routes with this AFI/SAFI.

   The received One-time Extended Community ORF entries SHOULD only be
   used for one-time route filtering and MUST NOT be saved locally.  The
   received One-time Extended Community ORF entries MUST NOT modify the
   outbound route filters on the receiving speaker (either locally
   configured or received from the sending speaker through ORF).

   On receipt of ROUTE-REFRESH message with One-time Extended Community
   ORF entries, the receiving speaker SHOULD re-advertise to the sending
   speaker the routes from the Adj-RIB-Out associated with the sending
   speaker which pass the entries carried in the One-time Extended
   Community ORF as well as the locally saved ORFs (if any) received
   from the sending speaker.

   Since different processing orders may lead to different results, the
   One-time-ORFs and the regular ORFs SHOULD not be encoded in one
   ROUTE-REFRESH message.

   During the period when the receiving speaker is sending updates to
   satisfy the One-time-ORF request, it may experience other routing
   activity that will require it to send updates unrelated to the One-
   time-ORF request.  It is permitted to send these updates before it
   has completed sending the One-time-ORF related updates.

   Similarly, if a route that passes the One-time-ORF has already been
   sent and the receiving speaker experiences routing activity that
   changes this route and the receiving speaker has not yet sent all
   routes to satisfy the One-time-ORF request, it is permitted to send
   the changed route immediately.  A withdrawal of the route counts as a
   valid change.

   If the receiving speaker has received the Enhanced Route Refresh
   Capability as described in [I-D.ietf-idr-bgp-enhanced-route-refresh],
   then it SHALL perform the following additional procedures.

   It SHALL send a ROUTE-REFRESH message with the subtype to indicate
   demarcation of the beginning of route refresh (start-of-refresh)
   before sending routes to satisfy the ORF request and send a ROUTE-
   REFRESH message with the subtype to indicate demarcation of the
   ending of route refresh (end-of-refresh) after sending all routes to
   satisfy the request.

   As part of the start-of-refresh and end-of-refresh messages, it SHALL
   include the one-time-ORF rules that it is satisfying with this
   refresh.  The presence of the ORF is indicated in the same way as it
   is with the normal route refresh as in [RFC5291]: A BGP speaker can
   distinguish an incoming ROUTE-REFRESH message that carries one or



Dong, et al.            Expires January 12, 2012                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft    One-time Extended Community Based ORF        July 2011


   more ORF entries from an incoming plain ROUTE-REFRESH message by
   using the Message Length field in the BGP message header.

   As with the procedures without the Enhanced Route Refresh Capability,
   the receiving speaker is permitted to send updates for routes
   unrelated to the ORF request before it has sent all updates to
   satisfy the current ORF request.

   If a receiving speaker receives a new one-time-ORF request before it
   has finished completing a previous one, it MAY stop sending routes
   for the previous ORF request.  It MUST NOT send an end-of-refresh for
   the previous request.  If the speaker has received the Enhanced Route
   Refresh Capability, it SHALL send a start-of-refresh for the new
   request and start sending updates for it.


4.  Security Considerations

   This extension to BGP does not change the underlying security issues
   in [RFC4271].


5.  IANA Considerations

   This document specifies a new Outbound Route Filtering (ORF) type,
   One-time Extended Community ORF.  The value of the ORF-type needs to
   be assigned by IANA.


6.  Acknowledgements

   The authors would like to thank Robert Raszuk, John Scudder, Susan
   Hares, Haibo Wang, Jiawei Dong, Yaqun Xiao, Mach Chen for their
   valuable suggestions and comments to this document.


7.  Normative References

   [I-D.chen-bgp-ext-community-orf]
              Chen, E., Patel, K., and A. Lo, "Extended Community Based
              Outbound Route Filter for BGP-4",
              draft-chen-bgp-ext-community-orf-01 (work in progress),
              June 2011.

   [I-D.ietf-idr-bgp-enhanced-route-refresh]
              Patel, K., Chen, E., and B. Venkatachalapathy, "Enhanced
              Route Refresh Capability for BGP-4",
              draft-ietf-idr-bgp-enhanced-route-refresh-00 (work in



Dong, et al.            Expires January 12, 2012                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft    One-time Extended Community Based ORF        July 2011


              progress), June 2011.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC2918]  Chen, E., "Route Refresh Capability for BGP-4", RFC 2918,
              September 2000.

   [RFC4271]  Rekhter, Y., Li, T., and S. Hares, "A Border Gateway
              Protocol 4 (BGP-4)", RFC 4271, January 2006.

   [RFC4360]  Sangli, S., Tappan, D., and Y. Rekhter, "BGP Extended
              Communities Attribute", RFC 4360, February 2006.

   [RFC5226]  Narten, T. and H. Alvestrand, "Guidelines for Writing an
              IANA Considerations Section in RFCs", BCP 26, RFC 5226,
              May 2008.

   [RFC5291]  Chen, E. and Y. Rekhter, "Outbound Route Filtering
              Capability for BGP-4", RFC 5291, August 2008.

   [RFC5701]  Rekhter, Y., "IPv6 Address Specific BGP Extended Community
              Attribute", RFC 5701, November 2009.


Authors' Addresses

   Jie Dong
   Huawei Technologies
   Huawei Building, No.3 Xinxi Rd
   Beijing  100085
   China

   Email: jie.dong@huawei.com


   Qing Zeng
   Huawei Technologies
   Huawei Building, No.3 Xinxi Rd
   Beijing  100085
   China

   Email: zengqing@huawei.com








Dong, et al.            Expires January 12, 2012                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft    One-time Extended Community Based ORF        July 2011


   Jakob Heitz
   Ericsson Inc.
   100 Headquarters Drive
   San Jose, CA  95134
   USA

   Email: jakob.heitz@ericsson.com


   Keyur Patel
   Cisco Systems
   170 W. Tasman Drive
   San Jose, CA  95134
   USA

   Email: keyupate@cisco.com


   Rob Shakir
   Cable&Wireless Worldwide
   London
   UK

   Email: rjs@cw.net



























Dong, et al.            Expires January 12, 2012                [Page 9]

