A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3274

        Title:      Compressed Data Content Type for
                    Cryptographic Message Syntax (CMS)
        Author(s):  P. Gutmann
        Status:     Standards Track
        Date:       June 2002
        Mailbox:    pgut001@cs.auckland.ac.nz
        Pages:      6
        Characters: 11276
        Updates/Obsoletes/SeeAlso:  None

        I-D Tag:    draft-ietf-smime-compression-07.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3274.txt


This document defines a format for using compressed data as a
Cryptographic Message Syntax (CMS) content type.  Compressing data
before transmission provides a number of advantages, including the
elimination of data redundancy which could help an attacker, speeding
up processing by reducing the amount of data to be processed by later
steps (such as signing or encryption), and reducing overall message
size.  Although there have been proposals for adding compression at
other levels (for example at the MIME or SSL level), these don't
address the problem of compression of CMS content unless the
compression is supplied by an external means (for example by
intermixing MIME and CMS).

This document is a product of the S/MIME Mail Security Working Group
of the IETF.

This is now a Proposed Standard Protocol.

This document specifies an Internet standards track protocol for
the Internet community, and requests discussion and suggestions
for improvements.  Please refer to the current edition of the
"Internet Official Protocol Standards" (STD 1) for the
standardization state and status of this protocol.  Distribution
of this memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.

