A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3390
                         
        Title:      Increasing TCP's Initial Window
        Author(s):  M. Allman, S. Floyd, C. Partridge
        Status:     Standards Track
        Date:       October 2002
        Mailbox:    mallman@bbn.com, floyd@icir.org, craig@bbn.com
        Pages:      15
        Characters: 36177
        Obsoletes:  2414
        Updtes:     2581
                         
        I-D Tag:    draft-ietf-tsvwg-initwin-04.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3390.txt


This document specifies an optional standard for TCP to increase the
permitted initial window from one or two segment(s) to roughly 4K
bytes, replacing RFC 2414.  It discusses the advantages and
disadvantages of the higher initial window, and includes discussion of
experiments and simulations showing that the higher initial window
does not lead to congestion collapse.  Finally, this document provides
guidance on implementation issues. 

This document is a product of the Transport Area Working Group of the
IETF. 

This is now a Proposed Standard Protocol.

This document specifies an Internet standards track protocol for
the Internet community, and requests discussion and suggestions
for improvements.  Please refer to the current edition of the
"Internet Official Protocol Standards" (STD 1) for the
standardization state and status of this protocol.  Distribution
of this memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.


