A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3042

        Title:      Enhancing TCP's Loss Recovery Using Limited
                    Transmit 
        Author(s):  M. Allman, H. Balakrishnan, S. Floyd
        Status:     Standards Track
        Date:       January 2001
        Mailbox:    mallman@grc.nasa.gov, hari@lcs.mit.edu,
                    floyd@aciri.org 
        Pages:      9
        Characters: 19885
        Updates/Obsoletes/SeeAlso:  None

        I-D Tag:    draft-ietf-tsvwg-limited-xmit-00.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3042.txt


This document proposes a new Transmission Control Protocol (TCP)
mechanism that can be used to more effectively recover lost segments
when a connection's congestion window is small, or when a large number
of segments are lost in a single transmission window.  The "Limited
Transmit" algorithm calls for sending a new data segment in response
to each of the first two duplicate acknowledgments that arrive at the
sender.  Transmitting these segments increases the probability that
TCP can recover from a single lost segment using the fast retransmit
algorithm, rather than using a costly retransmission timeout.  Limited
Transmit can be used both in conjunction with, and in the absence of,
the TCP selective acknowledgment (SACK) mechanism.

This document is a product of the Transport Area Working Group of the
IETF.

This is now a Proposed Standard Protocol.

This document specifies an Internet standards track protocol for
the Internet community, and requests discussion and suggestions
for improvements.  Please refer to the current edition of the
"Internet Official Protocol Standards" (STD 1) for the
standardization state and status of this protocol.  Distribution
of this memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.