A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3522

        Title:      The Eifel Detection Algorithm for TCP
        Author(s):  R. Ludwig, M. Meyer
        Status:     Experimental
        Date:       April 2003
        Mailbox:    Reiner.Ludwig@eed.ericsson.se,
                    Michael.Meyer@eed.ericsson.se
        Pages:      14
        Characters: 33729
        Updates/Obsoletes/SeeAlso:  None

        I-D Tag:    draft-ietf-tsvwg-tcp-eifel-alg-07.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3522.txt


The Eifel detection algorithm allows a TCP sender to detect a
posteriori whether it has entered loss recovery unnecessarily.  It
requires that the TCP Timestamps option defined in RFC 1323 be enabled
for a connection.  The Eifel detection algorithm makes use of the fact
that the TCP Timestamps option eliminates the retransmission
ambiguity in TCP.  Based on the timestamp of the first acceptable ACK
that arrives during loss recovery, it decides whether loss recovery
was entered unnecessarily.  The Eifel detection algorithm provides a
basis for future TCP enhancements.  This includes response algorithms
to back out of loss recovery by restoring a TCP sender's congestion
control state.

This document is a product of the Transport Area Working Group Working
Group of the IETF.

This memo defines an Experimental Protocol for the Internet community.
It does not specify an Internet standard of any kind.  Discussion and
suggestions for improvement are requested.  Distribution of this memo
is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.

