A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3436
                                        
        Title:      Transport Layer Security over Stream Control
                    Transmission Protocol
        Author(s):  A. Jungmaier, E. Rescorla, M. Tuexen
        Status:     Standards Track
        Date:       December 2002
        Mailbox:    ajung@exp-math.uni-essen.de, ekr@rtfm.com,
                    Michael.Tuexen@icn.siemens.de
        Pages:      9
        Characters: 16333
        Updates/Obsoletes/SeeAlso:    None
                                        
        I-D Tag:    draft-ietf-tsvwg-tls-over-sctp-00.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3436.txt


This document describes the usage of the Transport Layer Security
(TLS) protocol, as defined in RFC 2246, over the Stream Control
Transmission Protocol (SCTP), as defined in RFC 2960 and RFC 3309.

The user of TLS can take advantage of the features provided
by SCTP, namely the support of multiple streams to avoid head of line
blocking and the support of multi-homing to provide network level
fault tolerance.

Additionally, discussions of extensions of SCTP are also
supported, meaning especially the support of dynamic
reconfiguration of IP-addresses.

This document is a product of the Transport Area Working Group Working
Group of the IETF.

This is now a Proposed Standard Protocol.

This document specifies an Internet standards track protocol for
the Internet community, and requests discussion and suggestions
for improvements.  Please refer to the current edition of the
"Internet Official Protocol Standards" (STD 1) for the
standardization state and status of this protocol.  Distribution
of this memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.

