A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3525

        Title:      Gateway Control Protocol Version 1
        Author(s):  C. Groves, M. Pantaleo, T. Anderson, T. Taylor,
                    Editors
        Status:     Standards Track
        Date:       June 2003
        Mailbox:    Christian.Groves@ericsson.com.au,
                    Marcello.Pantaleo@eed.ericsson.se,
                    tlatla@verizon.net,
                    taylor@nortelnetworks.com
        Pages:      213
        Characters: 439674
        Obsoletes:  3015

        I-D Tag:    draft-ietf-megaco-3015corr-03.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3525.txt


This document defines the protocol used between elements of a
physically decomposed multimedia gateway, i.e., a Media Gateway and a
Media Gateway Controller.  The protocol presented in this document
meets the requirements for a media gateway control protocol as
presented in RFC 2805.

This document replaces RFC 3015.  It is the result of
continued cooperation between the IETF Megaco Working Group and ITU-T
Study Group 16.  It incorporates the original text of RFC 3015,
modified by corrections and clarifications discussed on the Megaco

E-mail list and incorporated into the Study Group 16 Implementor's
Guide for Recommendation H.248.  The present version of this document
underwent  ITU-T Last Call as Recommendation H.248 Amendment 1.
Because of ITU-T renumbering, it was published by the ITU-T as
Recommendation H.248.1 (03/2002), Gateway Control Protocol Version 1.

Users of this specification are advised to consult the H.248
Sub-series Implementors' Guide at
http://www.itu.int/itudoc/itu-t/com16/implgd for additional
corrections and clarifications.

This document is a product of the Media Gateway Control Working Group
of the IETF.

This is now a Proposed Standard Protocol.

This document specifies an Internet standards track protocol for
the Internet community, and requests discussion and suggestions
for improvements.  Please refer to the current edition of the
"Internet Official Protocol Standards" (STD 1) for the
standardization state and status of this protocol.  Distribution
of this memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.

