A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3054

        Title:      Megaco IP Phone Media Gateway Application Profile 
        Author(s):  P. Blatherwick, R. Bell, P. Holland
        Status:     Informational
        Date:       January 2001
        Mailbox:    blather@nortelnetworks.com, rtbell@cisco.com
                    phil.holland@circa.ca 
        Pages:      14
        Characters: 31971
        Updates/Obsoletes/SeeAlso:  None

        I-D Tag:    draft-ietf-megaco-ipphone-03.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3054.txt


This document specifies a particular application of the Megaco/H.248
Protocol for control of Internet telephones and similar appliances:
the Megaco IP Phone Media Gateway.  The telephone itself is a Media
Gateway (MG), controlled by the Megaco/H.248 Protocol, with
application control intelligence located in the Media Gateway
Controller (MGC).  To achieve a high degree of interoperability and
design efficiency in such end-user devices, a consistent architectural
approach, a particular organization of Terminations and Packages, and
a Protocol Profile are described.  The approach makes use of existing
Protocol features and user interface related Packages, and is thus a
straight-forward application of the Megaco/H.248 Protocol.

This document is a product of the Media Gateway Control Working Group
of the IETF.

This memo provides information for the Internet community.  It does
not specify an Internet standard of any kind.  Distribution of this
memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.

