


Internet Engineering Task Force                                  T. Tsou
Internet-Draft                                 Huawei Technologies (USA)
Intended status: Informational                               A. Clauberg
Expires: August 20, 2012                                Deutsche Telekom
                                                            M. Boucadair
                                                          France Telecom
                                                               S. Venaas
                                                           Cisco Systems
                                                                  Q. Sun
                                                           China Telecom
                                                       February 17, 2012


   Address Acquisition For Multicast Content When Source and Receiver
                     Support Differing IP Versions
             draft-tsou-mboned-multrans-addr-acquisition-00

Abstract

   During the transition from IPv4 to IPv6, scenarios can occur where
   the IP version supported by the receiver differs from that supported
   by the source.  This memo examines and evaluates alternative
   strategies for allowing the receiver to acquire multicast address
   information in such scenarios in the version it supports.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 20, 2012.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2012 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal



Tsou, et al.             Expires August 20, 2012                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft        Multicast Address Acquisition        February 2012


   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Which Problem Are We Solving? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   3.  Possible Solutions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
     3.1.  The Reactive Strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
     3.2.  Dynamic Modification  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
     3.3.  Administrative Preparation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   4.  Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   5.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   6.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   7.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   8.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   Appendix A.  Some Background On Program Guides  . . . . . . . . . . 8
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9


























Tsou, et al.             Expires August 20, 2012                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft        Multicast Address Acquisition        February 2012


1.  Introduction

   Discussion of the multicast transition problem has focussed on the
   case of unidirectional delivery of multicast content.  Within this
   scenario, the operation of viewing a program follows a well-defined
   sequence.  For the sake of reducing the zapping delay, the list of
   multicast addresses is generally pre-provisioned to the receiver as
   part of the program guide prior to requesting access to the multicast
   content.  At some subsequent time the user chooses to view a program,
   possibly by selecting it from a displayed program guide, or simply by
   selecting a channel.  The receiver uses its pre-acquired information
   to signal to the network to receive the desired content.  In
   particular, the receiver initiates reception of multicast content
   using the multicast group address and possibly a unicast source
   address supplied within the program information.

   If the network, the source of the multicast content, and the
   receivers all use IPv4, it is evident that the program information
   will only include IPv4 multicast group addresses (and optionally,
   IPv4 unicast source addresses).  Suppose now, as can occur in some
   transition scenarios, that IPv6-only receivers acquire program
   information containing these IPv4 addresses.  Then there will be a
   mismatch: the IPv6-only receivers will be unable to use the addresses
   that are provided in the program information.  This memo examines the
   possible strategies for remedying this mismatch, evaluating them in
   terms of their impact on receiver implementation and network
   operation.

   This document makes reference to some of the scenarios described in
   Section 3 of [ID.jaclee-behave-v4v6-multicast-ps].  The remarks in
   Section 4.1 of [ID.jaclee-behave-v4v6-multicast-ps] are relevant to
   the problem considered here, but are more restricted in scope.


2.  Which Problem Are We Solving?

   In some transition scenarios, the source supports one IP version
   while the receiver and the provider network support the other (e.g.,
   the source supports IPv4, the receiver and the network to which it is
   attached support IPv6).  In this case, the problem stated above can
   be expressed as follows: how does the receiver acquire addresses of
   the IP version it supports, possibly with the help of the provider
   network?

   In other transition scenarios, the source and provider network may
   support one IP version while the receiver supports another.  In this
   case there are actually two problems: how the receiver acquires
   addresses that it supports (as already stated), and how to make those



Tsou, et al.             Expires August 20, 2012                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft        Multicast Address Acquisition        February 2012


   addresses usable in a network supporting a different version?  This
   second problem is the subject of a different memo and out of scope of
   the present one.

   There is also a third class of scenarios, where the source and
   receiver support the same IP version but the intervening network
   supports a different one (e.g., the 4-6-4 scenario, Section 3.1 of
   [ID.jaclee-behave-v4v6-multicast-ps]).  In those scenarios,
   delivering addresses of the right IP version to the receiver within
   the program guide is notionally a non-problem.  The problem still can
   arise, if the intervening network intercepts and modifies the program
   guide to be consistent with the IP version it supports.  In this
   case, the problem can be re-stated as: how can such modification be
   avoided when it is not needed?


3.  Possible Solutions

   This section explores three classes of solutions to the problem just
   described:

   o  reactive: the receiver recognizes that addresses it has received
      are in the wrong version and converts them through a request to a
      mapping function or using an in-built algorithm and accompanying
      configuration;

   o  dynamic modification: the network intercepts the access
      information and modifies it as necessary to meet the requirements
      of the receiver;

   o  administrative: the electronic program guide is modified in
      advance of its acquisition by the receiver to provide alternative
      address versions.  Two variations on this strategy are identified.

3.1.  The Reactive Strategy

   According to this strategy, an IPv6 receiver receiving IPv4
   addresses, for example, would recognize that they were the wrong
   version.  As one possibility, it would package the addresses into one
   or two requests to a mapping function, which would return
   corresponding IPv6 addresses.  In the 6-4-4 scenario (IPv6 receiver,
   IPv4 network and source), the mapping function could be located in
   another node at the user site or located in a dual-stack element at
   the provider edge.  In the 6-6-4 case (IPv6 receiver and network,
   IPv4 source) it would have to be part of the provider network,
   although not necessarily at its edge.

   This approach involves a fair amount of work to implement.  Not only



Tsou, et al.             Expires August 20, 2012                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft        Multicast Address Acquisition        February 2012


   does the receiver need to recognize that addresses are the wrong
   version; it also has to implement a new protocol to the mapping
   function.  It also has to discover that function.

   As an alternative, the receiver could implement an algorithm to
   perform the mapping itself, for example, synthesizing an IPv6 address
   given the IPv4 address of the source using the approach described by
   [ID.mboned-64-multicast-address-format] for multicast group addresses
   or [RFC6052] for unicast source addresses.  In this case, the
   receiver must be configured with the IPv6 prefixes allocated for that
   purpose in the network to which the receiver is attached (e.g., using
   [ID.qin-softwire-multicast-prefix-option]).  When applicable, this
   approach clearly has advantages over an approach using an external
   mapping function.  It still requires implementation effort in the
   receiver, but at more limited level.

3.2.  Dynamic Modification

   This strategy puts the entire burden of address adaptation on the
   provider network.  It requires that an element in that network must
   intercept program guide information destined to the receiver, locate
   the access information, and map IP addresses to an alternate version
   as necessary to suit the receiver.  If the problem identified in the
   last paragraph of Section 2 is to be avoided, the intercepting
   element has to be aware of the version supported by each receiver.

   As noted in the description of the OMA architecture in Appendix A, it
   is possible that such an adaptive function is present, but not clear
   that its scope would extend to IP version changes.  The need to
   include IP version along with other receiver-related information
   might or might not prove to be administratively demanding.  With the
   dynamic modification strategy the workload on the adaptation function
   might be large enough to make it a bottleneck in the process of
   program acquisition.  The mitigating factor is that program metadata
   will typically be retrieved rather less often than program content.

   This strategy has the clear advantage that it requires no changes in
   the receiver.

3.3.  Administrative Preparation

   The basic idea with this strategy is that the access information in
   the program metadata is set up to provide the right address version
   in advance of acquisition by any receiver.  There are two basic
   approaches:

   o  separate alternative versions of the access information are
      prepared.  The correct version is served up to the receiver when



Tsou, et al.             Expires August 20, 2012                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft        Multicast Address Acquisition        February 2012


      it requests it.  Like the dynamic modification strategy, this
      approach assumes that it is administratively feasible for the
      program guide server to know the IP version of the requesting
      receiver.  That may or may not be true in a given operator's
      context.  Also as with the dynamic modification approach, no
      change is required in the receiver.  The big advantage over
      dynamic modification is that there is no need for the
      complications of an intercepting adapting element.

   o  The same access information instance contains alternative IP
      address versions.  Where SDP is used, we can think of ICE or ICE-
      lite [RFC5245] or the proposed 'altc' mechanism
      [ID.boucadair-altc].  This requires receiver modification to
      recognize the alternative syntax and (in the case of ICE and
      potentially in the case of ICE-Lite) to take part in STUN
      exchanges.  However, it means that the same access information can
      be served up to all receivers in a backward-compatible manner.

   The administrative strategy requires that the network provider have
   control over the translations used in the preparation of the
   alternative versions of the access information.  The network has to
   be aware of the translations used, so it can reuse them at other
   stages of the multicast acquisition process.  Note networks owned by
   different operators are likely to have different mappings between
   IPv4 and IPv6 addresses, so if multiple receiving networks are
   downstream of the same source network, each of them may have to
   prepare and make available its own IPv6 version of the electronic
   program guide.


4.  Conclusions

   To come.


5.  Acknowledgements

   TBD


6.  IANA Considerations

   This memo includes no request to IANA.


7.  Security Considerations

   To come.



Tsou, et al.             Expires August 20, 2012                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft        Multicast Address Acquisition        February 2012


8.  Informative References

   [ID.boucadair-altc]
              Boucadair, M., Kaplan, H., Gilman, R., and S.
              Veikkolainen, "Session Description Protocol (SDP)
              Alternate Connectivity (ALTC) Attribute (Work in
              Progress)", November 2011.

   [ID.jaclee-behave-v4v6-multicast-ps]
              Jacquenet, C., Boucadair, M., Lee, Y., Qin, J., and T.
              Tsou, "IPv4-IPv6 Multicast: Problem Statement and Use
              Cases (Work in Progress)", November 2011.

   [ID.mboned-64-multicast-address-format]
              Boucadair, M., Qin, J., Lee, Y., Venaas, S., Li, X., and
              M. Xu, "IPv4-Embedded IPv6 Multicast Address Format (Work
              in Progress)", February 2012.

   [ID.qin-softwire-multicast-prefix-option]
              Qin, J., Boucadair, M., and T. Tsou, "DHCPv6 Options for
              IPv6 DS-Lite Multicast Prefix (Work in Progress)",
              October 2011.

   [MPEG-7_DDL]
              ISO/IEC, "ISO/IEC 15938-2 (2002): "Information technology
              - Multimedia content description interface - Part 2:
              Description definition language".", 2002.

   [RFC3261]  Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., Camarillo, G., Johnston,
              A., Peterson, J., Sparks, R., Handley, M., and E.
              Schooler, "SIP: Session Initiation Protocol", RFC 3261,
              June 2002.

   [RFC4078]  Earnshaw, N., Aoki, S., Ashley, A., and W. Kameyama, "The
              TV-Anytime Content Reference Identifier (CRID)", RFC 4078,
              May 2005.

   [RFC4566]  Handley, M., Jacobson, V., and C. Perkins, "SDP: Session
              Description Protocol", RFC 4566, July 2006.

   [RFC5245]  Rosenberg, J., "Interactive Connectivity Establishment
              (ICE): A Protocol for Network Address Translator (NAT)
              Traversal for Offer/Answer Protocols", RFC 5245,
              April 2010.

   [RFC6052]  Bao, C., Huitema, C., Bagnulo, M., Boucadair, M., and X.
              Li, "IPv6 Addressing of IPv4/IPv6 Translators", RFC 6052,
              October 2010.



Tsou, et al.             Expires August 20, 2012                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft        Multicast Address Acquisition        February 2012


Appendix A.  Some Background On Program Guides

   Numerous organizations have been involved in the development of
   specifications for IPTV.  Those specifications and the requirements
   of individual providers have influenced the development of existing
   receivers.  Any solution to the multicast transition problem
   described in Section 1 has to take account of the effort involved not
   only in the direct development of a new generation of receivers, but
   also in evolving the specifications on which those receivers are
   based.  It is thus worthwhile to review the current situation as it
   affects multicast transition.

   The TV-Anytime forum (http://www.tv-anytime.org/) did early work in
   the area, formally terminating in 2005.  Their work focussed on the
   description of program content, to facilitate the creation of such
   descriptions and their navigation by the user.  The results are
   documented in the ETSI TS 102 822 series of technical specifications.

   The content reference identifier (CRID) is a fundamental concept in
   the TV-Anytime data model.  It refers to a specific piece of content
   or to other CRIDs, the latter thereby providing a method for grouping
   related pieces of content.  TV-Anytime registered the CRID: URL
   schema in [RFC4078].  Quoting from the abstract of that document:

      The Uniform Resource Locator (URL) scheme "CRID:" has been devised
      to allow references to current or future scheduled publications of
      broadcast media content over television distribution platforms and
      the Internet.

      The initial intended application is as an embedded link within
      scheduled programme description metadata that can be used by the
      home user or agent to associate a programme selection with the
      corresponding programme location information for subsequent
      automatic acquisition.

   The process of location resolution for the CRID: URL for an
   individual piece of content locates the content itself so that the
   user can access it.  TV-Anywhere left the details of that process
   unspecified.

   The Open IPTV Forum (http://www.oipf.tv) has focussed on defining the
   user-to-network interface, particularly for fixed broadband access.
   The architecture is based on the ETSI NGN (Next Generation Networks)
   model.  The receiver obtains the actual access information for a
   given program, including the multicast group address and possibly a
   unicast source address, from XML-encoded program information
   following the Open IPTV Forum schema.  The receiver uses SIP (Session
   Initiation Protocol [RFC3261]) signalling to obtain authorization and



Tsou, et al.             Expires August 20, 2012                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft        Multicast Address Acquisition        February 2012


   resources for a session, before signalling at the multicast level to
   acquire the program.  The SIP signalling conveys the multicast group
   address and the unicast source address, if available, in the form of
   an SDP (Session Description Protocol [RFC4566]) session description.

   Finally, the Open Mobile Alliance (OMA,
   http://www.openmobilealliance.org/) has defined a series of
   specifications relating to broadcast services over wireless networks.
   The source and multicast group addresses used to acquire a given
   program instance are provided in SDP fragments either directly
   embedded in the primary electronic program guide or pointed to by it.
   The OMA architecture provides functionality to adapt access
   information within the program guide to the requirements of the
   transport network to which the user is attached, but this
   functionality appears to be primarily directed toward overcoming
   differences in technology rather than a general capability for
   modification.

   In conclusion, it appears that there are at least two extant sources
   of specifications for the receiver interface, each providing its own
   data model, XML data schema, and detailed architecture.  In the OMA
   case, the access information including the source and multicast group
   addresses is embedded as an SDP fragment within a larger set of XML-
   encoded program metadata.  The OMA metadata can be supplied to the
   receiver in multiple segments, through multiple channels.  This
   complicates the task of intercepting that metadata and modifying it
   in a particular transport network.


Authors' Addresses

   Tina Tsou
   Huawei Technologies (USA)
   2330 Central Expressway
   Santa Clara, CA  95050
   USA

   Phone: +1 408 330 4424
   Email: Tina.Tsou.Zouting@huawei.com












Tsou, et al.             Expires August 20, 2012                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft        Multicast Address Acquisition        February 2012


   Axel Clauberg
   Deutsche Telekom
   Deutsche Telekom AG, GTN-FM4
   Landgrabenweg 151
   Bonn,   53227
   Germany

   Phone: +4922893618546
   Email: axel.clauberg@telekom.de


   Mohamed Boucadair
   France Telecom
   Rennes,   35000
   France

   Phone:
   Email: mohamed.boucadair@orange.com


   Stig Venaas
   Cisco Systems
   Tasman Drive
   San Jose, CA  95134
   USA

   Phone:
   Email: stig@cisco.com


   Qiong Sun
   China Telecom
   Room 708, No.118, Xizhimennei Street
   Beijing,   100035
   P.R.China

   Phone: +86-10-58552936
   Email: sunqiong@ctbri.com.cn













Tsou, et al.             Expires August 20, 2012               [Page 10]

