


Internet Engineering Task Force                                  T. Tsou
Internet-Draft                                 Huawei Technologies (USA)
Intended status: Informational                         December 11, 2011
Expires: June 4, 2012


   Address Acquisition For Multicast Content When Source and Receiver
                     Support Differing IP Versions
                draft-tsou-multrans-addr-acquisition-00

Abstract

   In a typical IP television (IPTV) system, the receiver acquires
   information about available program content, the subscriber selects a
   program to watch, and the receiver signals to the network to begin
   receiving the program in the form of multicast content.  The program
   content information is typically XML-encoded, can be transmitted in
   multiple segments, possibly over multiple channels, but includes
   media stream descriptions for the individual program descriptions
   that may also be XML-encoded or may use the Session Description
   Protocol (SDP, RFC 4566).  The media stream descriptions provide
   multicast group and unicast source addresses that are used in the
   subsequent signalling to the network.

   During the transition from IPv4 to IPv6, scenarios can occur where
   the IP version supported by the receiver differs from that supported
   by the source.  This memo examines and evaluates alternative
   strategies for allowing the receiver to acquire addresses in such
   scenarios in the version it supports.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on June 4, 2012.

Copyright Notice



Tsou                      Expires June 4, 2012                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft        Multicast Address Acquisition        December 2011


   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
     1.1.  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  IPTV System Background  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   3.  Which Problem Are We Solving? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   4.  Possible Solutions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
     4.1.  The Reactive Strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
     4.2.  Dynamic Modification  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
     4.3.  Administrative Preparation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   5.  Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   6.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   7.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   8.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   9.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9





















Tsou                      Expires June 4, 2012                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft        Multicast Address Acquisition        December 2011


1.  Introduction

   Discussion of the multicast transition problem has focussed on the
   IPTV scenario.  Within this scenario, the operation of viewing a
   program follows a well-defined sequence: first the receiver acquires
   program information that includes the detailed information needed to
   request delivery of specific content.  At some subsequent time the
   user chooses to view a program, possibly by selecting it from a
   displayed program guide, or simply by selecting a channel.  The
   receiver uses its pre-acquired information to signal to the network
   to receive the desired content.  In particular, the receiver
   initiates reception of multicast content using the source and
   multicast group addresses supplied within the program information.

   With an all-IPv4 system, it is evident that the program information
   will include IPv4 source and group addresses only.  Suppose now, as
   can occur in some transition scenarios, that IPv6 receivers appear
   within the system.  Then there will be a mismatch: the IPv6 receivers
   will be unable to use the addresses that are provided in the program
   information.  This memo examines the possible strategies for
   remedying this mismatch, evaluating them in terms of their impact on
   receiver implementation and network operation.

1.1.  Terminology

   This memo uses no mandatory language.

   The term "receiver" in this document refers to the functionality at
   the user location that communicates with the network and receives
   multicast content on behalf of the user.


2.  IPTV System Background

   Numerous organizations have been involved in the development of
   specifications for IPTV.  Those specifications and the requirements
   of individual providers have influenced the development of existing
   receivers.  Any solution to the multicast transition problem
   described in Section 1 has to take account of the effort involved not
   only in the direct development of a new generation of receivers, but
   also in evolving the specifications on which those receivers are
   based.  It is thus worthwhile to review the current situation as it
   affects multicast transition.

   The TV-Anytime forum (http://www.tv-anytime.org/) did early work in
   the area, formally terminating in 2005.  Their work focussed on the
   description of program content, to facilitate the creation of such
   descriptions and their navigation by the user.  The results are



Tsou                      Expires June 4, 2012                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft        Multicast Address Acquisition        December 2011


   documented in the ETSI TS 102 822 series of technical specifications.

   The content reference identifier (CRID) is a fundamental concept in
   the TV-Anytime data model.  It refers to a specific piece of content
   or to other CRIDs, the latter thereby providing a method for grouping
   related pieces of content.  TV-Anytime registered the CRID: URL
   schema in [RFC4078].  Quoting from the abstract of that document:

      The Uniform Resource Locator (URL) scheme "CRID:" has been devised
      to allow references to current or future scheduled publications of
      broadcast media content over television distribution platforms and
      the Internet.

      The initial intended application is as an embedded link within
      scheduled programme description metadata that can be used by the
      home user or agent to associate a programme selection with the
      corresponding programme location information for subsequent
      automatic acquisition.

   The process of location resolution for the CRID: URL for an
   individual piece of content locates the content itself so that the
   user can access it.  TV-Anywhere left the details of that process
   unspecified.

   The Open IPTV Forum (http://www.oipf.tv) has focussed on defining the
   user-to-network interface, particularly for fixed broadband access.
   The architecture is based on the ETSI NGN (Next Generation Networks)
   model.  The receiver uses SIP (Session Initiation Protocol [RFC3261])
   signalling to obtain authorization and resources for a session,
   before signalling at the multicast level to acquire the program.
   [Further research is needed to determine whether the source and
   multicast group address are provided in the SDP (Session Description
   Protocol [RFC4566]) in the response to the SIP request, or whether
   the receiver already has this information from the electronic program
   guide before it starts.]

   Finally, the Open Mobile Alliance (OMA,
   http://www.openmobilealliance.org/) has defined a series of
   specifications relating to broadcast services over wireless networks.
   The source and multicast group addresses used to acquire a given
   program instance are provided in SDP fragments either directly
   embedded in the primary electronic program guide or pointed to by it.
   The OMA architecture provides functionality to adapt access
   information within the program guide to the requirements of the
   transport network to which the user is attached, but this
   functionality appears to be primarily directed toward overcoming
   differences in technology rather than a general capability for
   modification.



Tsou                      Expires June 4, 2012                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft        Multicast Address Acquisition        December 2011


   In conclusion, it appears that there are at least two extant sources
   of specifications for the receiver interface, each providing its own
   data model, XML data schema, and detailed architecture.  In the OMA
   case, the access information including the source and multicast group
   addresses is definitely embedded as an SDP fragment within a larger
   set of XML-encoded program metadata.  [Further research needed for
   the Open IPTV Forum, as already noted.]  The OMA metadata can be
   supplied to the receiver in multiple segments, through multiple
   channels.  This complicates the task of intercepting that metadata
   and modifying it in a particular transport network.


3.  Which Problem Are We Solving?

   The problem addressed by this memo was stated fairly clearly (the
   authors trust) above, but it does not hurt to further clarify the
   issue being addressed.

   In some transition scenarios, the source supports one IP version
   while the receiver and the provider network support the other (e.g.,
   the 6-6-4 scenario).  In this case, the problem stated above is
   unambiguous: how are addresses of the version supported by the
   receiver delivered to the receiver, possibly with the help of the
   provider network?

   In other transition scenarios, the source and provider network
   support one IP version while the receiver supports another.  In this
   case there are actually two problems: how to get provided addresses
   to the receiver that it understands (as already stated), and how to
   make those addresses usable in a network supporting a different
   version?  This second problem is the subject of a different memo and
   out of scope of the present one.

   There is also a third class of scenarios, where the source and
   receiver support the same IP version but the intervening network
   supports a different one (e.g., the 4-6-4 scenario).  In those
   scenarios, delivering addresses of the right IP version to the
   receiver is notionally a non-problem.  The problem still can arise,
   if the intervening network intercepts and modifies the access
   information to be consistent with the IP version it supports.  In
   this case, the problem can be re-stated as: how can such modification
   by avoided when it is not needed?


4.  Possible Solutions

   This section explores three classes of solution to the problem at
   hand:



Tsou                      Expires June 4, 2012                  [Page 5]

Internet-Draft        Multicast Address Acquisition        December 2011


   o  reactive: the receiver recognizes that addresses it has received
      are in the wrong version and converts them through a request to a
      mapping function;

   o  dynamic modification: the network intercepts the access
      information and modifies it as necessary to meet the requirements
      of the receiver;

   o  administrative: the electronic program guide is modified in
      advance of acquisition to provide alternative address versions.
      Two variations on this strategy are identified.

4.1.  The Reactive Strategy

   According to this strategy, an IPv6 receiver receiving IPv4
   addresses, for example, would recognize that they were the wrong
   version.  It would package the addresses into one or two requests to
   a mapping function, which would return corresponding IPv6 addresses.
   In the 6-4-4 scenario cited above, the mapping function could be part
   of the user site or located in a dual-stack element at the provider
   edge.  In the 6-6-4 case it would have to be part of the provider
   network, although not necessarily at its edge.

   This strategy clearly involves a fair amount of work to implement.
   Not only does the receiver need to recognize that addresses are the
   wrong version; it also has to implement a new protocol to the mapping
   function.  It also has to discover that function.  The mapping
   function itself is probably needed to solve other aspects of the
   multicast transition problem, so should not be considered a cost of
   the reactive strategy in particular.

4.2.  Dynamic Modification

   This strategy puts the entire burden of address adaptation on the
   provider network.  It requires that an element in that network
   intercept program guide information destined to the receiver, locate
   the access information, and translate IP address versions as
   necessary to suit the receiver.  If the problem identified in the
   last paragraph of Section 3 is to be avoided, the intercepting
   element has to be aware of the version supported by each receiver.

   As noted in the description of the OMA architecture, it is possible
   that such an adaptive function is present, but not clear that its
   scope would extend to IP version changes.  The need to include IP
   version along with other receiver-related information might or might
   not prove to be administratively demanding.  With the dynamic
   modification strategy the workload on the adaptation function might
   be large enough to make it a bottleneck in the process of program



Tsou                      Expires June 4, 2012                  [Page 6]

Internet-Draft        Multicast Address Acquisition        December 2011


   acquisition.  The mitigating factor is that program metadata will
   typically be retrieved rather less often than program content.

   This strategy has the clear advantage that it requires no changes in
   the receiver.

4.3.  Administrative Preparation

   The basic idea with this strategy is that the access information in
   the program metadata is set up to provide the right address version
   in advance of acquisition by any receiver.  There are two basic
   approaches:

   o  separate alternative versions of the access information are
      prepared.  The correct version is served up to the receiver when
      it requests it.  Like the dynamic modification strategy, this
      approach assumes that it is administratively feasible for the
      program guide server to know the IP version of the requesting
      receiver.  That may or may not be true in a given operator's
      context.  Also as with the dynamic modification approach, no
      change is required in the receiver.  The big advantage over
      dynamic modification is that there is no need for the
      complications of an intercepting adapting element.

   o  The same access information instance contains alternative IP
      address versions.  Where SDP is used, we can think of ICE or ICE-
      lite [RFC5245] or the proposed altc mechanism
      [I_D.boucadair-altc].  This requires receiver modification to
      recognize the alternative syntax and potentially to take part in
      STUN exchanges.  However, it means that the same access
      information can be served up to all receivers in a backward-
      compatible manner.

   The administrative strategy requires that the network provider have
   control over the translations used in the preparation of the
   alternativ e versions of the access information.  The network has to
   be aware of the translations used, so it can reuse them at other
   stages of the multicast acquisition process.

   The case where the receiver supports a different IP version from the
   network to which it is attached and the adaptation between versions
   occurs in the customer network (e.g., 6-4-4 case with dual stack
   customer edge device) is not amenable to the administrative approach,
   unless the operator is able to control the mapping used by the
   customer edge device.  Failing that, it appears that the reactive
   strategy is the only one that would work in this particular case.





Tsou                      Expires June 4, 2012                  [Page 7]

Internet-Draft        Multicast Address Acquisition        December 2011


5.  Conclusions

   To come.


6.  Acknowledgements

   TBD


7.  IANA Considerations

   This memo includes no request to IANA.


8.  Security Considerations

   To come.


9.  Informative References

   [I_D.boucadair-altc]
              Boucadair, M., Kaplan, H., Gilman, R., and S.
              Veikkolainen, "Session Description Protocol (SDP)
              Alternate Connectivity (ALTC) Attribute", November 2011.

   [MPEG-7_DDL]
              ISO/IEC, "ISO/IEC 15938-2 (2002): "Information technology
              - Multimedia content description interface - Part 2:
              Description definition language".", 2002.

   [RFC3261]  Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., Camarillo, G., Johnston,
              A., Peterson, J., Sparks, R., Handley, M., and E.
              Schooler, "SIP: Session Initiation Protocol", RFC 3261,
              June 2002.

   [RFC4078]  Earnshaw, N., Aoki, S., Ashley, A., and W. Kameyama, "The
              TV-Anytime Content Reference Identifier (CRID)", RFC 4078,
              May 2005.

   [RFC4566]  Handley, M., Jacobson, V., and C. Perkins, "SDP: Session
              Description Protocol", RFC 4566, July 2006.

   [RFC5245]  Rosenberg, J., "Interactive Connectivity Establishment
              (ICE): A Protocol for Network Address Translator (NAT)
              Traversal for Offer/Answer Protocols", RFC 5245,
              April 2010.



Tsou                      Expires June 4, 2012                  [Page 8]

Internet-Draft        Multicast Address Acquisition        December 2011


Author's Address

   Tina Tsou
   Huawei Technologies (USA)
   2330 Central Expressway
   Santa Clara, CA  95050
   USA

   Phone: +1 408 330 4424
   Email: tina.tsou.zouting@huawei.com









































Tsou                      Expires June 4, 2012                  [Page 9]

