


Internet Engineering Task Force                                  T. Tsou
Internet-Draft                                       Huawei Technologies
Intended status: Informational                         December 22, 2009
Expires: June 20, 2010


            Plug-and-Play Nodal Deployment Problem Statement
         draft-tsou-network-configuration-problem-statement-02

Abstract

   When a new network node is brought into service, it is typically
   configured using scripts worked out in advance.  These scripts depend
   critically upon knowledge of the network topology, that is, the
   node's address and link information.  While this information may be
   derived during advance planning, deviations from plan occur in
   practice.  Correcting the scripts can be expensive, particularly if
   the corrections have to be reapplied on-site after installation.
   When an entire network of tens of thousands of nodes is being brought
   into service, such expenses become a significant part of the
   deployment budget.

   Clearly it is helpful if plug-and-play operation of new nodes can be
   enabled, such that a link between the node and a network management
   system is established automatically upon activation.  In the first
   place, this allows automated assignment of the node's address and
   acquisition of its link information at the central location.  Beyond
   that, it provides the means for application of configuration scripts
   from a central point, avoiding the cost of sending a skilled
   craftsperson to a remote site.

   This memo describes the problem of plug-and-play deployment of new
   nodes.  It defines this problem as minimizing the amount of pre-
   configuration required to achieve a successful IKEv2 exchange with a
   central management system.  It assumes that part of the solution
   consists of a protocol that distributes addresses from the network
   management system to the nodes as a preliminary to that exchange.  It
   explores the requirements on that protocol in various network
   scenarios.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-



Tsou                      Expires June 20, 2010                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft          Plug-and-Play Deployment           December 2009


   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on June 20, 2010.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2009 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the BSD License.






















Tsou                      Expires June 20, 2010                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft          Plug-and-Play Deployment           December 2009


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
     1.1.  Requirements Language . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   2.  The Address Configuration Protocol  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
     2.1.  The New Network Scenario  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
     2.2.  Increments To an Existing Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
     2.3.  Attachment To Another Operator's Network  . . . . . . . . . 6
   3.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   4.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   5.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   6.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8






































Tsou                      Expires June 20, 2010                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft          Plug-and-Play Deployment           December 2009


1.  Introduction

   Before a network management system can configure a new network node,
   a link has to be established between the two entities.  At a minimum,
   this means that the new node has to acquire an IP address and mask
   (or an IPv6 prefix).  The demands of security typically mean that the
   node also needs to possess pre-shared keying material.  In typical
   practice such information is entered through a command line
   interface, and a database relating the device identity to this pre-
   configured information is built up and made available to the network
   management system.  In the worst case, a craftsperson has to do the
   pre-configuration on site after hardware installation is complete.

   New networks are being deployed today with tens of thousands of
   network nodes.  Pre-configuring each of them manually through a
   command line interface would be a costly operation, especially if it
   requires on-site visits.  Moreover, topological considerations
   complicate the task of establishing the management links.  A given
   node may not be reachable until other nodes have been brought into
   service first.  Just to complicate the picture, some nodes may be
   reachable only across another operator's network.  Plug-and-play
   operation of new network nodes is the ideal outcome, but may not be
   easy in the face of these considerations.

   This memo explores a possible solution to the requirement for plug-
   and-play operation.  This is a protocol through which nodes can
   request and receive addresses from the network management system,
   allowing them to communicate with that system.  It is assumed that
   the goal is to achieve a successful IKEv2 exchange between the node
   and the network management system, since once an IPSEC tunnel has
   been established between the two entities further configuration can
   proceed safely.

   The model of operation assumed in this memo consists of the following
   steps:

   1.  Some configuration data is entered into the node at the factory
       or in advance of deployment.  One goal of the analysis which
       follows is to determine the minimum amount of information which
       must be so configured.  To start with, that information includes
       a node identifier and the MAC address of each of its interfaces.

   2.  The node is physically deployed and activated.

   3.  The node begins to poll its neighbours, looking for a neighbour
       that can relay a request for an address between the new node and
       the network management system.




Tsou                      Expires June 20, 2010                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft          Plug-and-Play Deployment           December 2009


   4.  Eventually the new node gets a response and acquires an IP
       address and the address of the network management system.

   5.  The new node establishes a tunnel between it and the network
       management system by means of an IKEv2 exchange.  The new node is
       now in a position to relay requests for addresses from other
       nodes.

   6.  The network management system queries the new node for the
       identities of the neighbours reachable through its interfaces and
       possibly other information.

   7.  The network management system verifies the validity of the
       configuration scripts that have been prepared for this node.  If
       the scripts are valid, it passes the scripts to the node.  If
       they are not valid, corrective action is taken and then the
       scripts are passed down.  The node is now ready for service.

   Security considerations are clearly important in determining to what
   extent plug-and-play operation is possible.  The security
   considerations provided in Section 3 are an integral part of the
   analysis provided by this memo.

1.1.  Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].


2.  The Address Configuration Protocol

   This section explores the requirements for an initial address
   configuration protocol.  The intention is to provide the information
   needed to determine whether an existing protocol would do the job,
   possibly with modifications, or whether a new protocol is needed.
   The exploration considers three scenarios:

   o  a brand new network where none of the nodes have completed
      configuration to start with;

   o  an existing network to which new nodes are added;

   o  a scenario where the messaging must pass across another operator's
      network.






Tsou                      Expires June 20, 2010                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft          Plug-and-Play Deployment           December 2009


2.1.  The New Network Scenario

   Section 1 gave a brief description of an algorithm whereby a node
   receives its IP address and carries out subsequent communications
   with the network management system through the first node to respond
   to it.  In a new network, this algorithm implies that address
   configuration will advance through a tree which eventually spans the
   complete network.  Communications with the network management system
   will pass along branches of the tree until alternative routing is
   established.

   In this specific scenario, the initial poll sent out from the new
   node through each of its interfaces needs to contain only the node's
   MAC address on that link.  If a receiving node has established
   communication with the network management system, it sends back a
   response identifying itself, giving its own MAC address, and
   indicating that the network management system is reachable through
   it.  If the new node receives more than one such response, it chooses
   one and sends second message indicating the selection and requesting
   the allocation of an address.  (As a refinement, the responses from
   the neighbours could contain the round trip time from the neighbour
   to the network management system, and the new node could select the
   neighbour that minimizes the new node's own round trip time.)

   The selected neighbour forwards the new node's address request toward
   the network management system at the IP level, with its own address
   as source and the address of the network management system as
   destination.  The request contains the identity and MAC address of
   the new node.  Upon receiving the request, the network management
   system allocates and returns an address and mask or a prefix, as
   applicable.  The neighbour relays this information along with the
   network management system's address to the new node, which can now
   operate at the IP level itself.  Configuration continues with an
   IKEv2 exchange as described above.

   If there is no response to its initial poll, the new node repeats the
   poll at suitable intervals until it gets a response.

2.2.  Increments To an Existing Network

   The second scenario is one where the new node is deployed into an
   existing network.  In this case, the address configuration protocol
   described above will continue to work.

2.3.  Attachment To Another Operator's Network

   The third scenario is one where another operator's network lies along
   the messaging path.  The only interesting case here is when all of



Tsou                      Expires June 20, 2010                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft          Plug-and-Play Deployment           December 2009


   the new node's neighbours belong to the third party.  In any other
   case communication with the network management system is protected by
   the tunnels that have been set up.

   When the new node and its neighbour belong to different domains, the
   information provided by the new node to the neighbour has to include
   either the address or FQDN of the target network management system.
   Otherwise the neighbour would route the request to the management
   system for its own network instead.  That means the new node has to
   be configured with this information so it can send it out.  One could
   imagine the address configuration protocol operating as described
   above, with the neighbouring node faithfully relaying the address
   request to the indicated management entity.  However, it seems
   simpler in this case to rely on local DHCP to give the new node an
   initial address, then have the new node contact the network
   management system directly at the IP level.


3.  Security Considerations

   It is critical that no attacker be able to modify the configuration
   of a network router, either through impersonation of the network
   management system or through modification of configuration messages
   en route to the new node.  This is why the preceding discussion
   assumed that the immediate goal is to set up a tunnel between the new
   node and the network management system through an IKEv2 exchange.
   That goal implies that the new node has to be pre-configured with the
   shared secret and any other parameters needed to carry out the IKEv2
   exchange.

   Taking that part as a given, the interesting part of the analysis is
   what the security considerations are for the address acquisition
   process.  The first point to observe is that, with all other
   configuration protected, the only outcome of an attack on the address
   acquisition process is to prevent configuration from being carried
   out.  An attacker with that goal has to be on the messaging path to
   achieve it.  To minimize exposure to such an attack, the vulnerable
   portion of the path can be restricted to the portion between the new
   node and its neighbour, by requiring that messages relayed between
   the neighbour and the network management system pass via the tunnel
   that the neighbour has set up.

   With this restriction, the means available to the attacker come down
   to two: interference with the link between the new node and any
   neighbour able to reach the network management system, or
   impersonation of such a neighbour.  The latter is the more likely
   approach, given that the new node probably supports multiple links.




Tsou                      Expires June 20, 2010                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft          Plug-and-Play Deployment           December 2009


   The first opportunity for impersonation comes when the new node sends
   out its initial poll for candidate neighbours.  The attacker could
   send a reply indicating that it is a candidate.  The other
   opportunity is when the new node sends out its second message, the
   actual request for an address.  The attacker could respond before the
   selected neighbour has an opportunity to do so.  In either case, the
   attacker can provide addresses of its own choosing to the new node.
   If the allocated address the attacker supplies duplicates the address
   of another node in the network, subsequent messages from the new node
   may interfere with messaging to the rightful owner of the address.
   If the address of the network management system that the attacker
   supplies is false, the subsequent attempt at an IKEv2 exchange will
   fail.

   The obvious, but not necessarily effective way to alleviate these
   attacks is to provide the means for the new node to authenticate its
   neighbour as a member of the same network.  This could be a secret
   shared amongst all of the new nodes and their neighbours.  The
   validity of this approach needs further discussion.


4.  IANA Considerations

   This memo includes no request to IANA.


5.  Acknowledgements

   TBD.  Depends on who gets listed as author.


6.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.


Author's Address

   Tina Tsou
   Huawei Technologies
   Bantian, Longgang District
   Shenzhen  518129
   P.R. China

   Email: tena@huawei.com





Tsou                      Expires June 20, 2010                 [Page 8]


