


Internet Engineering Task Force                                 V. Grado
Internet-Draft                                                   T. Tsou
Intended status: Informational                 Huawei Technologies (USA)
Expires: December 14, 2011                                         N. So
                                             Verizon Communications Inc.
                                                           June 12, 2011


     Virtual Resource Operations and Management in the Data Center
                  draft-tsou-vrom-problem-statement-01

Abstract

   The dynamic allocation of computing resources on a massive scale
   through the use of virtual machines running over a "hypervisor" layer
   to serve a large number of customers and applications simultaneously
   brings a number of benefits but also a number of challenges to data
   center operations.  Such challenges range from acquiring the
   information needed to provision the physical servers, storage and
   networking elements, through accounting for resource and application
   usage at the user level.  The Distributed Management Task Force
   (DMTF) has begun the work of developing the standards needed to
   support this work, but many tasks remain.  This document provides a
   brief survey of the problem space, but focusses on the requirements
   for operation and management of network resources within the data
   center complex and between that complex and the users.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 14, 2011.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.



Grado, et al.           Expires December 14, 2011               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft      Virtual Resource Ops & Management          June 2011


   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
     1.1.  Requirements Language . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Operational Challenges for Virtualization . . . . . . . . . . . 4
     2.1.  A More Detailed Look At the Hypervisor  . . . . . . . . . . 4
     2.2.  Operations and Management in a Virtualized Data Center  . . 4
   3.  Real and Virtual Network Management in the Virtualized
       Data Center . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   4.  Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   5.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   6.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   7.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   8.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6

























Grado, et al.           Expires December 14, 2011               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft      Virtual Resource Ops & Management          June 2011


1.  Introduction

   There is currently a strong movement toward virtualization of data
   center resources, with the aim of improving physical resource
   utilization, reducing energy consumption as a result, and improving
   responsiveness to demands for data center resources.  Along with this
   is a parallel movement toward outsourcing data center operations,
   with the result that multiple enterprises may share the same physical
   resources for their own computing and storage requirements.  Both in-
   house and outsourced data center virtualization raise obvious
   concerns over data security and regulatory compliance, but this is
   just one aspect of the operational and management challenges raised
   by large-scale resource virtualization.

   The basic unit of resource virtualization in this architecture is the
   virtual machine (VM), running over a "hypervisor" layer and sharing a
   physical server with other virtual machines and a management entity.
   The virtual machine has its own guest operating system, set of one or
   more applications, and allocations of processing, storage, and
   networking resources.  The Distributed Management Task Force (DMTF)
   has provided a standard interface for management of the virtual
   machine life cycle, the Open Virtualization Format [OVF].

   Within the data center complex, virtual machines may migrate from one
   set of physical resources to another.  The data center complex may
   itself be distributed geographically, and resources for a single
   virtual machine may be spread over multiple locations.  This raises
   the importance of ensuring adequate and well-running network
   resources within the data center complex.

   The next section is a slightly more detailed description of the
   interaction between the hypervisor and the virtual machines it
   supports, followed by a general enumeration of the complete range of
   operations and management issues associated with massive
   virtualization within the data center complex.  The following section
   looks in more detail at the problem of operating and managing the
   virtual and physical networking resources within the complex, with
   the aim of laying the groundwork for identifying gaps in the existing
   set of standards in this area.  The concluding section actually
   identifies those gaps.

1.1.  Requirements Language

   This document contains no normative language.







Grado, et al.           Expires December 14, 2011               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft      Virtual Resource Ops & Management          June 2011


2.  Operational Challenges for Virtualization

2.1.  A More Detailed Look At the Hypervisor

   With virtualized resources, a virtual machine (VM) embodies virtual
   hardware that is emulated by a hypervisor (or a similar mechanism
   with respect to virtual networking resources.  The hypervisor
   mediates all interactions with the underlying physical hardware.
   That mechanism is transparent to the guest operating system, which
   runs completely independently of other VMs sharing the same physical
   resources.

   The hypervisor performs the mapping between the virtual resources of
   the VM (usually an application and a guest operating system) and the
   physical hardware of a server, storage, or network.  The hypervisor
   is the component responsible for managing physical resources to
   allocate them fairly to the multiple VMs running on a host.

   The main physical resource pools that the hypervisor needs to manage
   to carry out its job are as follows:

   o  CPU: A configurable amount of CPU assigned to a VM, during
      creation, regardless of the real amount of physical CPU.  The
      hypervisor uses a CPU scheduler to process the CPU requests from
      the VMs.

   o  Disk: A single large file allocated on one the host's datastores
      as a virtual disk for each VM.  Disk I/O requests are also queued
      for each VM.

   o  Memory: A fixed amount of memory that gets mapped into virtual
      memory pages and in turn to physical memory pages.  The hypervisor
      must ensure there is no overallocation of virtual memory that the
      physical memory cannot handle.

   o  Network: The virtual machine includes a virtual network to provide
      the same functionality as a physical network, including IP
      address, virtual NIC, switches and firewalls.  Some network
      traffic passes only between VMs on the same host, and will not be
      visible to external physical tools.

2.2.  Operations and Management in a Virtualized Data Center

   [PTT] We can add material to expand this, but bear in mind that it is
   just an introductory section and need not get too detailed.

   From the brief description given above, one can infer a number of
   operational challenges that arise in a virtualized environment to



Grado, et al.           Expires December 14, 2011               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft      Virtual Resource Ops & Management          June 2011


   cover different levels of service in a data center.  Some of
   challenges are:

   1.  Impact of new devices and elements:

       *  monitoring of the VM life cycle, including VM migration ("lift
          and shift");

       *  address management for VM life cycle support;

       *  resource monitoring for faults and abnormal conditions;

       *  metering of resource availability, performance metrics and
          usage;

       *  monitoring of the status of the hypervisor and the interface
          to it.

   2.  Infrastructure management support:

       *  connectivity needs for virtualization management;

       *  policy management and enforcement;

       *  virtualization performance management;

       *  interoperability of multiple hypervisors;

       *  open programmatic interfaces to support access and management
          of data center contents and resources

   3.  Enabling service management:

       *  supporting secure low-latency VLAN and VPN connections in
          large scale on an on-demand (pay as you go) basis for capacity
          management of dedicated pools of resources

       *  scalable service hosting, collocation, and distributed
          virtualized redundancy

       *  facilities management including premises, security, privacy,
          and data integrity management for regulatory compliance;

       *  management of virtual private data centers, VPN-based data
          centers.






Grado, et al.           Expires December 14, 2011               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft      Virtual Resource Ops & Management          June 2011


3.  Real and Virtual Network Management in the Virtualized Data Center

   [PTT] Time is pressing, so I'll propose text for this later, unless
   someone else can do it.  Basically we have to monitor at three
   levels: virtual network connections (rely on the hypervisor for
   that), physical connections within the (possibly distributed) data
   center, and the customer connections into the data center.


4.  Conclusions

   [PTT] Juergen??  You'd know what tools exist now for the job and what
   needs development.


5.  Acknowledgements

   Tom Taylor added text and may become an author unless it is necessary
   to leave room for others.


6.  IANA Considerations

   This memo includes no request to IANA.


7.  Security Considerations

   Security is a very important consideration, both for private and
   multi-user virtualized data centers.  However, detailed discussion of
   that topic is out of the scope of this document.  This memo raises no
   security issues in itself.


8.  Informative References

   [OVF]  Distributed Management Task Force (DMTF), "Open Virtualization
          Format (OVF)", January 2010, <http://dmtf.org/standards/ovf>.













Grado, et al.           Expires December 14, 2011               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft      Virtual Resource Ops & Management          June 2011


Authors' Addresses

   Victor M. Grado
   Huawei Technologies (USA)
   2330 Central Expwy,
   Santa Clara,, CA  95050
   USA

   Phone:
   Email: vgrado@huawei.com


   Tina Tsou
   Huawei Technologies (USA)
   2330 Central Expwy,
   Santa Clara,, CA  95050
   USA

   Phone:
   Email: tena@huawei.com


   Ning So
   Verizon Communications Inc.
   2400 N. Glenville Ave,
   Richardson,, TX  75080
   USA

   Phone:
   Email: ning.so@verizonbusiness.com





















Grado, et al.           Expires December 14, 2011               [Page 7]

