


Internet Engineering Task Force                                 V. Grado
Internet-Draft                                                   T. Tsou
Intended status: Informational                       Huawei Technologies
Expires: December 15, 2011                                         N. So
                                             Verizon Communications Inc.
                                                           June 13, 2011


      Virtual Resource Operations & Management in the Data Center
                  draft-tsou-vrom-problem-statement-02

Abstract

   TThe dynamic allocation of computing resources on a massive scale
   through the use of virtual machines to serve a large number of
   customers and applications simultaneously brings a number of benefits
   but also a number of challenges to data center operations.  Such
   challenges range from acquiring the information needed to provision
   the physical servers, storage and networking elements, through
   accounting for resource and application usage at the user level.  In
   particular, this document describes the problem of operational and
   management challenges that virtualization brings in the (carrier)
   data center as an enabler of new technologies such as self-
   provisioning and elastic capacity and related benefits of
   consolidation, reduced total cost of ownership, and energy
   management.  This document does not cover the problem of address
   resolution in massive data centers.  It does not cover technologies
   related to VDI either.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 15, 2011.

Copyright Notice




Grado, et al.           Expires December 15, 2011               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                    VRO&M                        June 2011


   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   3.  Operational Challenges for Virtualization . . . . . . . . . . . 4
     3.1.  Unique Requirements from Virtualization . . . . . . . . . . 4
     3.2.  Operations and Management in a Virtualized DC . . . . . . . 5
   4.  VM Performance and Configuration Management Challenges  . . . . 6
     4.1.  Performance Management Challenges in Virtualization . . . . 6
     4.2.  VM Configuration and Inventory Operational Challenges . . . 6
   5.  Operational Challenges in Services with Virtual Resources . . . 6
     5.1.  VM Migration Operational Challenges . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
     5.2.  VPC Operational and Management Challenges . . . . . . . . . 7
   6.  Conclusion and Recommendation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   7.  Manageability Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   8.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   9.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   10. Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8


















Grado, et al.           Expires December 15, 2011               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                    VRO&M                        June 2011


1.  Introduction

   There is currently a strong movement toward virtualization of data
   center resources, with the aim of improving physical resource
   utilization, reducing energy consumption as a result, and improving
   responsiveness to demands for data center resources.  Along with this
   is a parallel movement toward outsourcing data center operations,
   with the result that multiple enterprises may share the same physical
   resources for their own computing and storage requirements.  Both in-
   house and outsourced data center virtualization raise obvious
   concerns over data security and regulatory compliance, but this is
   just one aspect of the operational and management challenges raised
   by large-scale resource virtualization.

   IThe basic unit of resource virtualization in this architecture is
   the virtual machine (VM), running over a "hypervisor" layer and
   sharing a physical server with other virtual machines and a
   management entity.  The virtual machine has its own guest operating
   system, set of one or more applications, and allocations of
   processing, storage, and networking resources.  The need to mix and
   match products from different vendors can lead to interoperability
   challenges that need to be addressed by standards from the start, or
   risk vendor lock-in.

   This document focuses on the problem statement of various data center
   virtual resources operations and management areas.  This document
   does not cover the problem of address resolution in massive data
   centers nor the problem of technologies known as VDI.


2.  Terminology

   CE: Customer Edge

   DC: Data Center

   DE: Data Center Edge

   PE: Provider Edge

   VDC: Virtualized Data Center

   VDI: Virtualized Desktop Infrastructure

   VPC: Virtual Private Clouds (or VPN based Clouds)

   VM: Virtual Machine (or host)




Grado, et al.           Expires December 15, 2011               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                    VRO&M                        June 2011


   SLA: Service Level Agreement


3.  Operational Challenges for Virtualization

3.1.  Unique Requirements from Virtualization

   There are operational challenges and requirements ensuing from
   virtualized resources that are unique and not present in conventional
   implementations.

   In virtualized resources, a virtual machine (VM) embodies virtual
   hardware that is emulated by a hypervisor (or a similar mechanism in
   virtual networking resources), that mediates all interactions with
   the underlying physical hardware.  That mechanism is transparent to
   the guest operating system, running completely independent of other
   guests VM in the same physical resources.

   The hypervisor then performs the mapping between the virtual
   resources of the VM (usually an application and a guest operating
   system) and the physical hardware of a server, storage, or network.
   The hypervisor is the component responsible for managing physical
   resources to allocate them fairly to the multiple VMs running on a
   host.

   The main physical resource pools that the hypervisor needs to manage
   for carrying out its job are as follows:

   o  CPU: An configurable amount of CPU assigned to a VM, during
      creation, regardless of the real amount of physical CPU.  A CPU
      scheduler is used by the hypervisor to process the CPU requests
      from the VMs.

   o  Disk: A single large file allocated on one the host's datastores
      as a virtual disk for each VM.  Disk I/O requests are also queued
      for each VM.

   o  Memory: A fixed amount of memory that gets mapped into virtual
      memory pages and in turn to physical memory pages.  The hypervisor
      must ensure there is no overallocation of virtual memory that the
      physical memory cannot handle.

   o  Network: It includes a virtual network to provide the same
      functionality as a physical network, including IP address, virtual
      NIC, switches and firewalls.  Because the network traffic is only
      handled between VMs, many times there is no visibility to external
      physical tools.




Grado, et al.           Expires December 15, 2011               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                    VRO&M                        June 2011


3.2.  Operations and Management in a Virtualized DC

   From the above, a number of operational challenges arise in a
   virtualized environment that cover different leves of service in a
   DC.  Some of challenges are:

   1.  New devices and elements

       *  Monitor VM lifecycle, including VM migration ("lift & shift")

       *  Address management for VM lifecycle support

       *  Resource monitoring for faults and abnormal conditions

       *  Resource availability, peformance metrics and usage based
          metering

       *  Hypervisor status and interface monitoring

   2.  Infrastructure management support

       *  Connectivity needs for virtualization management

       *  Policy management and enforcement in the Virtualized DC

       *  IPFIX for virtualization performance management

       *  Interoperability of multiple hypervisors

       *  Open programmatic interfaces to support access and management
          of Datacenter contents and resources

   3.  Service management enablement

       *  Supporting secure low-latency VLAN and VPN connections in
          large scale on on-demand (pay as you go) basis for capacity
          management of dedicated pool of resources

       *  Service hosting, co-location, and distributed virtualized
          redundancy for seamless scaling

       *  Facilities management including premises, security, privacy
          and data integrity management for regulatory compliancy

       *  Management of VPN-based clouds






Grado, et al.           Expires December 15, 2011               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                    VRO&M                        June 2011


4.  VM Performance and Configuration Management Challenges

4.1.  Performance Management Challenges in Virtualization

   From the discussion in the previous sections, it is clear that
   performance management for virtualized resources is a very critical
   area.  This can include capacity management, as well as availability
   management, since they provide a status of the health of the network
   resources and services, including the health of the VMs and
   hypervisors.

   While a hypervisor is in charge of load balancing and keeping tab of
   resource utilization, additional mechanisms need to be in place to
   obtain the best performance.  There is a need to obtain key metrics
   from the VMs that can be used to support a more robust management of
   resources and services.

   A protocol such as IPFIX that can tap into VMs to obtain flow metrics
   needs to be devised (or existing ones enhanced).  The source of the
   metrics for virtualized resources are diferent from the sources in
   physical resources, as described above.

   Metrics such as uptime that are provided by mechanisms within IPPM
   and PMOL recommendations need to be obtained for virtualized hosts as
   well.

4.2.  VM Configuration and Inventory Operational Challenges

   Another critical challenge arising from the creation of virtual hosts
   is 'sprawl' that can happen over time when there is lack of control
   and monitoring in the lifecycle of a large quantity of VMs.  Besides
   service and performance problems that might arise, configuration
   management issues will ensue from VM that are consuming resources in
   the background, if unmonitored, some may become out of sync with
   policy and compliance, with fine-tuning applications, with bandwith
   management, etc.

   There is a need to carry out configuration management for virtual
   resources and hosts that include discovery, inventory and backup, for
   the both the virtual and physical resources.  There is a need for a
   protocol like NETCONF that also covers virtual hosts.


5.  Operational Challenges in Services with Virtual Resources







Grado, et al.           Expires December 15, 2011               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                    VRO&M                        June 2011


5.1.  VM Migration Operational Challenges

   VM migration, also called by other names such as VM Motion, "lift &
   shift", etc., implies moving a VM to another location within a data
   center, or even to a different data center, with the consequent
   operational and management challenges.

   Just to name a few of the challenges:

   o  Policy reconfiguration in the destination device

   o  Other dynamic information updating in destination

   o  Address management and reconfiguration when involving different
      data centers

   In addition, there are a few complex models for the interconnection
   of service providers supporting virtualized resources already working
   their way into real implementations that will allow more complex VM
   migration schemes but that also represent their own set of
   operational and management challenges.

5.2.  VPC Operational and Management Challenges

   From the virtualized resources deployment models, this model brings
   together most of the operational requirements into the unified
   computing stack, and in particular the network side, directly.  VPC
   embodies services that are delivered over a virtual private network
   (VPN) and therefore the VPN protocols and implementations need to be
   enhanced to support the "characteristics" mentioned above in addition
   to their own operational requirements.  At a higher level, a VPC
   needs to meet SLA and enfore policies, meet demands from the
   management of order requests, self-provisioning, usage-based
   metering, and management, either through programmatic interfaces or
   by other means.

   There are two cases, 1) the pure play virtualization-enabled
   provider, that needs to use another carrier to interconnect the
   different data centers, and 2) the carrier offering over their own
   network.  In both of those cases, the VPN protocols need operational
   enhancements to support end-to-end SLA monitoring or even just
   internal service level objectives in addition to customer SLA, all
   which requires corresponding metrics, based on usage per resource and
   per customer.

   In the second case, there are additional improvements that can be
   made as in the case of the deployment of a DC Edge device (DE), a box
   in between the DC and the network edge that will simplify



Grado, et al.           Expires December 15, 2011               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                    VRO&M                        June 2011


   provisioning and operations by eliminating the need of a CE-PE pair.


6.  Conclusion and Recommendation

   With the new networking, server and storage technologies converging
   in to the DC in the form of unified computing solutions at whose core
   is a virtualization stack, many new operational and management
   challenges arise.

   Therefore, we recommend that the IETF engage in the study of the
   problem of virtualized resources operations and management and, if
   appropriate, the development of interoperable solutions.


7.  Manageability Considerations

   This document does not add additional manageability considerations.


8.  Security Considerations

   To come.


9.  IANA Considerations

   This memo currently includes no request to IANA.


10.  Acknowledgements

   Awaiting comments.


Authors' Addresses

   Victor M. Grado
   Huawei Technologies
   2330 Central Expwy
   Santa Clara, CA  95050
   US

   Phone:
   Email: vgrado@huawei.com






Grado, et al.           Expires December 15, 2011               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                    VRO&M                        June 2011


   Tina Tsou
   Huawei Technologies
   2330 Central Expwy
   Santa Clara, CA  95050
   US

   Phone:
   Email: tena@huawei.com


   Ning So
   Verizon Communications Inc.
   2400 N. Glenville Ave
   Richardson, TX  75080
   US

   Phone:
   Email: ning.so@verizonbusiness.com

































Grado, et al.           Expires December 15, 2011               [Page 9]

