
Networking Working Group                                JP. Vasseur, Ed.
Internet-Draft                                               J. Hui, Ed.
Intended status: Informational                               S. Dasgupta
Expires: January 3, 2013                                         G. Yoon
                                                      Cisco Systems, Inc
                                                            July 5, 2012


           RPL deployment experience in large scale networks
                draft-hui-vasseur-roll-rpl-deployment-01

Abstract

   Low power and Lossy Networks (LLNs) exhibit characteristics unlike
   other more traditional IP links.  LLNs are a class of network in
   which both routers and their interconnect are resource constrained.
   LLN routers are typically resource constrained in processing power,
   memory, and energy (i.e. battery power).  LLN links are typically
   exhibit high loss rates, low data rates, are are strongly affected by
   environmental conditions that change over time.  LLNs may be composed
   of a few dozen to thousands of routers.  A new protocol called the
   IPv6 Routing Protocol for Low-Power and Lossy Networks (RPL) has been
   specified for routing in LLNs supporting multipoint-to-point, point-
   to-multipoint traffic, and point-to-point traffic.  Since RPL's
   publication as an RFC, several large scale networks have been
   succesfully deployed.  The aim of this document is to provide
   deployment experience on real-life deployed RPL-based networks.

Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."



Vasseur, et al.          Expires January 3, 2013                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft    draft-hui-vasseur-roll-rpl-deployment        July 2012


   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 3, 2013.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2012 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.



































Vasseur, et al.          Expires January 3, 2013                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft    draft-hui-vasseur-roll-rpl-deployment        July 2012


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.  Objective of this document . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   3.  RPL Paramaters Settings  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   4.  Network Characteristics  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   5.  Performance Results  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   6.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   7.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   8.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   9.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     9.1.  Normative references . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     9.2.  Informative references . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11





































Vasseur, et al.          Expires January 3, 2013                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft    draft-hui-vasseur-roll-rpl-deployment        July 2012


1.  Introduction

   Low power and Lossy Networks (LLNs) exhibit characteristics unlike
   other more traditional IP links.  LLNs are a class of network in
   which both routers and their interconnect are resource constrained.
   LLN routers are typically resource constrained in processing power,
   memory, and energy (i.e. battery power).  LLN links are typically
   exhibit high loss rates, low data rates, are are strongly affected by
   environmental conditions that change over time.  LLNs may be composed
   of a few dozen to thousands of routers.

   A new protocol called the IPv6 Routing Protocol for Low-Power and
   Lossy Networks (RPL) has been specified for routing in LLNs supporting
   multipoint-to-point, point-to-multipoint traffic, and point-to-point
   traffic [RFC6550].  Since RPL's publication as an RFC, several large
   scale networks have been successfully deployed.  The aim of this
   document is to provide deployment experience on real-life deployed
   RPL-based networks.

   In addition to [RFC6550], companion documents have been defined that
   specify IPv6 packet options required for the proper operation of RPL,
   including [RFC6553] and [RFC6554].

   This document makes use of the terminology defined in
   [I-D.ietf-roll-terminology].

   RPL is a distance-vector routing protocol that builds a Destination
   Oriented Directed Acyclic Graph (DODAG) according to an Objective
   Function (OF).  The OF is a defined set of rules that optimize paths
   against a set of metrics and/or constraints.  A very basic OF, known
   as OF0, is specified in [RFC6552].  More involved OFs may be
   specified, such as the Minimum Rank with Hysteresis Objective
   Function specified in [I-D.ietf-roll-minrank-hysteresis-of].

   Routing requirements documents spelled out in [RFC5673], [RFC5826],
   [RFC5548] and [RFC5867]) observe that it must be possible to take
   into account a variety of node metrics and/or constraints during path
   computation.  Thus, a number of routing metrics and constraints for
   RPL have been specified in [RFC6551] for maximum flexibility
   according to the objectives and environment of the LLN.

   RPL supports efficient loop detection using data-path route
   validation and supports both local and global route repair
   operations.

   RPL makes use of the Trickle algorithm, which provides a density-
   aware mechanism for distributing and maintaining state within a
   network [RFC6206].  With simple local rules, the Trickle algorithm



Vasseur, et al.          Expires January 3, 2013                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft    draft-hui-vasseur-roll-rpl-deployment        July 2012


   adjusts the transmission period and suppresses redundant
   transmissions to minimize control traffic overhead in the steady
   state while propagating new information quickly.  Trickle's
   suppression mechanisms ensures that control message overhead grows
   logrithmically with node density.

   In maintaining point-to-multipoint routes, RPL supports two modes of
   operations: non-storing and storing.  In both cases, the DODAG built
   by RPL according to the OF is used for hop-by-hop upstream routing
   towards the DAG Root.  In non-storing mode, only the DAG Root
   maintains downward routes and all data packets must traverse the DAG
   Root.  In storing mode, LLN routers also maintain downward routing
   state, allowing each LLN router to forward data packets to devices in
   their sub-DAG.  LLN constraints, the network objective, and overall
   environment typically drives the choice of non-storing or storing
   mode and is left to the network administrator.

   RPL, like many other routing protocols, is designed to be deployed in
   a number of different operational environments and [RFC6550]
   specifies a number of configuration parameters.  Section 17 of
   [RFC6550] lists the following RPL constants and variables:

   o  DEFAULT_PATH_CONTROL_SIZE: This is the default value used to
      configure PCS in the DODAG Configuration option, which dictates
      the number of significant bits in the Path Control field of the
      Transit Information option.  DEFAULT_PATH_CONTROL_SIZE has a value
      of 0.  This configures the simplest case limiting the fan-out to 1
      and limiting a node to send a DAO message to only one parent.

   o  DEFAULT_DIO_INTERVAL_MIN: This is the default value used to
      configure Imin for the DIO Trickle timer.
      DEFAULT_DIO_INTERVAL_MIN has a value of 3.  This configuration
      results in Imin of 8 ms.

   o  DEFAULT_DIO_INTERVAL_DOUBLINGS: This is the default value used to
      configure Imax for the DIO Trickle timer.
      DEFAULT_DIO_INTERVAL_DOUBLINGS has a value of 20.  This
      configuration results in a maximum interval of 2.3 hours.

   o  DEFAULT_DIO_REDUNDANCY_CONSTANT: This is the default value used to
      configure k for the DIO Trickle timer.
      DEFAULT_DIO_REDUNDANCY_CONSTANT has a value of 10.  This
      configuration is a conservative value for Trickle suppression
      mechanism.

   o  DEFAULT_MIN_HOP_RANK_INCREASE: This is the default value of
      MinHopRankIncrease.  DEFAULT_MIN_HOP_RANK_INCREASE has a value of
      256.  This configuration results in an 8-bit wide integer part of



Vasseur, et al.          Expires January 3, 2013                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft    draft-hui-vasseur-roll-rpl-deployment        July 2012


      Rank.

   o  DEFAULT_DAO_DELAY: This is the default value for the DelayDAO
      Timer.  DEFAULT_DAO_DELAY has a value of 1 second.

   o  DIO Timer: One instance per DODAG of which a node is a member.
      Expiry triggers DIO message transmission.  A Trickle timer with
      variable interval in [0, DIOIntervalMin..2^DIOIntervalDoublings].

   o  DAG Version Increment Timer: Up to one instance per DODAG of which
      the node is acting as DODAG root.  May not be supported in all
      implementations.  Expiry triggers increment of DODAGVersionNumber,
      causing a new series of updated DIO message to be sent.  Interval
      should be chosen appropriate to propagation time of DODAG and as
      appropriate to application requirements (e.g., response time
      versus overhead).

   o  DelayDAO Timer: Up to one timer per DAO parent (the subset of
      DODAG parents chosen to receive destination advertisements) per
      DODAG.  Expiry triggers sending of DAO message to the DAO parent.

   o  RemoveTimer: Up to one timer per DAO entry per neighbor (i.e.,
      those neighbors that have given DAO messages to this node as a
      DODAG parent).  Expiry may trigger No-Path advertisements or
      immediately deallocate the DAO entry if there are no DAO parents.

   Please refer to the .pdf version of this document to see the figures 
   referred in further sections.


2.  Objective of this document

   Since its specification as a standard track RFC in March 2012, a
   number of RPL-based networks have been deployed in the field, some of
   small size, others of large scale.  The aim of this document is to
   describe the successful deployment of a RPL-based LLN with 1,000
   nodes.  Other networks of even larger scale (5,000 to 10,000 nodes)
   are in progress and further revisions of this document will include
   their details.

   It is nearly impossible to characterize the absolute performance of a
   protocol without looking at all the environmental factors and a large
   number of performance metrics.  Furthermore such performance metric
   not only depends on the environment but also how the various protocol
   parameters have been configured.  Similarly it would not make any
   sense to provide hard numbers on a performance characteristic of a
   protocol.  For example, Open Shortest Path First (OSPF) routing
   protocol [RFC2328] may provide convergence times varying between few
   dozens of milliseconds to seconds depending on the network
   characteritics and protocol parameters.  At one end of the spectrum,
   fast failure detection with fast Hellos or the use of other protocols



Vasseur, et al.          Expires January 3, 2013                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft    draft-hui-vasseur-roll-rpl-deployment        July 2012


   such as Bidirectional Forwarding Detection (BFD) [RFC5880], combined
   with fast LSA generation, LSA prioritization, fast SPF triggering and
   an optimized SPF calculation (potentially combined with incremental
   SPF) would lead to a few dozens of milliseconds of convergence times.
   At the other end of the spectrum slow detection of failure, combined
   with low priority trigger of Link State Advertisement (LSA), poor
   implementation of the Shortest Path First (SPF) algorithm, long
   propagation delays, lack of LSA control plane packets may lead to
   covergence times of seconds!

   While convergence time is not the critical performance metric in many
   LLN deployments, the convergence time example provided above is one
   that illustrates the challenge of providing performance results.
   This challenge generally applies to most other performance metrics.

   As a result, the aim of this document is not to provide absolute
   performance numbers or parameter setting recommendations, but rather
   to share successful experience of the large scale deployment of RPL in
   a real-life deployment scenario.

   To that end, we first provide several network characteristics such as
   the network topology, distribution of the link quality providing the
   link quality distribution according to the Expected Transmission
   count (ETX) link metric computed by the RPL nodes.  Then we provide
   indications of how RPL was used in that particular network before
   showing several performance metrics observed in this network.


3.  RPL Paramaters Settings

   This RPL network includes the following parameter settings:

   o  The Mode of Operation (MoP) is set to non-storing mode.

   o  Both local and global repair mechanisms are implemented.  Note,
      however, because the network operates in non-storing mode, local
      repair simply poisons routes and does not create floating DAGs.

   o  MaxRankIncrease is set to 0, which significantly reduces the
      possibility of routing loops but also limits the capabilities of
      local repair.

   o  The OF is the Minimum Rank with Hysteresis Object Function using
      the ETX metric.







Vasseur, et al.          Expires January 3, 2013                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft    draft-hui-vasseur-roll-rpl-deployment        July 2012


4.  Network Characteristics

   This network comprises one thousand nodes and the distribution of the
   hop counts is shown is Figure 1. This has been obtained by observing    the topology (shown in Figure 2) for a period of 24 hours and tracking             
   the hop count of all the nodes every 5 minutes. It can be seen that   
   approximately 51% of the nodes are 1 hop away and 30% of nodes are 2  
   hops away on average. Another way of saying this is that approximately  
   81% of the nodes are 2 hops or less from the root. A snapshot of the  
   network topology (the DODAG built by RPL) is depicted in Figure 2.

   Figure 1: Distribution of average hop count of nodes observed over a 24-
   hour period.

   Figure 2: DODAG Topology built by RPL

   As with any LLN, one can observe that the some links are of good
   quality while others provides low path delivery rates: this can be
   seen by observing the link ETX in Figure 3.  Note that we observed
   transient periods during which the ETX was much higher with links
   providing even intermittent connectivity (which is not always
   reflected in the ETX value due to the computation of the ETX is using
   moving averages to avoid network oscillations and over-reactions).
   Figure 3 was obtained by observing all the nodes periodically for a 24   
   hour period. We tracked the maximum and minimum ETX seen by the node as  
   well. From the figure, we can see that almost 90% of the nodes  had an  
   average ETX of 1.25 or less over the 24 hour period.

   Figure 3: Distribution of average, maximum and minimum ETX observed 
   over a 24-hour period.

   The LLN routers communicate using IEEE 802.15.4g links.  Operating
   in the 902-928 MHz US ISM band, the links have an effective data rate
   of 75 kbps and employ frequency hopping to communicate across 64
   channels with 400 kHz channel spacing.

   In summary, it can be observed that the network is indeed a LLN, with
   lossy links.

   The network is made of constrained nodes with limited processing
   power and available memory.  The root slightly less constrained and
   main powered.

   It is worth pointing out that the high density of this topology added
   stress on the routing protocol.


5.  Performance Results

   As pointed out in Section 1, there is not a single performance metric
   that could be provided to characterize the routing protocol
   performance.

   Deep analysis of a number of network management events, logs on
   routers, and packet inspection operation have shown that the routing
   topology was quite stable even during unstable conditions.  More
   importantly the observed packet delivery rate was always above 99%:
   by contrast with non LLN networks where the routing protocol is
   rarely responsible for non packet delivery because of the absence of



Vasseur, et al.          Expires January 3, 2013                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft    draft-hui-vasseur-roll-rpl-deployment        July 2012


   routes to reach a destination, several LLN routing protocols have
   reported low delivery packet rates because of routing issues.  In
   this particular network, the packet delivery rate was as high as 99%
   in all cases (link local packet retransmissions were handled by the
   IEEE 802.15.4 reliable link layer).

   Since questions were raised in the past about the RPL control plane
   overhead although RPL has been designed for low overhead, we paid a
   particular attention to this performance metric.  RPL has been
   designed to optimize the control plane overhead (thanks to the use of
   Neighbor Unreachability Detection (NUD) instead of routing hello
   packet to detect link/node failure, use of trickle algorithm for the
   transmission of the DIO packets, ...).

   Thus we show in Figure 4 the RPL control traffic overhead (both the
   DIO and the DAO are shown in the network) relative to the available
   bandwidth provided by the links.  Note that the RPL control plane
   traffic was observed on the most congested area of the network (on
   the DODAG root).


6.  IANA Considerations

   No action is required from IANA.


7.  Security Considerations

   This document provides informational data about existing deployments,
   thus security considerations do not apply.


8.  Acknowledgements

   The authors would like to acknowledge the contributions of Ibrahim
   Mortada for his very valuable contribution.


9.  References

9.1.  Normative references

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC5226]  Narten, T. and H. Alvestrand, "Guidelines for Writing an
              IANA Considerations Section in RFCs", BCP 26, RFC 5226,
              May 2008.



Vasseur, et al.          Expires January 3, 2013                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft    draft-hui-vasseur-roll-rpl-deployment        July 2012


   [RFC6550]  Winter, T., Thubert, P., Brandt, A., Hui, J., Kelsey, R.,
              Levis, P., Pister, K., Struik, R., Vasseur, JP., and R.
              Alexander, "RPL: IPv6 Routing Protocol for Low-Power and
              Lossy Networks", RFC 6550, March 2012.

9.2.  Informative references

   [I-D.ietf-roll-minrank-hysteresis-of]
              Gnawali, O. and P. Levis, "The Minimum Rank with
              Hysteresis Objective Function",
              draft-ietf-roll-minrank-hysteresis-of-11 (work in
              progress), June 2012.

   [I-D.ietf-roll-terminology]
              Vasseur, J., "Terminology in Low power And Lossy
              Networks", draft-ietf-roll-terminology-06 (work in
              progress), September 2011.

   [RFC2328]  Moy, J., "OSPF Version 2", STD 54, RFC 2328, April 1998.

   [RFC5548]  Dohler, M., Watteyne, T., Winter, T., and D. Barthel,
              "Routing Requirements for Urban Low-Power and Lossy
              Networks", RFC 5548, May 2009.

   [RFC5673]  Pister, K., Thubert, P., Dwars, S., and T. Phinney,
              "Industrial Routing Requirements in Low-Power and Lossy
              Networks", RFC 5673, October 2009.

   [RFC5826]  Brandt, A., Buron, J., and G. Porcu, "Home Automation
              Routing Requirements in Low-Power and Lossy Networks",
              RFC 5826, April 2010.

   [RFC5867]  Martocci, J., De Mil, P., Riou, N., and W. Vermeylen,
              "Building Automation Routing Requirements in Low-Power and
              Lossy Networks", RFC 5867, June 2010.

   [RFC5880]  Katz, D. and D. Ward, "Bidirectional Forwarding Detection
              (BFD)", RFC 5880, June 2010.

   [RFC6206]  Levis, P., Clausen, T., Hui, J., Gnawali, O., and J. Ko,
              "The Trickle Algorithm", RFC 6206, March 2011.

   [RFC6551]  Vasseur, JP., Kim, M., Pister, K., Dejean, N., and D.
              Barthel, "Routing Metrics Used for Path Calculation in
              Low-Power and Lossy Networks", RFC 6551, March 2012.

   [RFC6552]  Thubert, P., "Objective Function Zero for the Routing
              Protocol for Low-Power and Lossy Networks (RPL)",



Vasseur, et al.          Expires January 3, 2013               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft    draft-hui-vasseur-roll-rpl-deployment        July 2012


              RFC 6552, March 2012.

   [RFC6553]  Hui, J. and JP. Vasseur, "The Routing Protocol for Low-
              Power and Lossy Networks (RPL) Option for Carrying RPL
              Information in Data-Plane Datagrams", RFC 6553,
              March 2012.

   [RFC6554]  Hui, J., Vasseur, JP., Culler, D., and V. Manral, "An IPv6
              Routing Header for Source Routes with the Routing Protocol
              for Low-Power and Lossy Networks (RPL)", RFC 6554,
              March 2012.


Authors' Addresses

   JP Vasseur (editor)
   Cisco Systems, Inc
   11, Rue Camille Desmoulins
   Issy Les Moulineaux,   92782
   France

   Email: jpv@cisco.com


   Jonathan Hui (editor)
   Cisco Systems, Inc
   560 McCarthy Blvd.
   MILPITAS, CALIFORNIA  95035
   UNITED STATES

   Email: johui@cisco.com


   Sukrit Dasgupta
   Cisco Systems, Inc
   300 Beaver Brook Road
   BOXBOROUGH, MASSACHUSETTS  01719
   UNITED STATES

   Email: sukdasgu@cisco.com











Vasseur, et al.          Expires January 3, 2013               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft    draft-hui-vasseur-roll-rpl-deployment        July 2012


   Giyoung Yoon
   Cisco Systems, Inc
   560 McCarthy Blvd.
   MILPITAS, CALIFORNIA  95035
   UNITED STATES

   Email: giyoon@cisco.com












































Vasseur, et al.          Expires January 3, 2013               [Page 12]

