A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3314

        Title:      Recommendations for IPv6 in Third Generation
                    Partnership Project (3GPP) Standards
        Author(s):  M. Wasserman, Ed.
        Status:     Informational
        Date:       September 2002
        Mailbox:    mrw@windriver.com
        Pages:      23
        Characters: 48168
        Updates/Obsoletes/SeeAlso:  None

        I-D Tag:    draft-ietf-ipv6-3gpp-recommend-02.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3314.txt


This document contains recommendations from the Internet
Engineering Task Force (IETF) IPv6 Working Group to the Third
Generation Partnership Project (3GPP) community regarding the use
of IPv6 in the 3GPP standards.  Specifically, this document
recommends that the 3GPP specify that multiple prefixes may be
assigned to each primary PDP context, require that a given prefix must
not be assigned to more than one primary PDP context, and allow 3GPP
nodes to use multiple identifiers within those prefixes, including
randomly generated identifiers.

The IPv6 Working Group supports the use of IPv6 within 3GPP and
offers these recommendations in a spirit of open cooperation
between the IPv6 Working Group and the 3GPP community.  Since the
original publication of this document as an Internet-Draft, the
3GPP has adopted the primary recommendations of this document.

This document is a product of the IP Version 6 Working Group Working
Group of the IETF.

This memo provides information for the Internet community.  It does
not specify an Internet standard of any kind.  Distribution of this
memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.

