A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3316

        Title:      Internet Protocol Version 6 (IPv6) for Some Second
                    and Third Generation Cellular Hosts
        Author(s):  J. Arkko, G. Kuijpers, H. Soliman, J. Loughney,
                    J. Wiljakka
        Status:     Informational
        Date:       April 2003
        Mailbox:    jari.arkko@ericsson.com,
                    gerben.a.kuijpers@ted.ericsson.se,
                    john.loughney@nokia.com,
                    hesham.soliman@era.ericsson.se,
                    juha.wiljakka@nokia.com
        Pages:      22
        Characters: 48741
        Updates/Obsoletes/SeeAlso: None

        I-D Tag:    draft-ietf-ipv6-cellular-host-03.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3316.txt


As the deployment of second and third generation cellular networks
progresses, a large number of cellular hosts are being connected to
the Internet.  Standardization organizations are making Internet
Protocol version 6 (IPv6) mandatory in their specifications.  However,
the concept of IPv6 covers many aspects and numerous specifications.
In addition, the characteristics of cellular links in terms of
bandwidth, cost and delay put special requirements on how IPv6 is
used.  This document considers IPv6 for cellular hosts that attach to
the General Packet Radio Service (GPRS), or Universal Mobile
Telecommunications System (UMTS) networks.  This document also lists
basic components of IPv6 functionality and discusses some issues
relating to the use of these components when operating in these
networks.

This document is a product of the IP Version 6 Working Group Working
Group of the IETF.

This memo provides information for the Internet community.  It does
not specify an Internet standard of any kind.  Distribution of this
memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.

