A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3484

        Title:      Default Address Selection for Internet Protocol
                    version 6 (IPv6)
        Author(s):  R. Draves
        Status:     Standards Track
        Date:       February 2003
        Mailbox:    richdr@microsoft.com
        Pages:      24
        Characters: 55076
        Updates/Obsoletes/SeeAlso:    None

        I-D Tag:    draft-ietf-ipv6-default-addr-select-09.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3484.txt


This document describes two algorithms, for source address selection
and for destination address selection.  The algorithms specify default
behavior for all Internet Protocol version 6 (IPv6) implementations.
They do not override choices made by applications or upper-layer
protocols, nor do they preclude the development of more advanced
mechanisms for address selection.  The two algorithms share a common
context, including an optional mechanism for allowing administrators
to provide policy that can override the default behavior.  In dual
stack implementations, the destination address selection algorithm can
consider both IPv4 and IPv6 addresses - depending on the available
source addresses, the algorithm might prefer IPv6 addresses over IPv4
addresses, or vice-versa.

All IPv6 nodes, including both hosts and routers, must implement
default address selection as defined in this specification.

This document is a product of the IP Version 6 Working Group of the
IETF.

This is now a Proposed Standard Protocol.

This document specifies an Internet standards track protocol for
the Internet community, and requests discussion and suggestions
for improvements.  Please refer to the current edition of the
"Internet Official Protocol Standards" (STD 1) for the
standardization state and status of this protocol.  Distribution
of this memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.
