A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3531

        Title:      A Flexible Method for Managing the Assignment of
                    Bits of an IPv6 Address Block
        Author(s):  M. Blanchet
        Status:     Informational
        Date:       April 2003
        Mailbox:    Marc.Blanchet@viagenie.qc.ca
        Pages:      7
        Characters: 11314
        Updates/Obsoletes/SeeAlso: None

        I-D Tag:    draft-ietf-ipv6-ipaddressassign-06.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3531.txt


This document proposes a method to manage the assignment of bits of
an IPv6 address block or range.  When an organisation needs to make
an address plan for its subnets or when an ISP needs to make an
address plan for its customers, this method enables the organisation
to postpone the final decision on the number of bits to partition in
the address space they have.  It does it by keeping the bits around
the borders of the partition to be free as long as possible.  This
scheme is applicable to any bits addressing scheme using bits with
partitions in the space, but its first intended use is for IPv6.  It
is a generalization of RFC 1219 and can be used for IPv6 assignments.

This document is a product of the IP Version 6 Working Group of the
IETF.

This memo provides information for the Internet community.  It does
not specify an Internet standard of any kind.  Distribution of this
memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.

