


Individual Submission                                      B. Patil, Ed.
Internet-Draft
Intended status: Informational                               S. Probasco
Expires: August 26, 2011                                        G. Bajko
                                                                   Nokia
                                                       February 22, 2011


     Protocol to Access White Space database: Problem statement and
                              Requirements
                    draft-patil-paws-problem-stmt-00

Abstract

   Governments around the world continue to search for new pieces of
   radio spectrum which can be used by the expanding wireless
   communications industry to provide Broadband Wireless Access (BWA).
   The concept of allowing secondary or unlicensed transmissions in
   frequencies occupied by a primary or licensed user is a technique to
   "unlock" existing spectrum for new use.  An obvious requirement is
   that these secondary or unlicensed transmissions do not interfere
   with the primary or licensed use of the spectrum.  The fundamental
   issue is how to determine for a specific location and specific time
   if any TV channels are available for unlicensed use, e.g. they are
   not being used for TV broadcast or by a wireless microphone.
   Academia and Industry have studied multiple cognitive radio enablers
   for use in such a scenario.  The methods of geolocation and database
   have been shown to achieve favorable results.  This document
   discusses the requirements and the problems that need to be addressed
   for enabling the use of white-space spectrum by obtaining information
   from a database.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 26, 2011.



Patil, et al.            Expires August 26, 2011                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft             PAWS: PS and Reqmts             February 2011


Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Terminology and Concepts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     2.1.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     2.2.  The concept of Cognitive Radio . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   3.  Background information on white space in US  . . . . . . . . .  5
   4.  Problem Statement  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     4.1.  Global applicability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     4.2.  Database discovery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     4.3.  Data model definition  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     4.4.  Security requirements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   5.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   6.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   7.  Summary and Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   8.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   9.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10

















Patil, et al.            Expires August 26, 2011                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft             PAWS: PS and Reqmts             February 2011


1.  Introduction

   Governments around the world continue to search for new pieces of
   radio spectrum which can be used by the expanding wireless
   communications industry to provide Broadband Wireless Access (BWA).
   One area which has received much attention globally is the TV white
   space: portions of the TV band that are not used by broadcasters.  In
   2008 the FCC took beginning steps when they published their first
   ruling on use of TV white space, and then followed up with a final
   ruling in 2010[FCC ruling].  Finland passed an Act in 2009 enabling
   testing of cognitive radio systems in the TV white space.  The ECC
   has completed Report 159 [ECC Report 159] containing requirements for
   operation of cognitive radio systems in the TV white space.  Ofcom
   published in 2004 their Spectrum Framework Review [Spectrum Framework
   Review] and their Digital Dividend Review [DDR] in 2005, and have
   followed up with a proposal to access TV white space.

   The concept of allowing secondary or unlicensed transmissions in
   frequencies occupied by a primary or licensed user is a technique to
   "unlock" existing spectrum for new use.  An obvious requirement is
   that these secondary or unlicensed transmissions do not interfere
   with the primary or licensed use of the spectrum.  The fundamental
   issue is how to determine for a specific location and specific time
   if any TV channels are available for unlicensed use, e.g. they are
   not being used for TV broadcast or by a wireless microphone.
   Academia and Industry have studied multiple cognitive radio enablers
   for use in such a scenario.  The methods of geolocation and database
   have been shown to achieve favorable results, and are thus the basis
   for rulings by the FCC and reports from ECC and Ofcom.  However, the
   two cognitive radio enablers of geolocation and database are a
   framework, not a complete solution.  There is a choice of which
   parameters and which algorithms to use in determining spectrum
   availability.  The ongoing challenge is to maximize the spectrum
   available for unlicensed use while at the same time ensuring no
   interference to the licensed use of the spectrum.

   In a typical implementation of geolocation and database to access TV
   white space, a radio is configured with its location in latitude and
   longitude.  There are multiple ways to configure this location
   information, e.g. programmed at installation (e.g. for a fixed
   device) or determined by GPS (e.g. for a or mobile device).  At
   power-on, before the device can transmit in TV white space
   frequencies, the device must contact a database, provide its
   geolocation and receive in return a list of unoccupied or "white
   space" channels.  The device can then select one of the channels from
   the list (note that it is possible they list is empty; there are no
   unoccupied channels at the location of the device) and then begins to
   transmit and receive on the selected channel.  The device must query



Patil, et al.            Expires August 26, 2011                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft             PAWS: PS and Reqmts             February 2011


   the database again for a list of unoccupied channels based on certain
   conditions, e.g. a fixed amount of time has passed, the device has
   changed location beyond a specified threshold.  The basic scenario is
   that before transmitting in TV white space, the device must get
   permission from the database.

   The low frequencies of the TV bands have good propagation
   characteristics.  At these low frequencies, a radio signal will
   travel ~3 times further than traditional WLAN at 2.5 GHz, assuming
   the same transmit power.  Because of these characteristics and new
   cognitive radio techniques, when TV white space is taken into use,
   this will enable new use cases and new business opportunities.  Not
   only is the capacity of new spectrum needed, but this propagation
   trait by itself makes TV white space attractive for providing BWA in
   rural, sparsely populated areas, and also for extended range home
   hot-spot coverage (similar to WLAN today, but with improved
   coverage).  In addition to propagation characteristics, the
   geolocation database will provide new capabilities for devices that
   use TV white space.  When a device using TV white space registers its
   location in the database, this simple act makes the location of the
   device available for location based services.

   This document discusses the requirements for accessing a database to
   obtain information that enables a device to operate/use the available
   channels at a given location.  It also identifies various issues that
   need to be addressed by the protocol between the device and database.


2.  Terminology and Concepts

2.1.  Terminology

   TV White Space

      TV white space refers specifically to radio spectrum which has
      been allocated for TV broadcast, but is not occupied by a TV
      broadcast, or other licensed user (such as a wireless microphone),
      at a specific location and time.

   White Space Device

      A white space device can be an access point, base station or a
      portable device.  Different classes of white space devices exist.
      Any device which plans to use the available spectrum to provide
      service/connectivity to others is required to contact a database
      to obtain information about available channels.





Patil, et al.            Expires August 26, 2011                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft             PAWS: PS and Reqmts             February 2011


   Database

      In the context of white space and cognitive radio technologies,
      the database is an entity which contains uptodate information
      about available spectrum at any given location, registered devices
      and other types of information.

   Cognitive Radio

      A cognitive radio uses knowledge of the local radio environment to
      dynamically adapt its own configuration and function properly in a
      changing radio environment.  A radio which is able to dynamically
      which frequency to use is one example of a cognitive radio.

2.2.  The concept of Cognitive Radio

   A cognitive radio uses knowledge of the local radio environment to
   dynamically adapt its own configuration and function properly in a
   changing radio environment.  Knowledge of the local radio environment
   can come from various technology enablers including location
   determination and internet connectivity to a database to learn the
   details of the local radio environment.  Cognitive radio technology
   can be used for all available portions of spectrum, even those within
   bands dedicated to a Primary use like TV or satellite.  TV White
   Space is one implementation of cognitive radio.  Because a cognitive
   radio adapts itself to the available spectrum in a manner that
   prevents the creation of harmful interference, the spectrum can be
   shared among different radio users.


3.  Background information on white space in US

   Television transmission in the United States has moved to the use of
   digital signals as of June 12, 2009.  Since June 13, 2009, all full-
   power U.S. television stations have broadcast over-the-air signals in
   digital only.  An important benefit of the switch to all-digital
   broadcasting is that it freed up parts of the valuable broadcast
   spectrum.  More information about the switch to digital transmission
   is at : [DTV].

   With the switch to digital transmission for TV, the guard bands that
   existed to protect the signals between stations can now be used for
   other purposes.  The FCC has made this spectrum available for
   unlicensed use and this is generally refered to as white space.
   Please see the details of the FCC ruling and regulations in [FCC
   ruling].  The spectrum can be used to provide wireless broadband as
   an example.  The term "Super-Wifi" is also used to describe this
   spectrum and potential for providing wifi type of service.



Patil, et al.            Expires August 26, 2011                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft             PAWS: PS and Reqmts             February 2011


   Efforts are ongoing to specify air-interfaces for use in white space
   spectrum.  IEEEs 802.11af task group is currently working on one such
   specification.  IEEE 802.22 is another example.  Other air interfaces
   could be specified in the future such as LTE.


4.  Problem Statement

   The use of white space spectrum is enabled via the capability of a
   device to query a database and obtain information about the
   availability of spectrum/channels for use at a given location.  The
   databases are reachable via the Internet and the devices querying
   these databases are expected to have some form of Internet
   connectivity.  The databases are also country specific since the
   available spectrum and regulations may vary.

   An example high-level architecture of the devices and white space
   databases is shown in the figure below:



           -----------
           |WS Device|                              ------------
           |Lat: X   |\           .---.    /--------|Database X|
           |Long: Y  | \         (     )  /         ------------
           -----------  \-------/       \/               o
                              ( Internet )               o
           -----------  /------(        )\               o
           |WS Device| /         (_____)  \         ------------
           |Lat: X   |/                    \--------|Database Y|
           |Long: Y  |                              ------------
           -----------


    Figure 1: High level view of the White space database architecture

   In the figure above, note that there could be multiple databases
   serving white space devices.  The databases are country specific
   since the regulations and available spectrum may vary.

   A messaging interface between the white space devices and the
   database is required for operating a network using the white space
   spectrum.  The following sections discuss various aspects of such an
   interface and the need for a standard.







Patil, et al.            Expires August 26, 2011                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft             PAWS: PS and Reqmts             February 2011


4.1.  Global applicability

   The use of TV white space spectrum is currently approved by the FCC
   in the United States.  However regulatory bodies in other countries
   are also considering similar use of available spectrum.  The
   principles of cognitive radio usage for such spectrum is generally
   the same.  Some of the regulatory details may vary on a country
   specific basis.  But the need for devices that intend to use the
   spectrum to communicate with a regulatory database remains a common
   feature.

   Devices need to be able to query a database which are accessible via
   the Internet prior to operating in available spectrum.  Information
   about available spectrum, channels, power, etc. are provided by the
   database as a response to the query from a device.  The messaging
   interface needs to be:

   1.  Radio/air interface agnostic - The radio/air interface technology
       used by the white space device in available spectrum can be
       802.11af, 802.16, 802.22, LTE etc.  However the messaging
       interface between the white space device and the database should
       be agnostic to the air interface while being cognizant of the
       characteristics of various air-interface technologies and the
       need to include relevant attributes in the query to the database.

   2.  Globally applicable - A common messaging interface between white
       space devices and databases will enable the use of such spectrum
       for various purposes on a global basis.  Devices can operate in
       any country where such spectrum is available and a common
       interface ensures uniformity in implementations and deployment.

   3.  Address regulatory requirements - Each country will likely have
       regulations that are unique to that country.  The messaging
       interface needs to be flexible to accomodate the specific needs
       of a regulatory body in the country where the white space device
       is operating and connecting to the relevant database.

4.2.  Database discovery

   Another aspect of the problem space is the need to discover the
   database.  A white space device needs to find the relevant database
   to query based on its current location or for another location.
   Since the spectrum and databases are country specific, the device
   will need to discover the relevant database.  The device needs to
   obtain the IP address of the specific database to which it can send
   queries in addition to registering itself for operation and using the
   available spectrum.




Patil, et al.            Expires August 26, 2011                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft             PAWS: PS and Reqmts             February 2011


   A database discovery mechanism needs to be specified.  Reuse of
   existing mechanisms is an option and could be adapted for meeting the
   specific needs of cognitive radio technology.

4.3.  Data model definition

   The contents of the queries and response need to be specified.  A
   data model is required which enables the white space device to query
   the database while including all the relevant information such as
   geolocation, radio technology, power characteristics, etc.  All
   databases are able to interpret the data model and respond to the
   queries using the same data model that is understood by all devices.

   Use of XML for specifying a data model is an option.  The intent is
   to evaluate the best option that meets the need for use between white
   space devices and databases.

4.4.  Security requirements

   The messaging interface between the white space device and the
   database needs to be secured.  Both the queries and the responses
   need to be delivered securely.  The messages need to be protected
   from eavesdropping as well as ensuring that the message content is
   not modfified between the end points.  The queries and responses need
   to be integrity protected in addition to ciphering.

   Man-in-the-middle attacks could modify the content of a response
   which can cause problems for other networks or devices operating at a
   given location.  Interference as well as total loss of service could
   result from malicious information being delivered to a white space
   device.

   White space devices may also be required to authenticate and register
   with a database prior to using it.  An authentication mechanism needs
   to be specified for use in the context of this problem space.


5.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no requests to IANA.


6.  Security Considerations

   There are security aspects that need to be addressed by any solution
   for the problem identified in this document.  This Internet draft is
   describing the requirements and problems that need to be addressed
   for a messaging interface between white space devices and databases



Patil, et al.            Expires August 26, 2011                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft             PAWS: PS and Reqmts             February 2011


   and does not by itself raise any security concerns.


7.  Summary and Conclusion

   Cognitive radio and TV white space technology is now in the process
   of being approved by regulatory bodies around the world.  In the US
   the FCC has already created the regulation and approved a set of
   database administrators.  The interface between the white space
   devices and databases is over the Internet and uses IP connectivity.
   The IETF can create a common standard for use on a global basis for
   this interface.  The IETF also has the general expertise in this area
   since most of the protocols used on this Interface are ones that have
   been developed in the IETF.

   In summary, this document explains the requirements and issues that
   need to be dealt with in specifying an interface between the white
   space devices and databases.  The authors strongly believe that this
   interface specification should be undertaken in the IETF within the
   relevant area by creating a working group.


8.  Acknowledgements

   The authors thank Subir Das and Tom Derryberry for their comments and
   input.


9.  Informative References

   [DDR]      Ofcom - Independent regulator and competition authority
              for the UK communications industries, "Digital Dividend
              Review; http://stakeholders.ofcom.org.uk/spectrum/
              project-pages/ddr/".

   [DTV]      "Digital TV Transition; http://www.dtv.gov".

   [ECC Report 159]
              Electronic Communications Committee (ECC) within the
              European Conference of Postal and Telecommunications
              Administrations (CEPT), "TECHNICAL AND OPERATIONAL
              REQUIREMENTS FOR THE POSSIBLE OPERATION OF COGNITIVE RADIO
              SYSTEMS IN THE 'WHITE SPACES' OF THE FREQUENCY BAND 470-
              590 MHZ; http://www.erodocdb.dk/Docs/doc98/official/pdf/
              ECCREP159.PDF", January 2011.

   [FCC ruling]
              Federal Communications Commission, "Unlicensed Operation



Patil, et al.            Expires August 26, 2011                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft             PAWS: PS and Reqmts             February 2011


              in the TV Broadcast Bands;
              http://edocket.access.gpo.gov/2010/pdf/2010-30184.pdf",
              December 2010.

   [Spectrum Framework Review]
              Ofcom - Independent regulator and competition authority
              for the UK communications industries, "Spectrum Framework
              Review;
              http://stakeholders.ofcom.org.uk/consultations/sfr/",
              February 2005.


Authors' Addresses

   Basavaraj Patil (editor)
   6021 Connection drive
   Irving, TX  75039
   USA

   Email: basavaraj.patil@nokia.com


   Scott Probasco
   Nokia
   6021 Connection drive
   Irving, TX  75039
   USA

   Email: scott.probasco@nokia.com


   Gabor Bajko
   Nokia
   323 Fairchild drive 6
   Mountain view, CA  94043
   USA

   Email: gabor.bajko@nokia.com













Patil, et al.            Expires August 26, 2011               [Page 10]


