


Mobile Ad hoc Networks Working Group                          C. Perkins
Internet-Draft                                                 Futurewei
Intended status: Standards Track                             I. Chakeres
Expires: April 26, 2013                                           CenGen
                                                        October 23, 2012


     Intermediate RREP for dynamic MANET On-demand (AODVv2) Routing
                         draft-perkins-irrep-01

Abstract

   The Dynamic MANET On-demand (AODVv2) routing protocol is intended for
   use by mobile routers in wireless, multihop networks.  AODVv2
   determines unicast routes among AODVv2 routers within the network in
   an on-demand fashion, offering on-demand convergence in dynamic
   topologies.  This document specifies an extension to AODVv2 (and
   possibly other reactive routing protocols) enabling intermediate
   nodes to shorten route discovery times.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 26, 2013.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2012 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must



Perkins & Chakeres       Expires April 26, 2013                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft              Intermediate RREP               October 2012


   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Overview  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   3.  Intermediate AODVv2 Router RREP Creation  . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   4.  Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   5.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   6.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
     6.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
     6.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6



































Perkins & Chakeres       Expires April 26, 2013                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft              Intermediate RREP               October 2012


1.  Overview

   The Dynamic MANET On-demand (AODVv2) routing protocol enables on-
   demand, multihop unicast routing among participating AODVv2 routers.
   The basic operations of the AODVv2 protocol are route discovery and
   route maintenance.  Route discovery is performed by an AODVv2 router
   when one of its clients transmits a packet towards a destination for
   which the router does not have a route.  Route maintenance is
   performed to help ensure that the route being used to forward packets
   from the source to the destination remains operational.

   During route discovery, the originator's AODVv2 router initiates
   flooding of a Route Request (RREQ) throughout the network to find a
   route to a particular destination, via the AODVv2 router responsible
   for this destination.  During this hop-by-hop flooding process, each
   intermediate AODVv2 router records a route to the originator.  If the
   intermediate router has a route to the destination requested in the
   RREQ, it may by following the specification in this document supply
   that routing information to the originator of the RREQ.  Such an RREP
   message is termed an "Intermediate RREP" (iRREP).  The Intermediate
   router also forwards another RREP message to the requested
   destination, supplying the destination and other intermediate routers
   with a route towards the originator of the RREQ.  When the
   originator's AODVv2 router receives the iRREP, and the destination
   receives iRREP for the originator, routes have then been established
   between the originating AODVv2 router and the target AODVv2 router in
   both directions.


2.  Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in
   [RFC2119].  Additionally, this document uses some terminology from
   [RFC5444] and [I-D.ietf-manet-dymo], duplicated here for convenience.

   AODVv2 Sequence Number (SeqNum)
      An AODVv2 Sequence Number is maintained by each AODVv2 router
      process.  This sequence number is used by other AODVv2 routers to
      identify the temporal order of routing information generated and
      ensure loop-free routes.

   Router Client
      An AODVv2 router may be configured with a list of other IP
      addresses and networks which correspond to other non-router nodes
      which require the services of the AODVv2 router for route
      discovery and maintenance.  An AODVv2 is always its own client, so



Perkins & Chakeres       Expires April 26, 2013                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft              Intermediate RREP               October 2012


      that the list of client IP addresses is never empty. corresponds
      to the AODVv2 router process currently performing a calculation or
      processing a message.

   Originating Node (OrigNode)
      The originating node is the source, its AODVv2 router creates a
      AODVv2 control message on its behalf in an effort to flood some
      routing information.  The originating node is also referred to as
      a particular message's originator.

   Route Reply (RREP)
      A RREP message is used to flood routing information about the RREP
      TargetNode to the RREP OrigNode and the AODVv2 routers between
      them.

   Route Request (RREQ)
      A RREQ message is used to discover a valid route to a particular
      destination address, called the RREQ TargetNode.  When an AODVv2
      router processes a RREQ, it learns routing information on how to
      reach the RREQ OrigNode.

   Target Node (TargetNode)
      The TargetNode is the ultimate destination of a data packet.

   This Node (ThisNode)
      ThisNode corresponds to the AODVv2 router process currently
      performing a calculation or processing a message.


3.  Intermediate AODVv2 Router RREP Creation

   Sometimes an AODVv2 router other than the TargetNode's AODVv2 router
   (call it an "intermediate AODVv2 router") has routing information
   that can satisfy an incoming RREQ.  An intermediate AODVv2 router can
   issue a intermediate AODVv2 router RREP on behalf of the TargetNode's
   AODVv2 router.

   If ThisNode is not the TargetNode, and the RREQ contains the
   TargetNode.AddTLV.SeqNum, and ThisNode has a forwarding route to the
   TargetNode with a SeqNum satisfying Route.TargetNode.SeqNum >
   RREQ.TargetNode.AddTLV.SeqNum (using signed 16-bit arithmetic); then
   ThisNode MAY respond with an intermediate AODVv2 router RREP (iRREP).
   When an intermediate AODVv2 router creates a iRREP in response to a
   RREQ on behalf of the TargetNode's AODVv2 router, it transmits the
   iRREP to the RREQ OrigNode with additional routing information
   (Address, Prefix, SeqNum, Dist, etc.) about the RREQ TargetNode.
   After an AODVv2 router sends iRREP, it need not perform any more
   operations for the RREQ being processed.



Perkins & Chakeres       Expires April 26, 2013                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft              Intermediate RREP               October 2012


   The Intermediate AODVv2 router SHOULD also issue a RREP to the RREQ
   TargetNode, so that the RREQ TargetNode receives routing information
   on how to reach the RREQ OrigNode.


4.  Acknowledgments

   TBD


5.  Security Considerations

   If AODVv2 RREP messages are not secured, then the threats are the
   same.  Otherwise, the ability of intermediate nodes to issue RREP on
   behalf of a destination node changes the security vulnerability of an
   ad hoc network.  In that case, then the originator and TargetNode of
   the RREQ may need to maintain security associations with additional
   nodes in the ad hoc network in order to verify iRREP.  Doing this
   depends on the exact nature of the method by which the control
   messages are made secure, and is beyond the scope of this document.


6.  References

6.1.  Normative References

   [I-D.ietf-manet-dymo]
              Perkins, C. and I. Chakeres, "Dynamic MANET On-demand
              (AODVv2) Routing", draft-ietf-manet-dymo-22 (work in
              progress), March 2012.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC5444]  Clausen, T., Dearlove, C., Dean, J., and C. Adjih,
              "Generalized Mobile Ad Hoc Network (MANET) Packet/Message
              Format", RFC 5444, February 2009.

6.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.clausen-lln-loadng]
              Clausen, T., Verdiere, A., Yi, J., Niktash, A., Igarashi,
              Y., Satoh, H., Herberg, U., Lavenu, C., Lys, T., and C.
              Perkins, "The LLN On-demand Ad hoc Distance-vector Routing
              Protocol - Next Generation (LOADng)",
              draft-clausen-lln-loadng-05 (work in progress), July 2012.

   [RFC3561]  Perkins, C., Belding-Royer, E., and S. Das, "Ad hoc On-



Perkins & Chakeres       Expires April 26, 2013                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft              Intermediate RREP               October 2012


              Demand Distance Vector (AODV) Routing", RFC 3561,
              July 2003.


Authors' Addresses

   Charles E. Perkins
   Futurewei Inc.
   3300 Central Expressway
   Santa Clara, CA  95053
   USA

   Phone: +1-408-330-5305
   Email: charliep@computer.org


   Ian D Chakeres
   CenGen
   9250 Bendix Road North
   Columbia, Maryland  21045
   USA

   Email: ian.chakeres@gmail.com
   URI:   http://www.ianchak.com/



























Perkins & Chakeres       Expires April 26, 2013                 [Page 6]


