


Mobile Ad hoc Networks Working Group                          C. Perkins
Internet-Draft                                                 Futurewei
Intended status: Standards Track                             I. Chakeres
Expires: January 11, 2013                                         CenGen
                                                           July 10, 2012


     Intermediate RREP for dynamic MANET On-demand (AODVv2) Routing
                         draft-perkins-irrep-00

Abstract

   The Dynamic MANET On-demand (AODVv2) routing protocol is intended for
   use by mobile routers in wireless, multihop networks.  AODVv2
   determines unicast routes among AODVv2 routers within the network in
   an on-demand fashion, offering on-demand convergence in dynamic
   topologies.  This document specifies an extension to AODVv2 (and
   possibly other reactive routing protocols) enabling intermediate
   nodes to shorten route discovery times.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 11, 2013.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2012 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must



Perkins & Chakeres      Expires January 11, 2013                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft              Intermediate RREP                  July 2012


   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Overview  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   3.  Intermediate AODVv2 Router RREP Creation  . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   4.  Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   5.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   6.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
     6.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
     6.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6



































Perkins & Chakeres      Expires January 11, 2013                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft              Intermediate RREP                  July 2012


1.  Overview

   The Dynamic MANET On-demand (AODVv2) routing protocol enables on-
   demand, multihop unicast routing among participating AODVv2 routers.
   The basic operations of the AODVv2 protocol are route discovery and
   route maintenance.  Route discovery is performed when an AODVv2
   router receives a packet from a node under its responsibility to a
   destination for which it does not have a route.  Route maintenance is
   performed to help ensure that the route being used to forward packets
   from the source to the destination remains operational.

   During route discovery, the originator's AODVv2 router initiates
   dissemination of a Route Request (RREQ) throughout the network to
   find a route to a particular destination, via the AODVv2 router
   responsible for this destination.  During this hop-by-hop
   dissemination process, each intermediate AODVv2 router records a
   route to the originator.  If the intermediate router has a route to
   the destination requested in the RREQ, it may by following the
   specification in this document supply that routing information to the
   originator of the RREQ.  Such an RREP message is termed an
   "Intermediate RREP" (iRREP).  The Intermediate router also forwards
   another RREP message to the requested destination, supplying the
   destination and other intermediate routers with a route towards the
   originator of the RREQ.  When the originator's AODVv2 router receives
   the iRREP, and the destination receives iRREP for the originator,
   routes have then been established between the originating AODVv2
   router and the target AODVv2 router in both directions.


2.  Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].
   Additionally, this document uses some terminology from [RFC5444] and
   [I-D.ietf-manet-dymo], duplicated here for convenience.

   AODVv2 Sequence Number (SeqNum)
      An AODVv2 Sequence Number is maintained by each AODVv2 router
      process.  This sequence number is used by other AODVv2 routers to
      identify the temporal order of routing information generated and
      ensure loop-free routes.

   Originating Node (OrigNode)
      The originating node is the source, its AODVv2 router creates a
      AODVv2 control message on its behalf in an effort to disseminate
      some routing information.  The originating node is also referred
      to as a particular message's originator.



Perkins & Chakeres      Expires January 11, 2013                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft              Intermediate RREP                  July 2012


   Route Reply (RREP)
      A RREP message is used to disseminate routing information about
      the RREP TargetNode to the RREP OrigNode and the AODVv2 routers
      between them.

   Route Request (RREQ)
      A RREQ message is used to discover a valid route to a particular
      destination address, called the RREQ TargetNode.  When an AODVv2
      router processes a RREQ, it learns routing information on how to
      reach the RREQ OrigNode.

   Target Node (TargetNode)
      The TargetNode is the ultimate destination of a message.

   This Node (ThisNode)
      ThisNode corresponds to the AODVv2 router process currently
      performing a calculation or attending to a message.


3.  Intermediate AODVv2 Router RREP Creation

   Sometimes an AODVv2 router other than the TargetNode's AODVv2 router
   (call it an "intermediate AODVv2 router") has routing information
   that can satisfy an incoming RREQ.  An intermediate AODVv2 router can
   issue a intermediate AODVv2 router RREP on behalf of the TargetNode's
   AODVv2 router.

   Before creating a intermediate AODVv2 router RREP, OwnSeqNum SHOULD
   be incremented by one (1) according to the rules specified in
   [I-D.ietf-manet-dymo].

   If OwnSeqNum is not incremented the routing information about
   ThisNode might be considered stale by a handling AODVv2 router.  In
   this case, the RREP would not reach the RREP TargetNode.

   When an intermediate AODVv2 router originates a RREP in response to a
   RREQ on behalf of the TargetNode's AODVv2 router, it sends the RREP
   to the RREQ OrigNode with additional routing information (Address,
   Prefix, SeqNum, Dist, etc.) about the RREQ TargetNode.

   The Intermediate AODVv2 router SHOULD also issue a RREP to the RREQ
   TargetNode, so that the RREQ TargetNode receives routing information
   on how to reach the RREQ OrigNode.

   When an intermediate AODVv2 router creates this RREP, it sends a RREP
   to the RREQ TargetNode with additional routing information (Address,
   Prefix, SeqNum, Dist, etc.) about the RREQ OrigNode.




Perkins & Chakeres      Expires January 11, 2013                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft              Intermediate RREP                  July 2012


4.  Acknowledgments

   TBD


5.  Security Considerations

   The ability of intermediate nodes to issue RREP on behalf of a
   destination node does not significantly add to the security
   vulnerability of an ad hoc network.  If the routing control messages
   are not secured, then the threats are exactly the same.  If the
   routing control messages are secured, then the originator of the RREP
   may need to maintain security associations with additional nodes in
   the ad hoc network in order to verify iRREP, but this depends on the
   exact nature of the method by which the control messages are made
   secure.  That is beyond the scope of this document.


6.  References

6.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC5444]  Clausen, T., Dearlove, C., Dean, J., and C. Adjih,
              "Generalized Mobile Ad Hoc Network (MANET) Packet/Message
              Format", RFC 5444, February 2009.

6.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.clausen-lln-loadng]
              Clausen, T., Verdiere, A., Yi, J., Niktash, A., Igarashi,
              Y., Satoh, H., Herberg, U., Lavenu, C., and T. Lys, "The
              LLN On-demand Ad hoc Distance-vector Routing Protocol -
              Next Generation (LOADng)", draft-clausen-lln-loadng-04
              (work in progress), April 2012.

   [I-D.ietf-manet-dymo]
              Perkins, C. and I. Chakeres, "Dynamic MANET On-demand
              (AODVv2) Routing", draft-ietf-manet-dymo-22 (work in
              progress), March 2012.

   [RFC3561]  Perkins, C., Belding-Royer, E., and S. Das, "Ad hoc On-
              Demand Distance Vector (AODV) Routing", RFC 3561,
              July 2003.





Perkins & Chakeres      Expires January 11, 2013                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft              Intermediate RREP                  July 2012


Authors' Addresses

   Charles E. Perkins
   Futurewei Inc.
   3300 Central Expressway
   Santa Clara, CA  95053
   USA

   Phone:  +1-408-421-1172 
   Email: charliep@computer.org


   Ian D Chakeres
   CenGen
   9250 Bendix Road North
   Columbia, Maryland  21045
   USA

   Email: ian.chakeres@gmail.com
   URI:   http://www.ianchak.com/































Perkins & Chakeres      Expires January 11, 2013                [Page 6]


