


Mobile Ad hoc Networks Working Group                          C. Perkins
Internet-Draft                                                 Futurewei
Intended status: Standards Track                           July 14, 2012
Expires: January 15, 2013


  Precursor Notification for dynamic MANET On-demand (AODVv2) Routing
                    draft-perkins-manet-precursor-01

Abstract

   The Dynamic MANET On-demand (AODVv2) routing protocol is intended for
   use by mobile routers in wireless, multihop networks.  AODVv2
   determines unicast routes among AODVv2 routers within the network in
   an on-demand fashion, offering on-demand convergence in dynamic
   topologies.  This document specifies a simple modification to AODVv2
   (and possibly other reactive routing protocols) enabling faster
   notifications to known sources of traffic upon determination that a
   route for such traffic's destination has become invalid.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 15, 2013.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2012 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must



Perkins                 Expires January 15, 2013                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft           Precursor Notification                July 2012


   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Overview  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   3.  Precursor Notification  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   4.  Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   5.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   6.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
     6.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
     6.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6



































Perkins                 Expires January 15, 2013                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft           Precursor Notification                July 2012


1.  Overview

   If an AODVv2 router, while attempting to forward a packet to a
   particular destination, determines that the next hop (one of its
   neighbors) is no longer reachable, AODVv2 specifies that the router
   notify the source of that packet that the route to the destination
   has become invalid.  In the existing specification, the notification
   to the source is a unicast RERR message.

   However, in many cases there will be several sources of of traffic
   for that particular destination.  In fact, the broken link for the
   next hop in question may be a path component of numerous other routes
   for other destinations, and in that case the node detecting the
   broken link must invalidate multiple routes, one for each of the
   newly unreachable destinations.  Each route that uses the newly
   broken link is no longer valid.  For each such route, every node
   along the way from the source using that route, to the node detecting
   the broken link, is known as a "precursor" for the broken next hop.
   All the precursors for a particular next hop should be notified about
   the change in status of their route to a destination downstream from
   the broken next hop.  This can be done in several ways.


2.  Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].
   Additionally, this document uses some terminology from [RFC5444] and
   [I-D.ietf-manet-dymo], duplicated here for convenience.

   AODVv2 Sequence Number (SeqNum)
      An AODVv2 Sequence Number is maintained by each AODVv2 router
      process.  This sequence number is used by other AODVv2 routers to
      identify the temporal order of routing information generated and
      ensure loop-free routes.

   Originating Node (OrigNode)
      The originating node is the source, its AODVv2 router creates a
      AODVv2 control message on its behalf in an effort to disseminate
      some routing information.  The originating node is also referred
      to as a particular message's originator.

   Route Reply (RREP)
      A RREP message is used to disseminate routing information about
      the RREP TargetNode to the RREP OrigNode and the AODVv2 routers
      between them.




Perkins                 Expires January 15, 2013                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft           Precursor Notification                July 2012


   Route Request (RREQ)
      A RREQ message is used to discover a valid route to a particular
      destination address, called the RREQ TargetNode.  When an AODVv2
      router processes a RREQ, it learns routing information on how to
      reach the RREQ OrigNode.

   Target Node (TargetNode)
      The TargetNode is the ultimate destination of a message.

   This Node (ThisNode)
      ThisNode corresponds to the AODVv2 router process currently
      performing a calculation or attending to a message.


3.  Precursor Notification

   During normal operation, each node wishing to enable the improved
   notification for precursors of any links to its next hop neighbors
   has to keep track of the precursors.  This is done by maintaining a
   precursor table and updating the table whenever the node initiates or
   relays a RREP message back to a node originating a RREQ message.
   When the node transmits the RREP message, it is implicitly agreeing
   to forward traffic from the RREQ originator towards the RREP
   originator (i.e., along the next hop link to the neighbor from which
   the RREP was received).  The "other" next hop, which is the neighbor
   along the way towards the originator of the RREQ message, is then the
   next precursor for the route towards the destination requested by the
   RREQ.

   Each such precursor should then be recorded as a precursor for a
   route along the next hop.  The same next hop may be in service for
   routes to multiple destinations, but for precursor list management it
   is only important to keep track of precursors for a particular next
   hop; the exact destination does not matter, only the particular next
   hop towards the destination(s).

   When a node observes that one of its neighbors is no longer
   reachable, the node first checks to see whether the link to that
   neighbor is a next hop for any more distant destination in its route
   table.  If not, then the node simply updates any relevant neighorhood
   information and takes no further action.

   Otherwise, for all destinations no longer reachable because of the
   changed status of the next hop, the node first checks to see whether
   the link to that neighbor is a next hop for any more distant
   destination in its route table.  If not, then the node simply updates
   any relevant neighorhood information and takes no further action.




Perkins                 Expires January 15, 2013                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft           Precursor Notification                July 2012


   For each precursor of the next hop, the node MAY notify the precursor
   in one of three ways:

   o  unicast RERR

   o  broadcast RERR

   o  multicast RERR to multicast group PRECURSOR_RERR_RECEIVERS

   Each precursor then MAY execute the same procedure until all affected
   traffic sources have received the RERR route maintenance information.

   When a precursor receives a unicast RERR, the precursor MUST further
   unicast the RERR message towards the affected traffic source.  If a
   precursor receives a broadcast or multicast RERR, the precursor MAY
   further retransmit the RERR towards the traffic source.


4.  Acknowledgments

   TBD


5.  Security Considerations

   The ability of to use broadcast instead of unicast can in some cases
   cause additional network traffic.  This would happen when many
   traffic sources were never going to re-use a particular route, and
   yet were receiving essentially useless notifications about that
   route.  It remains to be determined whether such scenarios, where
   route tables have significant numbers of useless routes, would be
   encountered in practice.


6.  References

6.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC5444]  Clausen, T., Dearlove, C., Dean, J., and C. Adjih,
              "Generalized Mobile Ad Hoc Network (MANET) Packet/Message
              Format", RFC 5444, February 2009.







Perkins                 Expires January 15, 2013                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft           Precursor Notification                July 2012


6.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.ietf-manet-dymo]
              Perkins, C. and I. Chakeres, "Dynamic MANET On-demand
              (AODVv2) Routing", draft-ietf-manet-dymo-22 (work in
              progress), March 2012.

   [RFC3561]  Perkins, C., Belding-Royer, E., and S. Das, "Ad hoc On-
              Demand Distance Vector (AODV) Routing", RFC 3561,
              July 2003.


Author's Address

   Charles E. Perkins
   Futurewei Inc.
   2330 Central Expressway
   Santa Clara, CA  95050
   USA

   Phone:  +1-408-421-1172 
   Email: charliep@computer.org





























Perkins                 Expires January 15, 2013                [Page 6]


