


Internet Engineering Task Force                                   X. Cui
Internet-Draft                                                    Huawei
Obsoletes: 5136 (if approved)                           October 16, 2010
Intended status: Informational
Expires: April 19, 2011


                       Defining Network Capacity
                      draft-cui-ippm-rfc5136bis-00

Abstract

   This document defines the metric of network capacity, including link
   capacity aspect, router capacity aspect and path capacity aspect.
   RFC5136 has defined link capacity and path capacity, where the router
   impact is implicitly considered in link capacity.  However, in this
   document, router capacity is considerred as a separate factor of path
   capacity, no longer a factor of link capacity.  This document
   explicitly describes the router capacity and its impact to network
   capacity, e.g. how to evaluate path capacity.

   This document is derived from RFC5136 and obsoletes RFC5136.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 19, 2011.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of



Cui                      Expires April 19, 2011                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft              Network Capacity                October 2010


   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     1.1.  Overview of Capacity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     1.2.  Requirements Language  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   2.  Definitions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     2.1.  Component Definitions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
       2.1.1.  Node . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
       2.1.2.  Non-IP-Node  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
       2.1.3.  Host . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
       2.1.4.  Router . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
       2.1.5.  Link . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
       2.1.6.  Path . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     2.2.  Definition: Nominal Physical Capacity  . . . . . . . . . .  8
     2.3.  Capacity at the IP Layer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
       2.3.1.  Definition: IP-layer Bits  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
       2.3.2.  Definition: IP-type-P Link Capacity  . . . . . . . . . 10
       2.3.3.  Definition: IP-type-P Link Usage . . . . . . . . . . . 12
       2.3.4.  Definition: IP-type-P Link Utilization . . . . . . . . 12
       2.3.5.  Definition: IP-type-P Available Link Capacity  . . . . 12
       2.3.6.  Definition: IP-type-P Router Capacity  . . . . . . . . 12
       2.3.7.  Definition: IP-type-P Router Usage . . . . . . . . . . 13
       2.3.8.  Definition: IP-type-P Router Utilization . . . . . . . 14
       2.3.9.  Definition: IP-type-P Available Router Capacity  . . . 14
       2.3.10. Definition: IP-type-P Path Capacity  . . . . . . . . . 14
       2.3.11. Definition: IP-type-P Available Path Capacity  . . . . 16
   3.  Changes from RFC5136 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
     3.1.  Node Definition  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
     3.2.  Link Definition  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
     3.3.  Path Definition  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
     3.4.  Definition: Nominal Physical Capacity  . . . . . . . . . . 18
     3.5.  IP-type-P Link Capacity  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
     3.6.  IP-type-P Router Capacity  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
     3.7.  IP-type-P Router Usage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
     3.8.  IP-type-P Router Utilization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
     3.9.  IP-type-P Available Router Capacity  . . . . . . . . . . . 21
     3.10. IP-type-P Path Capacity  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
     3.11. IP-type-P Available Path Capacity  . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
   4.  Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
     4.1.  Time and Sampling  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23



Cui                      Expires April 19, 2011                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft              Network Capacity                October 2010


     4.2.  Hardware Duplicates  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
     4.3.  Other Potential Factors  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
     4.4.  Common Terminology in Literature . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
     4.5.  Comparison to Bulk Transfer Capacity (BTC) . . . . . . . . 25
   5.  Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
   6.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
   7.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
   8.  Acknowledgments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
   9.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
     9.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
     9.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
   Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28







































Cui                      Expires April 19, 2011                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft              Network Capacity                October 2010


1.  Introduction

   The IPPM working group has defined a framework for IP Performance
   Metrics [RFC2330] and a set of IP Performance Metrics, such as One-
   way Delay Metric [RFC2679], Packet Delay Variation Metric [RFC3393]
   and Network Capacity Metric [RFC5136].

   Network capacity, which is defined in [RFC5136], is one of the most
   important IP Performance Metrics in internet.  In [RFC5136], network
   capacity consists of link capacity, path capacity, link usage, link
   utilization, available link capacity and available path capacity.
   [RFC5136] also introduces the definitions, measurement and
   calculation methods and some important formulas.

   As stated in [RFC5136], "measuring the capacity of a link or network
   path is a task that sounds simple, but in reality can be quite
   complex".  There are so many factors and so complicated coupling
   (between these factors) that the factor of router capacity is not
   explicitly stated in [RFC5136].  Router is an important element of
   internet and it is also an essential component of path.  In [RFC5136]
   router impact is implicitly considered in link capacity, but it
   should be considered in path and path capacity instead, because
   router is a part of path while not a part of link.

   This memo explicitly presents that the router factor should be
   considered in path, path capacity and related metrics (e.g.
   available path capacity).  For the integrity of network capacity
   metrics, this memo additionally defines router capacity, router
   usage, router utilization and available router capacity.

   This memo is the latest development based on [RFC5136] and draws
   heavily from it.

   The remainder of this memo is structured as follows.

   Section 2.1 contains component definitions and explanations (node,
   host, router, link, path, etc.)

   Section 2.2 contains nominal physical capacity and explanations of
   link and router.

   Section 2.3 give IP-layer capacity definitions and explanstions.  It
   is structured in 11 subsections:

   - IP-layer Bits (section 2.3.1)
   - IP-type-P Link Capacity (section 2.3.2)
   - IP-type-P Link Usage (section 2.3.3)
   - IP-type-P Link Utilization (section 2.3.4)



Cui                      Expires April 19, 2011                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft              Network Capacity                October 2010


   - IP-type-P Available Link Capacity (section 2.3.5)
   - IP-type-P Router Capacity (section 2.3.6)
   - IP-type-P Router Usage (section 2.3.7)
   - IP-type-P Router Utilization (section 2.3.8)
   - IP-type-P Available Router Capacity (section 2.3.9)
   - IP-type-P Path Capacity (section 2.3.10)
   - IP-type-P Available Path Capacity (section 2.3.11)

   Section 3 describes changes from [RFC5136].  Section 4 gives some
   complementary discussion.  Section 5 gives discussion conclusion.
   

1.1.  Overview of Capacity

   Any physical medium requires that information be encoded and,
   depending on the medium, there are various schemes to convert
   information into a sequence of signals that are transmitted
   physically from one location to another.

   While on some media, the maximum frequency of these signals can be
   thought of as "capacity", on other media, the signal transmission
   frequency and the information capacity of the medium (channel) may be
   quite different.  For example, a satellite channel may have a carrier
   frequency of a few gigahertz, but an information-carrying capacity of
   only a few hundred kilobits per second.  Often similar or identical
   terms are used to refer to these different applications of capacity,
   adding to the ambiguity and confusion, and the lack of a unified
   nomenclature makes it difficult to properly build, test, and use
   various techniques and tools.

   We are interested in information-carrying capacity, but even this is
   not straightforward.  Each of the layers, depending on the medium,
   adds overhead to the task of carrying information.  The wired
   Ethernet uses Manchester coding or 4/5 coding, which cuts down
   considerably on the "theoretical" capacity.  Similarly, RF (radio
   frequency) communications will often add redundancy to the coding
   scheme to implement forward error correction because the physical
   medium (air) is lossy.  This can further decrease the information
   capacity.

   In addition to coding schemes, usually the physical layer and the
   link layer add framing bits for multiplexing and control purposes.
   For example, on SONET there is physical-layer framing and typically
   also some layer-2 framing such as High-Level Data Link Control
   (HDLC), PPP, or ATM.

   Aside from questions of coding efficiency, there are issues of how
   access to the channel is controlled, which also may affect the



Cui                      Expires April 19, 2011                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft              Network Capacity                October 2010


   capacity.  For example, a multiple-access medium with collision
   detection, avoidance, and recovery mechanisms has a varying capacity
   from the point of view of the users.  This varying capacity depends
   upon the total number of users contending for the medium, how busy
   the users are, and bounds resulting from the mechanisms themselves.
   RF channels may also vary in capacity, depending on range,
   environmental conditions, mobility, shadowing, etc.

   The important points to derive from this discussion are these: First,
   capacity is only meaningful when defined relative to a given protocol
   layer in the network.  It is meaningless to speak of "link" capacity
   without qualifying exactly what is meant.  Second, capacity is not
   necessarily fixed, and consequently, a single measure of capacity at
   any layer may in fact provide a skewed picture (either optimistic or
   pessimistic) of what is actually available.

1.2.  Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].


2.  Definitions

   In this section, we specify component definitions and capacity
   definitions.

2.1.  Component Definitions

   In this section, we specify component definitions for network.  We
   define "node", "Non-IP-Node", "host", "router", "link" and "path"
   clearly in this section, then we define capacity of network in next
   section.

2.1.1.  Node

   IPv6 Specification [RFC2460] defines node is a device that implements
   IPv6.  Framework for IP Performance Metrics [RFC2330] defines host is
   a computer capable of communicating using the Internet protocols;
   includes "routers".  The notion of host from [RFC2330] is equal to
   the notion of node from RFC2460.  In this document, a node is a
   computer that implements IP protocol.

   Note in this document any node without specicial statement is an IP
   node.





Cui                      Expires April 19, 2011                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft              Network Capacity                October 2010


2.1.2.  Non-IP-Node

   In this document, a Non-IP-Node is a device that can transmit,
   receive or forward bit flow, but doesn't implement IP protocol.  The
   examples of Non-IP-Node are ethernet switch and hub.

   Note the Non-IP-Node may be part of link and impact the link
   capacity, for example, consider an ethernet switch that can operate
   ports at different speeds.

2.1.3.  Host

   IPv6 Specification [RFC2460] defines a host as any node that is not a
   router.  This document adopts this definition, and the notion of host
   in this document dosn't includes "routers".

2.1.4.  Router

   [RFC2460] defines a router is a node that forwards IP packets not
   explicitly addressed to itself.  This document adopts this
   definition.

2.1.5.  Link

   [RFC2460] defines link is a communication facility or medium over
   which nodes can communicate at the link layer, i.e., the layer
   immediately below IPv6.  Examples are Ethernets (simple or bridged);
   PPP links; X.25, Frame Relay, or ATM networks; and internet (or
   higher) layer "tunnels", such as tunnels over IPv4 or IPv6 itself.
   [RFC2330] defines link is a single link-level connection between two
   (or more) hosts; includes leased lines, ethernets, frame relay
   clouds, etc.  This document adopts the definition from [RFC2460].

   Note that link is a bidirectional concept, link terminal and link-
   layer middle-box are included in link.

2.1.6.  Path

   As defined in [RFC2330], a path of length n is a sequence of the form
   (N0, L1, N1, ..., Ln, Nn), where n >= 0, each Ni is a node, each Li
   is a link between Ni-1 and Ni, each N1...Nn-1 is a router.  A pair
   (Li, Ni) is termed a 'hop'.  In an appropriate operational
   configuration, the links and routers in the path facilitate network-
   layer communication of packets from N0 to Nn.

   Note that path is a unidirectional concept and a path of length one
   is not equal to the corresponding link.  In this case, the Link
   (i.e., L1) is a part of the path, i.e., the sequence of (N0, L1, N1).



Cui                      Expires April 19, 2011                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft              Network Capacity                October 2010


2.2.  Definition: Nominal Physical Capacity

   Nominal physical link capacity, NomCap(L), is the theoretical maximum
   amount of data that the link L can support.  For example, an OC-3
   link would be capable of 155.520 Mbit/s.  We stress that this is a
   measurement at the physical layer and not the network IP layer, which
   we will define separately.  While NomCap(L) is typically constant
   over time, there are links whose characteristics may allow otherwise,
   such as the dynamic activation of additional transponders for a
   satellite link.

   Note when we define nominal physical capacity of link, link terminals
   are considered while the nodes (host or router) which are connected
   by the link are not gathered.  This is because the link terminal
   (e.g., network interface card) is not integrant of computer, it is
   only an accessory of the computer.  However, there may be some Non-
   IP-Node in the link, such as an ethereal switch.  The physical link
   capacity is affected by the switch's ability to process and forward
   information bits for the given link.

   The nominal physical link capacity is provided as a means to help
   distinguish between the commonly used link-layer capacities and the
   remaining definitions for IP-layer capacity.  The nominal physical
   capacity provides an upper bound on link capaciy of both IP-layer and
   link-layer.

   However, it is difficult to define the nominal physical capacity of a
   router.  The routers are designed under many limitation, such as
   physical bound of CPU, memory and system bus.  We usually use a pair
   of common principle to estimate a router: packet per second and bit
   per second.  These two principles are coupled together, and in
   general, we almost can not correctly estimate a router by either of
   them.  So we don't define nominal physical router capacity in this
   document.

2.3.  Capacity at the IP Layer

   There are many factors that can reduce the IP information carrying
   capacity of the link.  However, the goal of this document is not to
   become an exhaustive list of such factors.  Rather, we outline some
   of the major examples in the following section, thus providing food
   for thought to those implementing the algorithms or tools that
   attempt to measure capacity accurately.

   The remaining definitions are all given in terms of "IP-layer bits"
   in order to distinguish these definitions from the nominal physical
   capacity of the link.




Cui                      Expires April 19, 2011                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft              Network Capacity                October 2010


2.3.1.  Definition: IP-layer Bits

   IP-layer bits are defined as eight (8) times the number of octets in
   all IP packets received, from the first octet of the IP header to the
   last octet of the IP packet payload, inclusive.

   IP-layer bits are recorded at the destination D beginning at time T
   and ending at a time T+I. Since the definitions are based on
   averages, the two time parameters, T and I, must accompany any report
   or estimate of the following values in order for them to remain
   meaningful.  It is not required that the interval boundary points
   fall between packet arrivals at D. However, boundaries that fall
   within a packet will invalidate the packets on which they fall.
   Specifically, the data from the partial packet that is contained
   within the interval will not be counted.  This may artificially bias
   some of the values, depending on the length of the interval and the
   amount of data received during that interval.  We elaborate on what
   constitutes correctly received data in the next section.

2.3.1.1.  Standard or Correctly Formed Packets

   The definitions in this document specify that IP packets must be
   received correctly.  The IPPM framework recommends a set of criteria
   for such standard-formed packets in Section 15 of [RFC2330].
   However, it is inadequate for use with this document.  Thus, we
   outline our own criteria below while pointing out any variations or
   similarities to [RFC2330].

   First, data that is in error at layers below IP and cannot be
   properly passed to the IP layer must not be counted.  For example,
   wireless media often have a considerably larger error rate than wired
   media, resulting in a reduction in IP link capacity.  In accordance
   with the IPPM framework, packets that fail validation of the IP
   header must be discarded.  Specifically, the requirements in
   [RFC1812], Section 5.2.2, on IP header validation must be checked,
   which includes a valid length, checksum, and version field.

   The IPPM framework specifies further restrictions, requiring that any
   transport header be checked for correctness and that any packets with
   IP options be ignored.  However, the definitions in this document are
   concerned with the traversal of IP-layer bits.  As a result, data
   from the higher layers is not required to be valid or understood as
   that data is simply regarded as part of the IP packet.  The same
   holds true for IP options.  Valid IP fragments must also be counted
   as they expend the resources of a link even though assembly of the
   full packet may not be possible.  The IPPM framework differs in this
   area, discarding IP fragments.




Cui                      Expires April 19, 2011                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft              Network Capacity                October 2010


   For a discussion of duplicates, please see Section 4.2.

   In summary, any IP packet that can be properly processed must be
   included in these calculations.

2.3.1.2.  Type P Packets

   The definitions in this document refer to "Type P" packets to
   designate a particular type of flow or sets of flows.  As defined in
   [RFC2330], Section 13, "Type P" is a placeholder for what may be an
   explicit specification of the packet flows referenced by the metric,
   or it may be a very loose specification encompassing aggregates.  We
   use the "Type P" designation in these definitions in order to
   emphasize two things: First, that the value of the capacity
   measurement depends on the types of flows referenced in the
   definition.  This is because networks may treat packets differently
   (in terms of queuing and scheduling) based on their markings and
   classification.  Networks may also arbitrarily decide to flow-balance
   based on the packet type or flow type and thereby affect capacity
   measurements.  Second, the measurement of capacity depends not only
   on the type of the reference packets, but also on the types of the
   packets in the "population" with which the flows of interest share
   the links in the path.

   All of this indicates two different approaches to measuring: One is
   to measure capacity using a broad spectrum of packet types,
   suggesting that "Type P" should be set as generic as possible.  The
   second is to focus narrowly on the types of flows of particular
   interest, which suggests that "Type P" should be very specific and
   narrowly defined.  The first approach is likely to be of interest to
   providers, the second to application users.

   As a practical matter, it should be noted that some providers may
   treat packets with certain characteristics differently than other
   packets.  For example, access control lists, routing policies, and
   other mechanisms may be used to filter ICMP packets or forward
   packets with certain IP options through different routes.  If a
   capacity-measurement tool uses these special packets and they are
   included in the "Type P" designation, the tool may not be measuring
   the path that it was intended to measure.  Tool authors, as well as
   users, may wish to check this point with their service providers.

2.3.2.  Definition: IP-type-P Link Capacity

   We define the IP-layer link capacity, C(L,T,I), to be the maximum
   number of IP-layer bits that can be transmitted from the source S and
   correctly received by the destination D over the link L during the
   interval [T, T+I], divided by I. The "maximum" means that IP-type-P



Cui                      Expires April 19, 2011                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft              Network Capacity                October 2010


   link capacity is the capacity representation when the link is fully
   utilized (i.e., nominal physical link capacity is fully used.)

   In theory, IP-layer link capacity may be calculated out from nominal
   physical link capacity.  Usually, for any link whose link protocol is
   given, we can know well the encapsulation, overhead and overtail of
   the link layer protocol.  In these cases, for Type P Packets, whose
   length is Lp, we can get IP-layer link capacity as:

   C(L,T,I)
   = [Lp/(Lh + Lp + Lt)] * [1 - BER(T, T+I)] * [1 - BDR(T, T+I)] * P(L)

   In this formula,
   - Lp denotes type P packet length (in IP layer),
   - Lh denotes link layer protocol overhead length,
   - Lt denotes link layer protocol overtail length,
   - BER(T, T+I) denotes Block Error or Lost Rate during the interval
     [T, T+I],
   - BDR(T, T+I) denotes Block Duplication Rate during the interval [T,
     T+I],
   - P(L) denotes nominal physical link capacity of the given link.

   Like nominal physical link capacity, IP-type-P link capacity is also
   a theoretical maximum value.  But IP-type-P link capacity is not
   constant over time, becauese there are many types of link layer
   protocol and BER and BDR (e.g., BER/BDR of radio channel) may vary in
   different period.

   As defined in section 2.1.5, link is the layer 2 connection between
   nodes, so the nodes which are connected by the link are not part of
   the given link.  However, there may be some Non-IP-Node in the link,
   such as an ethereal switch.  The IP-type-P link capacity is affected
   by the switch's ability to process and forward IP packets for the
   given link.

   IP-type-P link capacity is affected by on-way Non-IP-Node but not
   affected by the nodes which are connected by the IP link.  This
   means, the injecting node may affect how many packets are transpored
   between the source S and the destination D during the interval [T,
   T+I], and the incepting node may also affect how many packets are
   correctly received in the destination D, but these factors do not
   affect IP-type-P link capacity, because the capacity is the maximum
   value can be represented by the link.

   IP-type-P link capacity is similar to IP-type-P link usage in some
   percent.  The comparison is described in the next section.





Cui                      Expires April 19, 2011                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft              Network Capacity                October 2010


2.3.3.  Definition: IP-type-P Link Usage

   The average usage of a link L, Used(L,T,I), is the actual number of
   IP-layer bits from any source, correctly received over link L during
   the interval [T, T+I], divided by I.

   An important distinction between usage and capacity is that the
   capacity is a theoretical value (constant number) while the usage is
   a factually represented value (variable number).  This is to say,
   Used(L,T,I) is not the maximum number, but rather, the actual average
   rate that IP bits are correctly received.
        
   The information transmitted across the link can be generated by any
   source, including those sources that may not be directly attached to
   either side of the link.  In addition, each information flow from
   these sources may share any number (from one to n) of links in the
   overall path between S and D.

2.3.4.  Definition: IP-type-P Link Utilization

   We express usage as a fraction of the overall IP-layer link capacity.

   Util(L,T,I) = ( Used(L,T,I) / C(L,T,I) )

   Thus, the utilization now represents the fraction of the capacity
   that is being used and is a value between zero (meaning nothing is
   used) and one (meaning the link is fully saturated).  Multiplying the
   utilization by 100 yields the percent utilization of the link.  By
   using the above, we can now define the available capacity over the
   link.

2.3.5.  Definition: IP-type-P Available Link Capacity

   We can now determine the amount of available capacity on a congested
   link by multiplying the IP-layer link capacity with the complement of
   the IP-layer link utilization.  Thus, the IP-layer available link
   capacity becomes:

   AvailCap(L,T,I) = C(L,T,I) * ( 1 - Util(L,T,I) )

2.3.6.  Definition: IP-type-P Router Capacity

   As mentioned in section 2.2, we don't define nominal physical router
   capacity in this document, we only discuss the router IP capaicy for
   given packet type.

   We define the IP-type-P router capacity, C(R,T,I), to be the maximum
   number of IP-layer bits (in the formation of type P packet) that can



Cui                      Expires April 19, 2011                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft              Network Capacity                October 2010


   be correctly transfered from the ingress interfaces to the egress
   interfaces during the interval [T, T+I], divided by I. Like nominal
   physical link capacity and IP-layer link capacity, IP-type-P router
   capacity is also a theoretical maximum value and typically constant
   over time.

   Note this is only a nominal value or an approximation, because the
   accurate IP layer router capacity depends on many factors.  Any
   router faces the common challenge, its capacity representation
   depends on its atchitect design, memory (e.g. queueing) management,
   interface deployment and other implementation issues. for example, a
   router can support 1000 interfaces and the capacity of 1T bps for IP
   type P at best.  When we configure this router with 100 interfaces/
   links, we can get this capacity value (i.e., 1T bps).  But if the
   router is configured with only one ingress interface/link and one
   egress interface/link, maybe the maximum capacity value this router
   can present is less than 1T bps, because of its internal bus
   structure factors, even each link has the IP layer capacity of 2T
   bps.

   On the other hand, as link capacity is node-independent, router
   capacity is not dependent on bits injection.  The ingress link (i.e.,
   the link which is attached to the ingress interface) may affect how
   many packets are injected to the router and the egress link (i.e.,
   the link which is attached to the egress interface) may affect how
   many packets are forwarded to the next hop, but note the router
   capacity is the maximum number that we can get in all cases, for the
   given type P packets.

2.3.7.  Definition: IP-type-P Router Usage

   The average usage of a Router R, Used(R,T,I), is the actual number of
   IP-layer bits (in the formation of type P packet) correctly
   transfered from any ingress interface to the right engree interface
   during the interval [T, T+I], divided by I.

   An important distinction between usage and capacity is that
   Used(R,T,I) is not the maximum number, but rather, the actual number
   of IP bits that are correctly transfered.

   The information forwarded through the router can be generated by any
   source, including those sources that are not directly attached to the
   router.  In addition, each information flow from these sources may
   share the router in their respective path.







Cui                      Expires April 19, 2011                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft              Network Capacity                October 2010


2.3.8.  Definition: IP-type-P Router Utilization

   We express usage as a fraction of the overall IP-layer router
   capacity.

   Util(R,T,I) = ( Used(R,T,I) / C(R,T,I) )

   Thus, the utilization now represents the fraction of the capacity
   that is being used and is a value between zero (meaning nothing is
   used) and one (meaning the router is fully saturated).  Multiplying
   the utilization by 100 yields the percent utilization of the router.
   By using the above, we can now define the capacity available throuth
   the router.

2.3.9.  Definition: IP-type-P Available Router Capacity

   We can now determine the amount of available capacity on a congested
   router by multiplying the IP-layer router capacity with the
   complement of the IP-layer router utilization.  Thus, the IP-layer
   available router capacity becomes:

   AvailCap(R,T,I) = C(R,T,I) * ( 1 - Util(R,T,I) )

   As mentioned in router capacity section, AvailCap(R,T,I) is only an
   approximation, because the accurate available router capacity depends
   on many internal factors.

2.3.10.  Definition: IP-type-P Path Capacity

   Using our definition for IP-layer link capacity and IP-layer router
   capacity, we can then extend these notions to an entire path.

   We define the IP-type-P IP-layer path capacity, C(P,T,I), to be the
   maximum number of IP-layer bits (in the formation of type P packet)
   that can be correctly transfered from the source to the destination
   during the interval [T, T+I], divided by I. Like link capacity and
   router capacity, path capacity is also a theoretical number.

   As mentioned earlier, the path of length n is a sequence of the form
   (N0, L1, N1, ..., Ln, Nn) and N1, N2, ..., Nn-1 are all routers and
   part of the path.  But these links and routers may be part of one or
   multiple paths, for example, in the following scenario:









Cui                      Expires April 19, 2011                [Page 14]

Internet-Draft              Network Capacity                October 2010


           +------+        +------+        +------+        +------+
           |  H1  |---L1---|      |        |      |---L2---|  H2  |
           +------+        |      |        |      |        +------+
               |           |      |        |      |            |L5
               |L3         |  R1  |---L4---|  R2  |        +------+
               |           |      |        |      |        |  R3  |
               |           |      |        |      |        +------+
               |           |      |        |      |            |L6
           +------+        |      |        |      |        +------+
           |  H3  |---L7---|      |        |      |        |  H4  |
           +------+        +------+        +------+        +------+



                        Host, Router, Link and Path

                                 Figure 1

   There are multiple paths in this network, such as:

   Path P1 (from H1 to H2) -- (H1, L1, R1, L4, R2, L2, H2);
   Path P2 (from H1 to H3) -- (H1, L3, H3);
   Path P3 (from H1 to H3) -- (H1, L1, R1, L7, H3);
   Path P4 (from H2 to H1) -- (H2, L2, R2, L4, R1, L1, H1);
   Path P5 (from H2 to H3) -- (H2, L2, R2, L4, R1, L7, H3); and,
   Path P6 (from H2 to H4) -- (H2, L5, R3, L6, H4).

   Note this is not an exhaustive list.  There are many other paths in
   this network, e.g., (R1, L4, R2).

   In this scenario, the path (H1, L3, H4) and the path (H2, L5, R3, L6,
   H4) are exclusive path.  The IP-layer capacity of an exclusive path
   may be calculated by:

   C(P,T,I) = min {1..n} {C(Ln,T,I), C(Rn,T,I)}

   we can also find that the link of L1, L2, L4 are all shared by
   multiple paths and the router of R1 and R2 are the same.  Because of
   the capacity sharing, path capacity rather depends on the capacity
   contribution from the links and the routers than the IP-layer
   capacity of themselves.  So for any given path whose link or router
   overlaps with other path, the IP-layer path capacity becomes more
   complex, it depends on not only the IP-layer capacity of the links
   and the routers but also the "competitive" traffic (also in formation
   of type P packet) of other paths, which have overlap segment with the
   given path.  This means the capacity of non-exclusive path is a
   variable, is external situation dependent.




Cui                      Expires April 19, 2011                [Page 15]

Internet-Draft              Network Capacity                October 2010


   It is very difficult to calculate IP-type-P path capacity of non-
   exclusive path in general but we can get out the maximum number of
   path capacity from links and routers, to indicate the upper bound on
   path capacity.

   The maximum number of IP-layer capacity of non-exclusive path may be
   calculated by:

   Cmax(P,T,I) = min {1..n} {C(Ln,T,I), C(Rn,T,I)}

2.3.11.  Definition: IP-type-P Available Path Capacity

   Using our definition for IP-layer available link capacity and IP-
   layer available router capacity, we can then extend these notions to
   an entire path, such that the IP-layer available path capacity simply
   becomes that of the link and router with the smallest available
   capacity along that path.

   AvailCap(P,T,I) = min {1..n} {AvailCap(Ln,T,I), AvailCap(Rn,T,I)}

   Since measurements of available capacity are more volatile than that
   of link capacity, we stress the importance that both the time and
   interval be specified as their values have a great deal of influence
   on the results.  In addition, a sequence of measurements may be
   beneficial in offsetting the volatility when attempting to
   characterize available capacity.


3.  Changes from RFC5136

   In general, this document clarifies some definitions (e.g., path) and
   expounds that the capacity metrics (e.g., IP-type-P link capacity)
   are theoretical number.  In addition, usage metrics (e.g., IP-type-P
   link usage) are very different from capacity metrics because they are
   actual number represented in measurement cases.

3.1.  Node Definition

   Section 2.1 from [RFC5136] has been changed from:

   We define nodes as hosts, routers, Ethernet switches, or any other
   device where the input and output links can have different
   characteristics.

   to Section 2.1.1 of this memo:

   Node is a computer that implements IP protocol.




Cui                      Expires April 19, 2011                [Page 16]

Internet-Draft              Network Capacity                October 2010


   Reason/summarization:

   The reason for this modification is to follow the most idiomatic
   definition.  Non-IP device is excluded in the notion of node.

3.2.  Link Definition

   Section 2.1 from [RFC5136] has been changed from:

   A link is a connection between two of these network devices or nodes.

   to Section 2.1.5 of this memo:

   Link is a communication facility or medium over which nodes can
   communicate at the link layer, i.e., the layer immediately below
   IPv6.  Examples are Ethernets (simple or bridged); PPP links; X.25,
   Frame Relay, or ATM networks; and internet (or higher) layer
   "tunnels", such as tunnels over IPv4 or IPv6 itself.

   Reason/summarization:

   The reason for this modification is to clarify the notion.  The
   connection between layer1 or layer2 devices is not an absolute link,
   but only a segment of link.

3.3.  Path Definition

   Section 2.1 from [RFC5136] has been changed from:

   We then define a path P of length n as a series of links (L1, L2,
   ..., Ln) connecting a sequence of nodes (N1, N2, ..., Nn+1).  A
   source S and destination D reside at N1 and Nn+1, respectively.

   to Section 2.1.6 of this memo:

   A path of length n is a sequence of the form (N0, L1, N1, ..., Ln,
   Nn), where n >= 0, each Ni is a node, each Li is a link between Ni-1
   and Ni, each N1...Nn-1 is a router.  A pair (Li, Ni) is termed a
   'hop'.  In an appropriate operational configuration, the links and
   routers in the path facilitate network-layer communication of packets
   from N0 to Nn.

   Reason/summarization:

   The reason for this modification is to emphasize that routers in the
   path are essential component of the path.





Cui                      Expires April 19, 2011                [Page 17]

Internet-Draft              Network Capacity                October 2010


3.4.  Definition: Nominal Physical Capacity

   Section 2.2 from [RFC5136] has been changed from "Definition: Nominal
   Physical Link Capacity" to "Definition: Nominal Physical Capacity".
   And some statement are added, including:

   Note when we define nominal physical capacity of link, link terminals
   are considered while the nodes (host or router) which are connected
   by the link are not gathered.  This is because the link terminal
   (e.g., network interface card) is not integrant of computer, it is
   only an accessory of the computer.  However, there may be some non-
   IP-node in the link, such as the ethereal switch.  The physical link
   capacity is affected by the switch's ability to process and forward
   information bits for the given link.

   and,

   However, it is difficult to define the nominal physical capacity of a
   router.  The routers are designed under many limitation, such as
   physical bound of CPU, memory and system bus.  We usually use a pair
   of common principle to estimate a router: packet per second and bit
   per second.  These two principles are coupled together, and in
   general, we almost can not correctly estimate a router by either of
   them.  So we don't define nominal physical router capacity in this
   document.

3.5.  IP-type-P Link Capacity

   Section 2.3.2 from [RFC5136] has been changed from:

   We define the IP-layer link capacity, C(L,T,I), to be the maximum
   number of IP-layer bits that can be transmitted from the source S and
   correctly received by the destination D over the link L during the
   interval [T, T+I], divided by I.

   As mentioned earlier, this definition is affected by many factors
   that may change over time.  For example, a device's ability to
   process and forward IP packets for a particular link may have varying
   effect on capacity, depending on the amount or type of traffic being
   processed.

   to Section 2.3.2 of this memo:

   We define the IP-layer link capacity, C(L,T,I), to be the maximum
   number of IP-layer bits that can be transmitted from the source S and
   correctly received by the destination D over the link L during the
   interval [T, T+I], divided by I. The "maximum" means that IP-type-P
   link capacity is the capacity representation when the link is fully



Cui                      Expires April 19, 2011                [Page 18]

Internet-Draft              Network Capacity                October 2010


   utilized (i.e., nominal physical link capacity is fully used.)

   In theory, IP-layer link capacity may be calculated out from nominal
   physical link capacity.  Usually, for any link whose link protocol is
   given, we can know well the encapsulation, overhead and overtail of
   the link layer protocol.  In these cases, for Type P Packets, whose
   length is Lp, we can get IP-layer link capacity as:

   C(L,T,I)
   = [Lp/(Lh + Lp + Lt)] * [1 - BER(T, T+I)] * [1 - BDR(T, T+I)] * P(L)

   In this formula,
   - Lp denotes type P packet length (in IP layer),
   - Lh denotes link layer protocol overhead length,
   - Lt denotes link layer protocol overtail length,
   - BER(T, T+I) denotes Block Error or Lost Rate during the interval
     [T, T+I],
   - BDR(T, T+I) denotes Block Duplication Rate during the interval [T,
     T+I],
   - P(L) denotes nominal physical link capacity of the given link.

   Like nominal physical link capacity, IP-type-P link capacity is also
   a theoretical maximum value.  But IP-type-P link capacity is not
   constant over time, becauese there are many types of link layer
   protocol and BER and BDR (e.g., BER/BDR of radio channel) may vary in
   different period.

   As defined in section 2.1.5, link is the layer 2 connection between
   nodes, so the nodes which are connected by the link are not part of
   the given link.  However, there may be some Non-IP-Node in the link,
   such as the ethereal switch.  The IP-type-P link capacity is affected
   by the switch's ability to process and forward IP packets for the
   given link.

   IP-type-P link capacity is affected by on-way Non-IP-Node but not
   affected by the nodes which are connected by the IP link.  This
   means, the injecting node may affect how many packets are transpored
   between the source S and the destination D during the interval [T,
   T+I], and the incepting node may also affect how many packets are
   correctly received in the destination D, but these factors do not
   affect IP-type-P link capacity, because the capacity is the maximum
   value can be represented by the link.

   IP-type-P link capacity is similar to IP-type-P link usage in some
   percent.  The comparison is described in the next section.

   Reason/summarization:




Cui                      Expires April 19, 2011                [Page 19]

Internet-Draft              Network Capacity                October 2010


   This modification clarifies the definition and calculation of link
   capacity and explicitly indicates that node doesn't affect link
   capacity but the Non-IP-Node which is part of link does.

3.6.  IP-type-P Router Capacity

   Section 2.3.6 is newly added in this memo, as:

   As mentioned in section 2.2, we don't define nominal physical router
   capacity in this document, we only discuss the router IP capaicy for
   given packet type.

   We define the IP-type-P router capacity, C(R,T,I), to be the maximum
   number of IP-layer bits (in the formation of type P packet) that can
   be correctly transfered from the ingress interfaces to the egress
   interfaces during the interval [T, T+I], divided by I. Like nominal
   physical link capacity and IP-layer link capacity, IP-type-P router
   capacity is also a theoretical maximum value and typically constant
   over time

   Note this is only a nominal value or an approximation, because the
   accurate IP layer router capacity depends on many factors.  Any
   router faces the common challenge, its capacity representation
   depends on its atchitect design, memory (e.g. queueing) management,
   interface deployment and other implementation issues. for example, a
   router can support 1000 interfaces and the capacity of 1T bps for IP
   type P at best.  When we configure this router with 100 interfaces/
   links, we can get this capacity value (i.e., 1T bps).  But if the
   router is configured with only one ingress interface/link and one
   egress interface/link, maybe the maximum capacity value this router
   can present is less than 1T bps, because of its internal bus
   structure factors, even each link has the IP layer capacity of 2T
   bps.

   On the other hand, as link capacity is node-independent, router
   capacity is not dependent on bits injection.  The ingress link (i.e.,
   the link which is attached to the ingress interface) may affect how
   many packets are injected to the router and the egress link (i.e.,
   the link which is attached to the egress interface) may affect how
   many packets are forwarded to the next hop, but note the router
   capacity is the maximum number that we can get in all cases, for the
   given type P packets.

   Reason/summarization:

   This modification defines IP-layer router capacity aspect from
   network capacity.




Cui                      Expires April 19, 2011                [Page 20]

Internet-Draft              Network Capacity                October 2010


3.7.  IP-type-P Router Usage

   Section 2.3.7 is newly added in this memo, as:

   The average usage of a Router R, Used(R,T,I), is the actual number of
   IP-layer bits (in the formation of type P packet) correctly
   transfered from any ingress interface to the right engree interface
   during the interval [T, T+I], divided by I.

   An important distinction between usage and capacity is that
   Used(R,T,I) is not the maximum number, but rather, the actual number
   of IP bits that are correctly transfered.

   The information forwarded through the router can be generated by any
   source, including those sources that are not directly attached to the
   router.  In addition, each information flow from these sources may
   share the router in their respective path.

   Reason/summarization:

   This modification defines IP-layer router usage aspect from network
   capacity.

3.8.  IP-type-P Router Utilization

   Section 2.3.8 is newly added in this memo, as:

   We express usage as a fraction of the overall IP-layer router
   capacity.

   Util(R,T,I) = ( Used(R,T,I) / C(R,T,I) )

   Thus, the utilization now represents the fraction of the capacity
   that is being used and is a value between zero (meaning nothing is
   used) and one (meaning the router is fully saturated).  Multiplying
   the utilization by 100 yields the percent utilization of the router.
   By using the above, we can now define the capacity available throuth
   the router.

   Reason/summarization:

   This modification defines IP-layer router utilization aspect from
   network capacity.

3.9.  IP-type-P Available Router Capacity

   Section 2.3.9 is newly added in this memo, as:




Cui                      Expires April 19, 2011                [Page 21]

Internet-Draft              Network Capacity                October 2010


   We can now determine the amount of available capacity on a congested
   router by multiplying the IP-layer router capacity with the
   complement of the IP-layer router utilization.  Thus, the IP-layer
   available router capacity becomes:

   AvailCap(R,T,I) = C(R,T,I) * ( 1 - Util(R,T,I) )

   As mentioned in router capacity section, AvailCap(R,T,I) is only an
   approximation, because the accurate available router capacity depends
   on many internal factors.

   Reason/summarization:

   This modification defines IP-layer available router capacity aspect
   from network capacity.

3.10.  IP-type-P Path Capacity

   Section 2.3.3 from [RFC5136] has been changed from:

   Using our definition for IP-layer link capacity, we can then extend
   this notion to an entire path, such that the IP-layer path capacity
   simply becomes that of the link with the smallest capacity along that
   path.

   C(P,T,I) = min {1..n} {C(Ln,T,I)}

   The previous definitions specify the number of IP-layer bits that can
   be transmitted across a link or path should the resource be free of
   any congestion.  It represents the full capacity available for
   traffic between the source and destination.  Determining how much
   capacity is available for use on a congested link is potentially much
   more useful.  However, in order to define the available capacity, we
   must first specify how much is being used.

   to Section 2.3.10 of this memo:

   We define the IP-type-P IP-layer path capacity, C(P,T,I), to be the
   maximum number of IP-layer bits (in the formation of type P packet)
   that can be correctly transfered from the source to the destination
   during the interval [T, T+I], divided by I. Like link capacity and
   router capacity, path capacity is also a theoretical number.

   The IP-layer capacity of an exclusive path may be calculated by:

   C(P,T,I) = min {1..n} {C(Ln,T,I), C(Rn,T,I)}

   It is very difficult to calculate IP-type-P path capacity of non-



Cui                      Expires April 19, 2011                [Page 22]

Internet-Draft              Network Capacity                October 2010


   exclusive path in general but we can get out the maximum number of
   path capacity from links and routers, to indicate the upper bound on
   path capacity.

   The maximum number of IP-layer capacity of non-exclusive path may be
   calculated by:

   Cmax(P,T,I) = min {1..n} {C(Ln,T,I), C(Rn,T,I)}

   Reason/summarization:

   This modification clarifies how to correctly evaluate path capacity.
   Router capacity is considered for path capacity.

3.11.  IP-type-P Available Path Capacity

   Section 2.3.7 from [RFC5136] has been changed from:

   Using our definition for IP-layer available link capacity, we can
   then extend this notion to an entire path, such that the IP-layer
   available path capacity simply becomes that of the link with the
   smallest available capacity along that path.

   AvailCap(P,T,I) = min {1..n} {AvailCap(Ln,T,I)}

   to Section 2.3.11 of this memo:

   Using our definition for IP-layer available link capacity and IP-
   layer available router capacity, we can then extend these notions to
   an entire path, such that the IP-layer available path capacity simply
   becomes that of the link and router with the smallest available
   capacity along that path.

   AvailCap(P,T,I) = min {1..n} {AvailCap(Ln,T,I), AvailCap(Rn,T,I)}

   Reason/summarization:

   This modification clarifies how to correctly evaluate available path
   capacity.  Available router capacity is considered for available path
   capacity.


4.  Discussion

4.1.  Time and Sampling

   We must emphasize the importance of time in the basic definitions of
   these quantities.  We know that traffic on the Internet is highly



Cui                      Expires April 19, 2011                [Page 23]

Internet-Draft              Network Capacity                October 2010


   variable across all time scales.  This argues that the time and
   length of measurements are critical variables in reporting available
   capacity measurements and must be reported when using these
   definitions.

   The closer to "instantaneous" a metric is, the more important it is
   to have a plan for sampling the metric over a time period that is
   sufficiently large.  By doing so, we allow valid statistical
   inferences to be made from the measurements.  An obvious pitfall here
   is sampling in a way that causes bias.  For example, a situation
   where the sampling frequency is a multiple of the frequency of an
   underlying condition.

4.2.  Hardware Duplicates

   We briefly consider the effects of paths where hardware duplication
   of packets may occur.  In such an environment, a node in the network
   path may duplicate packets, and the destination may receive multiple,
   identical copies of these packets.  Both the original packet and the
   duplicates can be properly received and appear to be originating from
   the sender.  Thus, in the most generic form, duplicate IP packets are
   counted in these definitions.  However, hardware duplication can
   affect these definitions depending on the use of "Type P" to add
   additional restrictions on packet reception.  For instance, a
   restriction only to count uniquely-sent packets may be more useful to
   users concerned with capacity for meaningful data.  In contrast, the
   more general, unrestricted metric may be suitable for a user who is
   concerned with raw capacity.  Thus, it is up to the user to properly
   scope and interpret results in situations where hardware duplicates
   may be prevalent.

4.3.  Other Potential Factors

   IP encapsulation does not affect the definitions as all IP header and
   payload bits must be counted regardless of content.  However, IP
   packets of different sizes can lead to a variation in the amount of
   overhead needed at the lower layers to transmit the data, thus
   altering the overall IP link-layer capacity.

   Should the link happen to employ a compression scheme such as RObust
   Header Compression (ROHC) [RFC3095] or V.44 [V44], some of the
   original bits are not transmitted across the link.  However, the
   inflated (not compressed) number of IP-layer bits should be counted.

4.4.  Common Terminology in Literature

   Certain terms are often used to characterize specific aspects of the
   presented definitions.  The link with the smallest capacity is



Cui                      Expires April 19, 2011                [Page 24]

Internet-Draft              Network Capacity                October 2010


   commonly referred to as the "narrow link" of a path.  Also, the link
   with the smallest available capacity is often referred to as the
   "tight link" within a path.  So, while a given link may have a very
   large capacity, the overall congestion level on the link makes it the
   likely bottleneck of a connection.  Conversely, a link that has the
   smallest capacity may not be the bottleneck should it be lightly
   loaded in relation to the rest of the path.

   Also, literature often overloads the term "bandwidth" to refer to
   what we have described as capacity in this document.  For example,
   when inquiring about the bandwidth of a 802.11b link, a network
   engineer will likely answer with 11 Mbit/s.  However, an electrical
   engineer may answer with 25 MHz, and an end user may tell you that
   his observed bandwidth is 8 Mbit/s.  In contrast, the term "capacity"
   is not quite as overloaded and is an appropriate term that better
   reflects what is actually being measured.

4.5.  Comparison to Bulk Transfer Capacity (BTC)

   Bulk Transfer Capacity (BTC) [RFC3148] provides a distinct
   perspective on path capacity that differs from the definitions in
   this document in several fundamental ways.  First, BTC operates at
   the transport layer, gauging the amount of capacity available to an
   application that wishes to send data.  Only unique data is measured,
   meaning header and retransmitted data are not included in the
   calculation.  In contrast, IP-layer link capacity includes the IP
   header and is indifferent to the uniqueness of the data contained
   within the packet payload.  (Hardware duplication of packets is an
   anomaly addressed in a previous section.)  Second, BTC utilizes a
   single congestion-aware transport connection, such as TCP, to obtain
   measurements.  As a result, BTC implementations react strongly to
   different path characteristics, topologies, and distances.  Since
   these differences can affect the control loop (propagation delays,
   segment reordering, etc.), the reaction is further dependent on the
   algorithms being employed for the measurements.  For example,
   consider a single event where a link suffers a large duration of bit
   errors.  The event could cause IP-layer packets to be discarded, and
   the lost packets would reduce the IP-layer link capacity.  However,
   the same event and subsequent losses would trigger loss recovery for
   a BTC measurement resulting in the retransmission of data and a
   potentially reduced sending rate.  Thus, a measurement of BTC does
   not correspond to any of the definitions in this document.  Both
   techniques are useful in exploring the characteristics of a network
   path, but from different perspectives.







Cui                      Expires April 19, 2011                [Page 25]

Internet-Draft              Network Capacity                October 2010


5.  Conclusion

   In this document, we have defined a set of quantities related to the
   capacity of links, routers and paths in an IP network.  In these
   definitions, we have tried to be as clear as possible and take into
   account various characteristics that links, routers and paths can
   have.  The goal of these definitions is to enable researchers who
   propose capacity metrics to relate those metrics to these definitions
   and to evaluate those metrics with respect to how well they
   approximate these quantities.

   In addition, we have pointed out some key auxiliary parameters and
   opened a discussion of issues related to valid inferences from
   available capacity metrics.


6.  Security Considerations

   This document specifies definitions regarding IP traffic traveling
   between a source and destination in an IP network.  These definitions
   do not raise any security issues and do not have a direct impact on
   the networking protocol suite.

   Tools that attempt to implement these definitions may introduce
   security issues specific to each implementation.  Both active and
   passive measurement techniques can be abused, impacting the security,
   privacy, and performance of the network.  Any measurement techniques
   based upon these definitions must include a discussion of the
   techniques needed to protect the network on which the measurements
   are being performed.


7.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no actions for IANA.


8.  Acknowledgments

   The author would especially like to acknowledge Phil Chimento and
   Joseph Ishac for their great contribution on the item of network
   capacity.  The author would like to acknowledge Mark Allman, Patrik
   Arlos, Matt Mathis, Al Morton, Stanislav Shalunov, and Matt Zekauskas
   for their contribution on [RFC5136], which is the basis of this
   document.

   The author would also like to acknowledge Brian E Carpenter, Adrian
   Farrel, Spencer Dawkins, David Harrington and Barry Leiba for their



Cui                      Expires April 19, 2011                [Page 26]

Internet-Draft              Network Capacity                October 2010


   review and discussion in the early stage of this document.


9.  References

9.1.  Normative References

   [RFC1812]  Baker, F., "Requirements for IP Version 4 Routers",
              RFC 1812, June 1995.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC2330]  Paxson, V., Almes, G., Mahdavi, J., and M. Mathis,
              "Framework for IP Performance Metrics", RFC 2330,
              May 1998.

   [RFC2460]  Deering, S. and R. Hinden, "Internet Protocol, Version 6
              (IPv6) Specification", RFC 2460, December 1998.

9.2.  Informative References

   [RFC2679]  Almes, G., Kalidindi, S., and M. Zekauskas, "A One-way
              Delay Metric for IPPM", RFC 2679, September 1999.

   [RFC3095]  Bormann, C., Burmeister, C., Degermark, M., Fukushima, H.,
              Hannu, H., Jonsson, L-E., Hakenberg, R., Koren, T., Le,
              K., Liu, Z., Martensson, A., Miyazaki, A., Svanbro, K.,
              Wiebke, T., Yoshimura, T., and H. Zheng, "RObust Header
              Compression (ROHC): Framework and four profiles: RTP, UDP,
              ESP, and uncompressed", RFC 3095, July 2001.

   [RFC3148]  Mathis, M. and M. Allman, "A Framework for Defining
              Empirical Bulk Transfer Capacity Metrics", RFC 3148,
              July 2001.

   [RFC3393]  Demichelis, C. and P. Chimento, "IP Packet Delay Variation
              Metric for IP Performance Metrics (IPPM)", RFC 3393,
              November 2002.

   [RFC5136]  Chimento, P. and J. Ishac, "Defining Network Capacity",
              RFC 5136, February 2008.

   [V44]      ITU Telecommunication Standardization Sector (ITU-T)
              Recommendation V.44, "Data Compression Procedures",
              November 2000.





Cui                      Expires April 19, 2011                [Page 27]

Internet-Draft              Network Capacity                October 2010


Author's Address

   Xiangsong Cui (editor)
   Huawei
   KuiKe Bld., No.9 Xinxi Rd., Shang-Di Information Industry Base
   Beijing,   100085
   P.R. China

   Phone:
   Email: Xiangsong.Cui@huawei.com









































Cui                      Expires April 19, 2011                [Page 28]


