A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3334

        Title:      Policy-Based Accounting
        Author(s):  T. Zseby, S. Zander, C. Carle
        Status:     Experimental
        Date:       October 2002
        Mailbox:    zseby@fokus.fhg.de, zander@fokus.fhg.de,
                    carle@fokus.fhg.de
        Pages:      44
        Characters: 103014
        Updates/Obsoletes/SeeAlso:  None
                 
        I-D Tag:    draft-irtf-aaaarch-pol-acct-05.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3334.txt


This document describes policy-based accounting which is an approach
to provide flexibility to accounting architectures.  Accounting
policies describe the configuration of an accounting architecture in
a standardized way.  They are used to instrument the accounting
architecture and can be exchanged between Authentication,
Authorization and Accounting (AAA) entities in order to
share configuration information.

This document describes building blocks and message sequences for
policy-based accounting in the generic AAA architecture
(RFC 2903).  Examples are given for the usage of accounting policies
in different scenarios.  It is also shown how accounting components
can be integrated into the AAA authorization framework (RFC 2904).
This document does not propose a language for the description of
accounting policies.  Rather, it is assumed that a suitable policy
language can be chosen from existing or upcoming standards. 

This memo defines an Experimental Protocol for the Internet community.
It does not specify an Internet standard of any kind.  Discussion and
suggestions for improvement are requested.  Distribution of this memo
is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.
