



Network Working Group                                        S. Burleigh
Internet-DraftJet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technol
Intended status: Experimental                             March 26, 2013
Expires: September 27, 2013


                     Bundle-in-Bundle Encapsulation
                      draft-irtf-burleigh-bibe-00

Abstract

   This document describes Bundle-in-Bundle Encapsulation (BIBE), a
   Delay-Tolerant Networking (DTN) Bundle Protocol (BP) "convergence
   layer" protocol that tunnels BP "bundles" through encapsulating
   bundles.  The services provided by the BIBE convergence-layer
   protocol adapter encapsulate an outbound BP "bundle" in a BIBE
   convergence-layer protocol data unit for transmission as the payload
   of a bundle.  Security measures applied to the encapsulating bundle
   may augment those applied to the encapsulated bundle.

Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 27, 2013.









Burleigh               Expires September 27, 2013               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                    BIBE                        March 2013


Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  BIBE Design Elements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     2.1.  BIBE Protocol Data Unit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     2.2.  BIBE Bundle Transmission Service  . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     2.3.  BIBE Bundle Delivery Service  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   3.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   4.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   5.  Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   6.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6

1.  Introduction

   This document describes Bundle-in-Bundle Encapsulation (BIBE), a
   Delay-Tolerant Networking (DTN) Bundle Protocol (BP) [RFC5050]
   "convergence layer" protocol that tunnels BP "bundles" through
   encapsulating bundles.

   Conformance to the bundle-in-bundle encapsulation (BIBE)
   specification is OPTIONAL for BP nodes.  Each BP node that conforms
   to the BIBE specification provides a BIBE convergence-layer adapter
   (CLA) that is implemented within the administrative element of the BP
   node's application agent.  Like any convergence-layer adapter, the
   BIBE CLA provides:

   o  A transmission service that sends an outbound bundle (from the
      bundle protocol agent) to all BP nodes in the minimum reception
      group of the endpoint identified by a specified endpoint ID.






Burleigh               Expires September 27, 2013               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                    BIBE                        March 2013


   o  A reception service that delivers to the bundle protocol agent an
      inbound bundle that was sent by a remote BP node via the BIBE
      convergence layer protocol.

   The BIBE CLA performs these services by:

   o  Encapsulating outbound bundles in BIBE protocol data units, which
      take the form of Bundle Protocol administrative records as
      described later.

   o  Requesting that the bundle protocol agent transmit bundles whose
      payloads are BIBE protocol data units.

   o  Taking delivery of BIBE protocol data units that are the payloads
      of bundles received by the bundle protocol agent.

   o  Delivering to the bundle protocol agent the bundles that are
      encapsulated in delivered BIBE protocol data units.

   Bundle-in-bundle encapsulation may have broad utility, but the
   principal motivating use case is the deployment of "cross domain
   solutions" in secure communications.  Under some circumstances a
   bundle may arrive at a node that is on the frontier of a region of
   network topology in which augmented security is required, from which
   the bundle must egress at some other designated node.  In that case,
   the bundle may be encapsulated within a bundle to which the requisite
   additional Bundle Security Protocol (BSP) [RFC6257] extension
   block(s) can be attached, whose source is the point of entry into the
   insecure region (the "security source") and whose destination is the
   point of egress from the insecure region (the "security
   destination").

   Note that:

   o  If the payload of the encapsulating bundle is protected by a
      Payload Confidentiality Block (PCB), then the source and
      destination of the encapsulated bundle are encrypted, providing a
      defense against traffic analysis that BSP alone cannot offer.

   o  Bundles whose payloads are BIBE protocol data units may themselves
      be forwarded via a BIBE convergence-layer adapter, enabling nested
      bundle encapsulation to arbitrary depth as required by a given
      security policy.








Burleigh               Expires September 27, 2013               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                    BIBE                        March 2013


   o  Moreover, in the event that no single point of egress from an
      insecure region of network topology can be determined at the
      moment a bundle is to be encapsulated, multiple copies of the
      bundle may be encapsulated individually and forwarded to all
      candidate points of egress.

   o  Finally, because the BIBE CLA (like any CLA) may conform to the
      Compressed Bundle Header Encoding (CBHE) specification [RFC6260],
      a bundle that is forwarded by BIBE and protected by multiple
      layers of encryption might be slightly smaller than a similarly
      protected bundle whose multiple PCBs have explicit security
      sources and destinations.  This is because BSP extension block
      security sources and destinations are encoded as endpoint ID
      references, which are not subject to CBHE compression (and in fact
      make CBHE compression of the bundle impossible); retention of the
      complete "dictionary" in the bundle's primary block is mandatory.
      When a bundle is forwarded via a BIBE CLA, explicit security
      sources and destinations in the BSP extension blocks are
      unnecessary.  Implicit security sources and destinations are
      asserted in the primary blocks of the encapsulating and
      encapsulated bundle(s), which may be compressed as described in
      the CBHE specification.

   Taken together, these capabilities provide flexibility in security
   that is comparable, and in some ways superior, to that offered by the
   explicit security sources and destinations of [RFC6257].

2.  BIBE Design Elements

2.1.  BIBE Protocol Data Unit

   The BIBE protocol data unit is a Bundle Protocol administrative
   record constructed as follows:

   o  Record type code is 7, i.e., bit pattern 0111.

   o  The content of the administrative record consists of a single BP
      bundle.

2.2.  BIBE Bundle Transmission Service

   When a BIBE convergence-layer adapter is requested by the bundle
   protocol agent to send a bundle to all bundle nodes in the minimum
   reception group of the endpoint identified by a specified endpoint
   ID:

   o  If the BIBE CLA is CBHE-conformant and the destination endpoint ID
      is likewise CBHE-conformant, the CLA SHOULD encode the primary



Burleigh               Expires September 27, 2013               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                    BIBE                        March 2013


      block of the bundle in the manner prescribed by the CBHE
      specification.

   o  The CLA MUST place the possibly encoded bundle in the content of a
      new BIBE administrative record.

   o  This new BIBE administrative record constitutes a BIBE
      convergence-layer protocol data unit which is to be conveyed from
      the BIBE CLA to a peer BIBE CLA at the destination node(s).

   o  To accomplish conveyance of the BIBE convergence-layer protocol
      data unit to its peer CLA, the CLA MUST request that the bundle
      protocol agent transmit -- to the destination endpoint -- a bundle
      whose payload is the BIBE convergence-layer protocol data unit
      (i.e., the new BIBE administrative record).

   o  Selection of the values of the parameters governing the bundle
      transmission requested by the CLA, other than the destination
      endpoint ID, is an implementation matter.  The parameter values
      governing transmission of the encapsulated bundle MAY be consulted
      for this purpose.

2.3.  BIBE Bundle Delivery Service

   When a BIBE CLA receives a BIBE convergence-layer protocol data unit
   from the bundle protocol agent (that is, upon delivery of the payload
   of a bundle whose transmission was requested by a BIBE CLA):

   o  The BIBE convergence-layer protocol data unit constitutes a BIBE
      administrative record.

   o  If the BIBE CLA is CBHE-conformant and the bundle that forms the
      content of that administrative record is CBHE-encoded, the CLA
      MUST decode the primary block of that bundle in the manner
      prescribed by the CBHE specification.

   o  The CLA MUST deliver the possibly decoded bundle to the bundle
      protocol agent.

   Note that, upon delivery of a bundle from a BIBE CLA, the bundle
   prototol agent will perform the bundle reception procedures defined
   in section 5.6 of [RFC5050] as usual: the formerly encapsulated
   bundle may be forwarded, delivered, etc.

3.  IANA Considerations

   The BIBE specification requires IANA registration of the new BIBE
   administrative record (type code 7) defined in section 2.1 above.



Burleigh               Expires September 27, 2013               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                    BIBE                        March 2013


4.  Security Considerations

   The BIBE specification introduces no new security considerations.

5.  Acknowledgments

   Although the BIBE specification diverges in some ways from the
   original Bundle-in-Bundle Encapsulation Internet Draft authored by
   Susan Symington, Bob Durst, and Keith Scott of The MITRE Corporation
   (draft-irtf-dtnrg-bundle-encapsulation-06, 2009), the influence of
   that earlier document is gratefully acknowledged.

6.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC3986]  Berners-Lee, T., Fielding, R., and L. Masinter, "Uniform
              Resource Identifier (URI): Generic Syntax", STD 66, RFC
              3986, January 2005.

   [RFC5050]  Scott, K. and S. Burleigh, "Bundle Protocol
              Specification", RFC 5050, November 2007.

   [RFC6257]  Symington, S., Farrell, S., Weiss, H., and P. Lovell,
              "Bundle Security Protocol Specification", RFC 6257, May
              2011.

   [RFC6260]  Burleigh, S., "Compressed Bundle Header Encoding (CBHE)",
              RFC 6260, May 2011.

Author's Address

   Scott Burleigh
   Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology
   4800 Oak Grove Drive, m/s 301-490
   Pasadena, CA  91109
   USA

   Phone: +1 818 393 3353
   Email: Scott.C.Burleigh@jpl.nasa.gov









Burleigh               Expires September 27, 2013               [Page 6]
