


Network Working Group                                        S. Burleigh
Internet-Draft                                Jet Propulsion Laboratory,
Intended status: Experimental                   California Institute of
Expires: May 15, 2011                                         Technology
                                                       November 11, 2010


                Compressed Bundle Header Encoding (CBHE)
                        draft-irtf-dtnrg-cbhe-06

Abstract

   This document describes a convention by which Delay-Tolerant
   Networking (DTN) Bundle Protocol (BP) "convergence-layer" adapters
   may represent endpoint identifiers in a compressed form within the
   primary blocks of bundles, provided those endpoint identifiers
   conform to the structure prescribed by this convention.

   CBHE compression is a convergence-layer adaptation.  It is opaque to
   bundle processing.  It therefore has no impact on the
   interoperability of different Bundle Protocol implementations, but
   instead affects only the interoperability of different convergence
   layer adaptation implementations.

   This document is a product of the Delay Tolerant Networking Research
   Group and has been reviewed by that group.  No objections to its
   publication as an RFC were raised.

Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."



Burleigh                  Expires May 15, 2011                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                    CBHE                     November 2010


   This Internet-Draft will expire on May 15, 2011.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.



































Burleigh                  Expires May 15, 2011                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                    CBHE                     November 2010


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.  Compression convention . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     2.1.  Constraints  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     2.2.  Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   3.  Specification  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     3.1.  Transmission . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     3.2.  Reception  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   4.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   5.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   6.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11






































Burleigh                  Expires May 15, 2011                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                    CBHE                     November 2010


1.  Introduction

   This document describes a convention by which Delay-Tolerant
   Networking (DTN) Bundle Protocol (BP) [RFC5050] "convergence-layer
   adapters" may represent endpoint identifiers in a compressed form
   within the primary blocks of bundles, provided those endpoint
   identifiers conform to the structure prescribed by this convention.

   Each DTN bundle's primary block contains the following four BP
   endpoint identifiers (EIDs), of which any two, any three, or even all
   four may be lexically identical: the endpoint identifiers of the
   bundle's source, destination, report-to endpoint, and current
   custodian.  Each EID is a Uniform Record Identifier (URI) as defined
   by [RFC3986].  More specifically, each BP EID is a URI consisting of
   a "scheme name" followed by ":", followed by a sequence of characters
   - historically termed the "scheme-specific part" (SSP) in DTN
   specifications - conforming to URI syntax as defined by RFC3986.

   A degree of block compression is provided by the design of the
   primary block: the scheme names and scheme-specific parts of the four
   endpoints' IDs - up to eight NULL-terminated strings - are
   concatenated at the end of the block in a variable-length character
   array called a "dictionary", enabling each EID to be represented by a
   pair of integers indicating the offsets (within the dictionary) of
   the EID's scheme name and scheme-specific part.  Duplicate strings
   may be omitted from the dictionary, so the actual number of
   concatenated NULL-terminated strings in the dictionary may be less
   than eight and two or more of the scheme name or scheme-specific part
   offsets in the block may have the same value.  Moreover, the eight
   offsets in the primary block are encoded as self-delimiting numeric
   values (SDNVs), which shrink to fit the encoded values; when the
   total length of the dictionary is less than 127 bytes, all eight
   offsets can be encoded into just eight bytes.

   However, these strategems do not prevent the scheme names and
   especially the scheme-specific parts themselves from being lengthy
   strings of ASCII text.  It is therefore still possible for the length
   of a bundle's primary header to be a very large fraction of the total
   length of the bundle when the bundle's payload is relatively small,
   as is anticipated for a number of DTN applications such as space
   flight operations (and as is in any case true of bundles carrying BP
   administrative records).

   The Compressed Bundle Header Encoding (CBHE) convention was developed
   to improve DTN transmission efficiency for such applications by
   further reducing the number of bytes used by convergence-layer
   adapters to represent EIDs in the primary blocks of bundles.




Burleigh                  Expires May 15, 2011                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                    CBHE                     November 2010


2.  Compression convention

2.1.  Constraints

   The only valid scheme name for BP EIDs identified to date is "dtn".
   Although no specification of valid SSP syntax for URIs composed
   within the "dtn" scheme has yet been formally defined, the syntax on
   which rough agreement has been reached in practice is unsuitable for
   CBHE's compression procedures.  For the purposes of CBHE, then, this
   document defines an additional URI scheme named "ipn".  As noted
   inSection 4 below, IANA registration is requested for this new URI
   scheme.

   Compressed Bundle Header Encoding (CBHE) is possible only when all
   endpoint IDs in the primary block of a given bundle are "CBHE-
   conformant".  The following two forms of endpoint ID are CBHE-
   conformant: (a) the null endpoint ID "dtn:none" and (b) any endpoint
   ID formed within the "ipn" scheme.

   The SSP of every URI formed within the "ipn" scheme must comprise:

   1.  A sequence of ASCII numeric digits representing an integer in the
       range 1 to (2^64 - 1), termed the "node number" of the URI.

   2.  An ASCII period ('.') character.

   3.  A sequence of ASCII numeric digits representing an integer in the
       range 0 to (2^64 - 1), termed the "service number" of the URI.

   The node number notionally identifies a BP node.  However, since CBHE
   is not used universally in delay-tolerant networking it must not be
   assumed that all BP nodes are identified by node numbers.

   Negative integers and integers larger than (2^64 - 1) cannot be used
   as node numbers because they cannot be encoded into the SDNVs that
   are used for representation of scheme name and SSP offsets in the
   primary blocks of bundles and therefore could not be compressed as
   described later in this specification.  Node number zero is reserved
   for representation of the null endpoint ID in the compressed form
   described later; decompressing a compressed null EID must always
   yield the standard null endpoint ID URI "dtn:none".

   The service number notionally functions as a de-multiplexing token.
   When the bundle payload is a protocol data unit of some protocol that
   has its own de-multiplexing identifiers, the service number may
   function in a manner similar to that of the protocol number in an IP
   packet, characterizing the encapsulated protocol; alternatively, the
   service number may function in a manner similar to that of the port



Burleigh                  Expires May 15, 2011                  [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                    CBHE                     November 2010


   number in a UDP datagram.  Service numbers enable inbound bundles'
   application data units to be de-multiplexed to instances of
   application functionality that are designed to process them, so that
   effective communication relationships can be developed between bundle
   producers and consumers.

   Service number must not be negative or exceed (2^64 - 1) for the same
   reason that node number must not do so.

   For example, "ipn:9.37" would be a CBHE-conformant endpoint ID.

   Conversion of a CBHE-conformant EID to and from a tuple of two
   integers is therefore straightforward: all characters in the EID
   other than the node number and service number are constant (as
   defined by the "ipn" scheme definition) and the node number and
   service number are taken as the two integers of the tuple.  This ease
   of conversion enables an array of pairs of integers to serve the same
   function as a dictionary of ASCII string EIDs.

   Note, however, that CBHE decompression cannot faithfully recreate the
   dictionary of a compressed primary block from an array of integer
   pairs unless the order of the scheme names and scheme-specific part
   strings in the dictionary of the original, uncompressed block is
   known.  (The bundle protocol specification does not require that the
   strings in the dictionary appear in any particular order and does not
   require that redundant strings be omitted from the dictionary.)
   Therefore, a further precondition to CBHE compression is that the
   strings in the dictionary of the bundle to be compressed must be
   exactly as follows, in this order and without addition:

   1.  The scheme name of the destination endpoint ID.

   2.  The scheme-specific part of the destination endpoint ID.

   3.  The scheme name of the source endpoint ID, if and only if
       different from any prior string in the dictionary.

   4.  The scheme-specific part of the source endpoint ID, if and only
       if different from any prior string in the dictionary.

   5.  The scheme name of the report-to endpoint ID, if and only if
       different from any prior string in the dictionary.

   6.  The scheme-specific part of the report-to endpoint ID, if and
       only if different from any prior string in the dictionary.

   7.  The scheme name of the current custodian endpoint ID, if and only
       if different from any prior string in the dictionary.



Burleigh                  Expires May 15, 2011                  [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                    CBHE                     November 2010


   8.  The scheme-specific part of the current custodian endpoint ID, if
       and only if different from any prior string in the dictionary.

   Note: this constraint implies that a bundle which includes any
   extension blocks containing EID references to endpoint IDs other than
   the block's destination, source, report-to, and current custodian
   cannot be CBHE-compressed since such compression would result in a
   dictionary that would deviate from this structure.

2.2.  Method

   When the constraints enumerated above are met, the CBHE block
   compression method can be applied by the convergence layer adapter at
   the time the bundle is transmitted via a convergence-layer protocol.
   In a CBHE-compressed primary block, the eight SDNVs that normally
   contain EIDs' scheme name and SSP offsets within the dictionary are
   instead used to contain the eight integer values listed below, in the
   order shown:

   1.  The node number of the destination endpoint ID, or zero if the
       destination endpoint is the null endpoint.

   2.  The service number of the destination endpoint ID, or zero if the
       destination endpoint is the null endpoint.

   3.  The node number of the source endpoint ID, or zero if the source
       endpoint is the null endpoint.

   4.  The service number of the source endpoint ID, or zero if the
       source endpoint is the null endpoint.

   5.  The node number of the report-to endpoint ID, or zero if the
       report-to endpoint is the null endpoint.

   6.  The service number of the report-to endpoint ID, or zero if the
       report-to endpoint is the null endpoint.

   7.  The node number of the current custodian endpoint ID, or zero if
       the current custodian endpoint is the null endpoint.

   8.  The service number of the current custodian endpoint ID, or zero
       if the current custodian endpoint is the null endpoint.

   Further, the dictionary is omitted from the primary block and the
   primary block's dictionary length is set to zero.

   Upon reception the receiving convergence-layer adaptation de-
   compresses the block by simply reversing the process so that the



Burleigh                  Expires May 15, 2011                  [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                    CBHE                     November 2010


   bundle presented to the bundle protocol agent has the standard form
   (i.e., the dictionary is reconstituted).


3.  Specification

   CBHE compression is a convergence-layer adaptation.  It is opaque to
   bundle processing.  It therefore has no impact on the
   interoperability of different Bundle Protocol implementations, but
   instead affects only the interoperability of different convergence
   layer adaptation implementations.

   Bundle Protocol convergence-layer adapters that conform to the CBHE
   specification must implement the following procedures.

3.1.  Transmission

   When and only when required by the bundle protocol agent to transmit
   to some CBHE-conformant convergence-layer adapter a bundle whose
   primary block's endpoint IDs satisfy the constraints identified in
   section 2.1 above, the convergence layer adapter MAY encode the
   primary block of the bundle in accordance with the CBHE compression
   convention described in section 2.2 above.

   Note that CBHE compression may be applied only when the receiving
   convergence-layer adapter is known to be CBHE-conformant, i.e., able
   to decode the encoded primary block.  When the convergence-layer
   adapter to which the bundle is to be transmitted is not known to be
   CBHE-conformant, CBHE compression MUST NOT be applied.  The manner in
   which this determination is made is an implementation matter.

3.2.  Reception

   Upon receiving a bundle whose dictionary length is zero (and only in
   this circumstance), a CBHE-conformant convergence layer adapter MUST
   decode the primary block of the bundle in accordance with the CBHE
   compression convention described in section 2.2 above before
   delivering it to the bundle protocol agent.

   Note that when a non-CBHE-conformant convergence layer adapter
   receives a bundle whose dictionary length is zero, it has no choice
   but to pass it to the bundle agent without modification.  In this
   case the bundle protocol agent will be unable to dispatch the
   received bundle, because it will be unable to determine the
   destination endpoint; the bundle will be judged to be malformed.  The
   behavior of the bundle protocol agent in this circumstance is an
   implementation matter.




Burleigh                  Expires May 15, 2011                  [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                    CBHE                     November 2010


4.  IANA Considerations

   Registration of the "ipn" URI scheme is requested as follows.

   URI scheme name: "ipn".

   Status: provisional.

   URI scheme syntax:

   This specification uses the Augmented Backus-Naur Form (ABNF)
   notation of [RFC2234], including the core ABNF syntax rule for DIGIT
   defined by that specification.

   o  ipn-uri := "ipn:" ipn-hier-part

   o  ipn-hier-part := node-nbr nbr-delim service-nbr ; a path-rootless

   o  node-nbr := 1*DIGIT

   o  nbr-delim := "."

   o  service-nbr := 1*DIGIT

   None of the reserved characters defined in the generic URI syntax are
   used as delimiters within URIs of the IPN scheme.

   URI scheme semantics: URIs of the IPN scheme are used as endpoint
   identifiers in the Delay-Tolerant Networking (DTN) Bundle Protocol
   (BP) [RFC5050] as described in 2.1 above.

   Encoding considerations: URIs of the IPN scheme are encoded
   exclusively in US-ASCII characters.

   Applications and/or protocols that use this URI scheme name: the
   Delay-Tolerant Networking (DTN) Bundle Protocol (BP) [RFC5050].

   Interoperability considerations: as noted above, URIs of the IPN
   scheme are encoded exclusively in US-ASCII characters.

   Security considerations:

   o  Reliability and consistency: none of the BP endpoints identified
      by the URIs of the IPN scheme are guaranteed to be reachable at
      any time, and the identity of the processing entities operating on
      those endpoints is never guaranteed by the Bundle Protocol itself.
      Bundle authentication as defined by the Bundle Security Protocol
      is required for this purpose.



Burleigh                  Expires May 15, 2011                  [Page 9]

Internet-Draft                    CBHE                     November 2010


   o  Malicious construction: malicious construction of a conformant
      IPN-scheme URI is limited to malicious selection of node number
      and malicious selection of service number.  That is, a maliciously
      constructed IPN-scheme URI could be used to direct a bundle to an
      endpoint that might be damaged by the arrival of that bundle or,
      alternatively, to declare a false source for a bundle and thereby
      cause incorrect processing at a node that receives the bundle.  In
      both cases (and indeed in all bundle processing) the node that
      receives a bundle should verify its authenticity and validity
      before operating on it in any way.

   o  Back-end transcoding: the limited expressiveness of URIs of the
      IPN scheme effectively eliminates the possibility of threat due to
      errors in back-end transcoding.

   o  Rare IP address formats: not relevant, as IP addresses do not
      appear anywhere in conformant IPN-scheme URIs.

   o  Sensitive information: because IPN-scheme URIs are used only to
      represent the identities of Bundle Protocol endpoints, the risk of
      disclosure of sensitive information due to interception of these
      URIs is minimal.  Examination of IPN-scheme URIs could be used to
      support traffic analysis; where traffic analysis is a plausible
      danger, bundles should be conveyed by secure convergence-layer
      protocols that don't expose endpoint IDs.

   o  Semantic attacks: the simplicity of IPN-scheme URI syntax
      minimizes the possibility of misinterpretation of a URI by a human
      user.

   Contact: Scott Burleigh, Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California
   Institute of Technology, scott.c.burleigh@jpl.nasa.gov, +1 (800) 393-
   3353.

   Author/Change controller.  Scott Burleigh, Jet Propulsion Laboratory,
   California Institute of Technology, scott.c.burleigh@jpl.nasa.gov, +1
   (800) 393-3353.


5.  Security Considerations

   The Bundle Security Protocol may under some conditions insert
   additional endpoint ID strings into the dictionary of a bundle and
   reference those strings in BSP extension blocks.  Because a bundle
   that includes any extension blocks containing EID references to
   endpoint IDs other than the block's destination, source, report-to,
   and current custodian cannot be CBHE-compressed, bundles cannot be
   compressed under those conditions.



Burleigh                  Expires May 15, 2011                 [Page 10]

Internet-Draft                    CBHE                     November 2010


   Specifically, the specification detailed above implies that a bundle
   cannot be CBHE-compressed when the security source endpoint for the
   Bundle Authentication Block (BAB) is noted in the dictionary
   (typically because there is no other way for the receiving bundle
   protocol agent to determine the security source endpoint), when the
   security destination endpoint for the BAB is noted in the dictionary
   (in the rare case that the receiving endpoint is not the security
   destination endpoint), when the security source endpoint for the
   Payload Integrity Block (PIB), Payload Confidentiality Block (PCB),
   or Extension Security Block (ESB) is not the source endpoint, or when
   the security destination endpoint for the PIB, PCB, or ESB is not the
   destination endpoint.

   These caveats aside, CBHE introduces no new security considerations
   beyond those discussed in the DTN Bundle Protocol and Bundle Security
   Protocol specifications.


6.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC3986]  Berners-Lee, T., Fielding, R., and L. Masinter, "Uniform
              Resource Identifier (URI): Generic Syntax", STD 66,
              RFC 3986, January 2005.

   [RFC5050]  Scott, K. and S. Burleigh, "Bundle Protocol
              Specification", RFC 5050, November 2007.


Author's Address

   Scott Burleigh
   Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology
   4800 Oak Grove Drive, m/s 301-490
   Pasadena, CA  91109
   USA

   Phone: +1 818 393 3353
   Email: Scott.C.Burleigh@jpl.nasa.gov










Burleigh                  Expires May 15, 2011                 [Page 11]


