



Network Working Group                                        S. Burleigh
Internet-DraftJet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technol
Intended status: Experimental                              July 01, 2013
Expires: January 02, 2014


            Bundle Protocol Extended Class Of Service (ECOS)
                        draft-irtf-dtnrg-ecos-05

Abstract

   This document describes an extension to the Delay-Tolerant Networking
   (DTN) Bundle Protocol (BP) that marks bundles with class-of-service
   designators beyond those defined for the BP primary block.  The
   extended class-of-service designators are an "ordinal" number that
   provides fine-grained prioritization of bundles, a "critical" flag,
   flags that explicitly request "timely" or "assured" convergence-layer
   transmission (or both), and an optional flow label.

Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 02, 2014.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.





Burleigh                Expires January 02, 2014                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                    ECOS                         July 2013


   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  ECOS Extension Block Format . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   3.  Processing  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     3.1.  Bundle Origination  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     3.2.  Bundle Forwarding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     3.3.  Bundle Delivery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   4.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   5.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   6.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8

1.  Introduction

   This document describes an extension to the Delay-Tolerant Networking
   (DTN) Bundle Protocol (BP) [RFC5050] that marks bundles with class-
   of-service designators beyond those defined for the BP primary block.

   The bundle protocol specification defines a single designator for a
   bundle's class of service:

   o  Priority, a value in the range 0 through 2, with higher values
      indicating greater urgency: 0 = "bulk", 1 = "normal", 2 =
      "expedited".  Priority level 3 is reserved for future use.

   For some applications, such as space flight operations, additional
   variation in class of service may be required:

   o  Many more levels of priority may be needed, enabling more fine-
      grained control over the precedence of user-selected application
      data types in the progress of bundles through the network.

   o  A way of indicating emergency ("critical") traffic may be needed.
      Emergency traffic is not merely high-priority: it is so important
      that the user is willing to incur the network overhead of
      transmitting the bundle along every potential route to its
      destination, rather than only on the route that would normally be



Burleigh                Expires January 02, 2014                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                    ECOS                         July 2013


      selected as the "best" route according to the applicable routing
      value function.  This expedient ensures that the bundle arrives at
      its destination in the least possible time, regardless of how
      accurately the routing system reckons end-to-end latency on any
      given route: the bundle arrives by whatever turns out to be the
      fastest route, as well as by all others.

   o  There may be a need to request explicitly that all nodes
      forwarding the bundle use convergence-layer protocols that either
      always do or always don't perform retransmission upon detected
      loss of data.  This designation may be important for bundles
      carrying application data for which timeliness of delivery is
      known to be more important than certainty, or vice versa.  In some
      cases, retransmitted "old data" may be a waste of bandwidth that
      could instead be used to convey new data of greater value, or the
      out-of-order arrival of retransmitted data may degrade the
      usefulness of streaming data such as audio or video.

   o  There may be a need for an opaque "flow label" that can be used by
      the application to pass a variety of transmission control
      parameters to the convergence-layer protocol.

   The Extended Class of Service (ECOS) extension to Bundle Protocol is
   designed to provide these additional class of service designators.

2.  ECOS Extension Block Format

   The ECOS block conforms to sections 4.5.2 and 4.6 of [RFC5050],
   constrained as follows:

   o  Block type code is 19.  (See "IANA Considerations" below.)

   o  The following block processing control flag MUST be set to 1:

      *  Bit 0 - block must be replicated in every fragment.

      The setting of other block processing control flags, where not
      mandated by the Bundle Protocol specification, is an
      implementation matter.

   o  The block MUST NOT contain any EID references.

   o  Block data length is 2 + N, where N is zero if the ECOS block
      contains no flow label (as described below) and is otherwise the
      length of the SDNV in which that flow label is represented.

   The block data of the ECOS block comprises at least two and possibly
   three fields.



Burleigh                Expires January 02, 2014                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                    ECOS                         July 2013


   The first field of the block data is an 8-bit "flags" byte.  The bits
   of the flags signify the following conditions:

   o  The 0x01 bit, if True, indicates that the bundle is "critical":
      the bundle protocol agent is requested to forward one copy of the
      bundle along every path that might get it to its destinaion.

   o  The 0x02 bit, if True, indicates an explicit preference that
      delivery of the bundle be timely and in order: the bundle protocol
      agent is requested to forward the bundle on a "best-efforts"
      basis, without retransmission.

   o  The 0x04 bit, if True, indicates that the "ordinal" byte of this
      ECOS block (the byte immediately following the "flags" byte) is
      followed by a numeric "flow label" in SDNV representation.

   o  The 0x08 bit, if True, indicates an explicit preference that
      delivery of the bundle be assured even if out of order: the bundle
      protocol agent is requested to forward the bundle reliably, with
      retransmission as necessary.

   o  All other bits of the "flags" byte are reserved for future use.

   Note that both the 0x02 and 0x08 bits might be set for a given
   bundle.  This indicates an explicit preference that delivery of the
   bundle be timely and in-order if possible but in any case assured, as
   in a bundle streaming service: whenever loss is detected in "best-
   efforts" transmission, the lost data are retransmitted for eventual
   out-of-order delivery in background.

   The "flags" byte is followed by an 8-bit "ordinal" byte, containing
   an unsigned "ordinal" number in the range 0-255.  For a bundle whose
   standard class of service is 2 ("expedited"), the ordinal number
   indicates the relative priority of this bundle among all other
   expedited bundles: ordinal value 100 indicates greater urgency than
   ordinal value 99, and so on.  Ordinal value 255 is reserved for
   custody signals.  For a bundle whose standard class of service is not
   2, the ordinal value has no significance.

   If the 0x04 bit of the ECOS block's "flags" byte is True, the third
   field of the block data is a numeric "flow label" value in SDNV
   representation.  The significance of the flow label is an
   implementation matter.  Notionally, the flow label is intended to be
   used to convey quality-of-service information to the convergence-
   layer protocol adapter.  The bundle protocol agent's response to a
   flow label whose significance is unknown is an implementation matter.





Burleigh                Expires January 02, 2014                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                    ECOS                         July 2013


3.  Processing

3.1.  Bundle Origination

   At the time a bundle is sourced it MAY contain one ECOS block.  When
   a bundle contains an ECOS block, the ECOS block MUST precede the
   payload block and it MUST be the only ECOS block in the bundle.

   The manner in which the application issuing the block communicates
   the values of the ECOS block data fields to the bundle protocol agent
   is an implementation matter.

   If the ECOS block contains a flow label, then the 0x04 bit of the
   block's "flags" byte MUST be set to 1 (True) and the flow label MUST
   be a numeric value represented as a valid SDNV.  Otherwise the 0x04
   bit of the block's flags byte MUST be set to 0 (False).

   The ordinal byte of the ECOS block MUST contain an unsigned integer
   in the range 0-255.  If the bundle of which the ECOS block is a part
   is a custody signal, then the value of the ordinal byte MUST be 255;
   otherwise, the value of the ordinal bit MUST be in the range 0-254.

3.2.  Bundle Forwarding

   This section applies only to nodes at which procedures for processing
   ECOS blocks are implemented.  When a node at which such procedures
   are not implemented receives a bundle that contains one or more ECOS
   blocks, those blocks must be processed as prescribed in the Bundle
   Protocol specification.

   When a received bundle contains multiple ECOS blocks or contains a
   single ECOS block that is invalid (that is, one that violates one or
   more of the provisions of section 3.1 above), all ECOS blocks in the
   bundle MUST be ignored and SHOULD be deleted.

   At the time a bundle that has no valid single ECOS block is received
   from a neighboring node, the bundle protocol agent MAY insert an ECOS
   block into the bundle.  The values of the block data fields of such
   an ECOS block are an implementation matter, provided that they
   conform to this specification.

   The forwarding of a bundle that contains a valid ECOS block, whether
   locally sourced or received from another bundle protocol agent or
   locally inserted upon reception from another bundle protocol agent,
   MUST comply with the following rules:

   1.  If the 0x01 bit of the ECOS block's flags byte is set to 1, then
       exactly one copy of the bundle SHOULD be forwarded to every



Burleigh                Expires January 02, 2014                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                    ECOS                         July 2013


       neighboring node that has some plausible prospect of being able
       to forward the bundle toward its final destination without
       returning it to the local node, a determination that is a matter
       left to the bundle protocol agent's route computation mechanism;
       also, the bundle MUST be queued for transmission as if its
       standard class of service were 2 ("expedited") and its ordinal
       value were 254, regardless of the actual values of these fields.
       Each "critical" bundle MUST be forwarded *at most once* by each
       bundle protocol agent; that is, critical bundles MUST NOT be
       reforwarded in response to custody refusals, the expiration of
       custody transfer timers, the presence of a routing loop in the
       network, or any other condition, because such reforwarding could
       result in unbounded bundle transmission explosions.  The manner
       in which this constraint is enforced is an implementation matter.
       One possible approach is to manage a list of the IDs and
       expiration times of all critical bundles received, removing
       bundles from the list only as the associated expiration times are
       reached; since "critical" bundles should be issued rarely,
       managing such a list should not be a severe processing burden.
       Note that a bundle protocol agent MAY choose to handle a critical
       bundle as non-critical traffic and forward it on only a single
       path, but ignoring the "critical" flag may put network assets as
       risk and should be avoided unless necessary to preserve the
       continued operation of the bundle protocol agent.

   2.  If the 0x02 bit of the ECOS block's flags byte is set to 1, then
       the bundle protocol agent SHOULD forward the bundle by invoking
       an adapter for a convergence layer protocol that does NOT perform
       retransmission of data lost in transit.  If the bundle protocol
       agent has no access to such a convergence layer adapter then this
       flag may be ignored, but in that case application data units may
       arrive out of transmission order at the destination (possibly
       degrading application performance) and/or transmission bandwidth
       may be wasted on unnecessary retransmission, reducing the
       effective throughput of the network.

   3.  If the 0x04 bit of the ECOS block's flags byte is set to 1, then
       the bundle protocol agent SHOULD forward the bundle by invoking
       an adapter for a convergence layer protocol that DOES perform
       retransmission of data lost in transit.  If the bundle protocol
       agent has no access to such a convergence layer adapter then this
       flag may be ignored, but in that case application data units may
       not arrive at the destination, possibly degrading application
       performance.

   4.  If both the 0x02 bit and the 0x04 bit of the ECOS block's flags
       byte are set to 1, then the bundle protocol agent SHOULD forward
       the bundle by invoking an adapter for a convergence layer



Burleigh                Expires January 02, 2014                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                    ECOS                         July 2013


       protocol that functions as a bundle streaming service: whenever
       loss is detected in "best-efforts" transmission, the lost data
       are retransmitted for eventual out-of-order delivery in
       background.  If the bundle protocol agent has no access to such a
       convergence layer adapter then this flag may be ignored, but in
       that case application performance may be degraded.

   5.  If the bundle's class of service is 2 (expedited), then the
       bundle protocol agent MUST forward this bundle only after
       forwarding all other bundles that are to be forwarded to the same
       node and have got class of service 2 and have explicit or
       implicit ordinal byte value that is higher than or equal to the
       ECOS block's ordinal byte value.  Moreover, the bundle protocol
       agent MUST forward this bundle before forwarding any other bundle
       that is to be forwarded to the same node and either (a) has got
       class of service 2 and explicit or implicit ordinal byte value
       lower than the ECOS block's ordinal byte value or (b) has got
       class of service less than 2.  An implicit ordinal byte value is
       the ordinal byte value for a bundle that has no valid ECOS block;
       that value is 0.

   The valid ECOS block of a received bundle that is to be forwarded to
   another node MUST NOT be deleted from the bundle.

3.3.  Bundle Delivery

   When a bundle that contains an ECOS block is delivered to its final
   destination, the values of ECOS block fields MAY be provided to the
   application but otherwise have no impact on bundle delivery
   procedures.

4.  IANA Considerations

   This specification allocates a codepoint from the Bundle Block Type
   Codes registry defined in [I-D.irtf-dtnrg-iana-bp-registries].  The
   additional entry in the Bundle Block Type Codes Registry assigns
   value 19 to the Extended Class of Service block and references this
   specification.

5.  Security Considerations

   Clearly the injection of bundles with the "critical" flag set to True
   could increase the impact of a denial of service attack.  As with all
   such attacks, the best available defense is to require valid Bundle
   Authentication Blocks on all received bundles.

6.  Normative References




Burleigh                Expires January 02, 2014                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                    ECOS                         July 2013


   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC3986]  Berners-Lee, T., Fielding, R., and L. Masinter, "Uniform
              Resource Identifier (URI): Generic Syntax", STD 66, RFC
              3986, January 2005.

   [RFC5050]  Scott, K. and S. Burleigh, "Bundle Protocol
              Specification", RFC 5050, November 2007.

Author's Address

   Scott Burleigh
   Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology
   4800 Oak Grove Drive, m/s 301-490
   Pasadena, CA  91109
   USA

   Phone: +1 818 393 3353
   Email: Scott.C.Burleigh@jpl.nasa.gov































Burleigh                Expires January 02, 2014                [Page 8]
