


Network Working Group                                        S. Burleigh
Internet-Draft                                Jet Propulsion Laboratory,
Intended status: Experimental                   California Institute of
Expires: June 6, 2010                                         Technology
                                                        December 3, 2009


            Bundle Protocol Extended Class Of Service (ECOS)
                        draft-irtf-dtnrg-ecos-00

Abstract

   This document describes an extension to the Delay-Tolerant Networking
   (DTN) Bundle Protocol (BP) that marks bundles with class-of-service
   designators beyond those defined for the BP primary block.  The
   extended class-of-service designators are an "ordinal" number that
   provides fine-grained prioritization of bundles, a "critical" flag, a
   "best-efforts" flag, and an optional flow label.

Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on June 6, 2010.




Burleigh                  Expires June 6, 2010                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                    ECOS                     December 2009


Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2009 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  ECOS Extension Block Format . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   3.  Processing  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
     3.1.  Bundle Origination  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
     3.2.  Bundle Forwarding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
     3.3.  Bundle Delivery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   4.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   5.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   6.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7























Burleigh                  Expires June 6, 2010                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                    ECOS                     December 2009


1.  Introduction

   This document describes an extension to the Delay-Tolerant Networking
   (DTN) Bundle Protocol (BP) [RFC5050] that marks bundles with class-
   of-service designators beyond those defined for the BP primary block.

   The bundle protocol specification defines a single designator for a
   bundle's class of service:

   o  Priority, a value in the range 0 through 2, with higher values
      indicating greater urgency: 0 = "bulk", 1 = "normal", 2 =
      "expedited".  Priority level 3 is reserved for future use.

   For some applications, such as space flight operations, additional
   variation in class of service may be required:

   o  Many more levels of priority may be needed, enabling more fine-
      grained control over the precedence of user-selected application
      data types in the progress of bundles through the network.

   o  A way of indicating "emergency" traffic may be needed.  Emergency
      traffic is not merely high-priority: it is so important that the
      user is willing to incur the network overhead of transmitting the
      bundle along every potential route to its destination, rather than
      only on the route that would normally be selected as the "best"
      route according to the applicable routing value function.  This
      expedient ensures that the bundle arrives at its destination in
      the least possible time, regardless of how accurately the routing
      system reckons end-to-end latency on any given route: the bundle
      arrives by whatever turns out to be the fastest route, as well as
      by all others.

   o  There may be a need to assure that all nodes forwarding the bundle
      use convergence-layer protocols that *don't *perform
      retransmission upon detected loss of data.  This designation may
      be important for bundles carrying application data for which
      timeliness of delivery is more important than certainty:
      retransmitted "old data" may be a waste of bandwidth that could
      instead be used to convey new data of greater value.

   o  There may be a need for an opaque "flow label" that can be used by
      the application to pass a variety of transmission control
      parameters to the convergence-layer protocol.

   The Extended Class of Service (ECOS) extension to Bundle Protocol is
   designed to provide these additional class of service designators.





Burleigh                  Expires June 6, 2010                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                    ECOS                     December 2009


2.  ECOS Extension Block Format

   The ECOS block conforms to sections 4.5.2 and 4.6 of [RFC5050],
   constrained as follows:

   o  Block type code is 19.

   o  The following block processing control flag MUST be set to 1:

      *  Bit 0 - block must be replicated in every fragment.

      The setting of other block processing control flags, where not
      mandated by the Bundle Protocol specification, is an
      implementation matter.

   o  The block MUST contain no EID references.

   o  Block data length is 2 + N, where N is zero if the ECOS block
      contains no flow label (as described below) and is otherwise the
      length of the SDNV in which that flow label is represented.

   The block data of the ECOS block comprises at least two and possibly
   three fields.

   The first field of the block data is an 8-bit "flags" byte.  The bits
   of the flags signify the following conditions:

   o  The 0x01 bit, if True, indicates that the bundle is "critical":
      the bundle protocol agent is required to forward one copy of the
      bundle along every path that might get it to its destinaion.

   o  The 0x02 bit, if True, indicates that the bundle is to be
      forwarded on a "best-efforts" basis.  Specifically, .

   o  The 0x04 bit, if True, indicates that the "ordinal" byte of this
      ECOS block (the byte immediately following the "flags" byte) is
      followed by a numeric "flow label" in SDNV representation.

   o  All other bits of the "flags" byte are reserved for future use.

   The "flags" byte is followed by an 8-bit "ordinal" byte, containing
   an unsigned "ordinal" number in the range 0-255.  For a bundle whose
   standard class of service is 2 ("expedited"), the ordinal number
   indicates the relative priority of this bundle among all other
   expedited bundles: ordinal value 100 indicates greater urgency than
   ordinal value 99, and so on.  Ordinal value 255 is reserved for
   custody signals.  For a bundle whose standard class of service is not
   2, the ordinal value has no significance.



Burleigh                  Expires June 6, 2010                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                    ECOS                     December 2009


   If the 0x04 bit of the ECOS block's "flags" byte is False then the
   "ordinal" byte is the last field of the block data.  Otherwise, the
   third and final field of the block data is a numeric "flow label"
   value in SDNV representation.  The significance of the flow label is
   an implementation matter.  Notionally, the flow label is intended to
   be used to convey quality-of-service information to the convergence-
   layer protocol adapter.


3.  Processing

3.1.  Bundle Origination

   At the time a bundle is sourced it MAY contain one ECOS block.  When
   a bundle contains an ECOS block, the ECOS block MUST precede the
   payload block and it MUST be the only ECOS block in the bundle.

   The manner in which the application issuing the block communicates
   the values of the ECOS block data fields to the bundle protocol agent
   is an implementation matter.

   If the ECOS block contains a flow label, then the 0x04 bit of the
   block's "flags" byte MUST be set to 1 (True) and the flow label MUST
   be a numeric value represented as a valid SDNV.  Otherwise the 0x04
   bit of the block's flags byte MUST be set to 0 (False).

   The ordinal byte of the ECOS block MUST contain an unsigned integer
   in the range 0-255.  If the bundle of which the ECOS block is a part
   is a custody signal, then the value of the ordinal byte MUST be 255;
   otherwise, the value of the ordinal bit MUST be in the range 0-254.

3.2.  Bundle Forwarding

   At the time a bundle that has no ECOS block is received from a
   neighboring node, the bundle protocol agent MAY insert an ECOS block
   into the bundle.  The values of the block data fields of such an ECOS
   block are an implementation matter, provided that they conform to
   this specification.

   The forwarding of a bundle that contains a valid ECOS block, whether
   locally sourced or received from another bundle protocol agent or
   locally inserted upon reception from another bundle protocol agent,
   MUST comply with the following rules:

   1.  If the 0x01 bit of the ECOS block's flags byte is set to 1, then
       one copy of the bundle MUST be forwarded to every neighboring
       node that has some plausible prospect of being able to forward
       the bundle toward its final destination without returning it to



Burleigh                  Expires June 6, 2010                  [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                    ECOS                     December 2009


       the local node.

   2.  If the 0x02 bit of the ECOS block's flags byte is set to 1, then
       the bundle protocol agent MUST invoke the services of an adapter
       for a convergence layer protocol that does NOT perform
       retransmission of data lost in transit unless the node has no
       convergence layer protocol adapter that has a plausible prospect
       of being able to forward the bundle toward its final destination
       without returning it to the local node.

   3.  If the bundle's class of service is 2 (expedited), then the
       bundle protocol agent MUST forward this bundle only after
       forwarding all other bundles that are to be forwarded to the same
       node and have got class of service 2 and have explicit or
       implicit ordinal byte value that is higher than or equal to the
       ECOS block's ordinal byte value, and MUST forward this bundle
       before forwarding any other bundle that is to be forwarded to the
       same node and either (a) has got class of service 2 and explicit
       or implicit ordinal byte value lower thant the ECOS block's
       ordinal byte value or (b) has got class of service less than 2.
       An implicit ordinal byte value is the ordinal byte value for a
       bundle that has no ECOS block; that value is 0.

   The ECOS block of a received bundle that is to be forwarded to
   another node MUST not be deleted from the bundle.

3.3.  Bundle Delivery

   When a bundle that contains an ECOS block is delivered to its final
   destination, the values of ECOS block fields have no impact on bundle
   delivery procedures.


4.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no IANA considerations.


5.  Security Considerations

   The ECOS block introduces no new security considerations beyond those
   discussed in the DTN Bundle Protocol and Bundle Security Protocol
   specifications.


6.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate



Burleigh                  Expires June 6, 2010                  [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                    ECOS                     December 2009


              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC3986]  Berners-Lee, T., Fielding, R., and L. Masinter, "Uniform
              Resource Identifier (URI): Generic Syntax", STD 66,
              RFC 3986, January 2005.

   [RFC5050]  Scott, K. and S. Burleigh, "Bundle Protocol
              Specification", RFC 5050, November 2007.


Author's Address

   Scott Burleigh
   Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology
   4800 Oak Grove Drive, m/s 301-490
   Pasadena, CA  91109
   USA

   Phone: +1 818 393 3353
   Email: Scott.C.Burleigh@jpl.nasa.gov































Burleigh                  Expires June 6, 2010                  [Page 7]


