


Network Working Group                                        S. Burleigh
Internet-Draft                                Jet Propulsion Laboratory,
Intended status: Experimental                   California Institute of
Expires: August 22, 2010                                      Technology
                                                       February 18, 2010


                Compressed Bundle Header Encoding (CBHE)
                        draft-irtf-dtnrg-cbhe-04

Abstract

   This document describes a convention by which Delay-Tolerant
   Networking (DTN) Bundle Protocol (BP) "convergence-layer" adapters
   may represent endpoint identifiers in a compressed form within the
   primary blocks of bundles, provided those endpoint identifiers
   conform to the structure prescribed by this convention.

   CBHE compression is a convergence-layer adaptation.  It is opaque to
   bundle processing.  It therefore has no impact on the
   interoperability of different Bundle Protocol implementations, but
   instead affects only the interoperability of different convergence
   layer adaptation implementations.

   This document is a product of the Delay Tolerant Networking Research
   Group and has been reviewed by that group.  No objections to its
   publication as an RFC were raised.

Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."



Burleigh                 Expires August 22, 2010                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                    CBHE                     February 2010


   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 22, 2010.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the BSD License.





























Burleigh                 Expires August 22, 2010                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                    CBHE                     February 2010


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.  Compression convention . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     2.1.  Constraints  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     2.2.  Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   3.  Specification  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     3.1.  Transmission . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     3.2.  Reception  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   4.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   5.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   6.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10






































Burleigh                 Expires August 22, 2010                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                    CBHE                     February 2010


1.  Introduction

   This document describes a convention by which Delay-Tolerant
   Networking (DTN) Bundle Protocol (BP) [RFC5050] "convergence-layer
   adapters" may represent endpoint identifiers in a compressed form
   within the primary blocks of bundles, provided those endpoint
   identifiers conform to the structure prescribed by this convention.

   Each DTN bundle's primary block contains at least the following four
   BP endpoint identifiers (EIDs), of which any two, any three, or even
   all four may be lexically identical: the endpoint identifiers of the
   source, the destination, the report-to endpoint, and the current
   custodian.  Each EID is a Uniform Record Identifier (URI) as defined
   by [RFC3986].  More specifically, each BP EID is a URI consisting of
   a "scheme name" followed by ":", followed by a sequence of characters
   -- historically termed the "scheme-specific part" (SSP) in DTN
   specifications -- conforming to URI syntax as defined by RFC3986.

   The only valid scheme name for BP EIDs identified to date is "dtn".
   No specification of valid SSP syntax for URIs composed within the
   "dtn" scheme has yet been formally defined, but at the time of this
   writing there is rough consensus within the DTN Research Group that a
   "dtn"-scheme SSP must be either the string "none" or else a sequence
   of one or more "DTN URI elements" separated by "!" characters.  Each
   DTN URI element must consist of an optional "operation name" followed
   by a mandatory ":", followed by a string -- here termed a
   "designator" -- that is itself in the form of a URI.  Within any
   single DTN URI element, the portion of the designator that would be
   interpreted as the scheme name if the designator were parsed as a URI
   is termed the designator's "namespace name" and the portion following
   the ":" that delimits the namespace name is termed the designator's
   namespace-specific string (NSS).  Adherence to this syntax
   specification is assumed in the definition of CBHE.

   A degree of block compression is provided by the design of the
   primary block: the scheme names and scheme-specific parts of the four
   endpoints' IDs - up to eight NULL-terminated strings - are
   concatenated at the end of the block in a variable-length character
   array called a "dictionary", enabling each EID to be represented by a
   pair of integers indicating the offsets (within the dictionary) of
   the EID's scheme name and scheme-specific part.  Duplicate strings
   may be omitted from the dictionary, so the actual number of
   concatenated NULL-terminated strings in the dictionary may be less
   than eight and two or more of the scheme name or scheme-specific part
   offsets in the block may have the same value.  Moreover, the eight
   offsets in the primary block are encoded as self-delimiting numeric
   values (SDNVs), which shrink to fit the encoded values; when the
   total length of the dictionary is less than 127 bytes, all eight



Burleigh                 Expires August 22, 2010                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                    CBHE                     February 2010


   offsets can be encoded into just eight bytes.

   However, these strategems do not prevent the scheme names and
   especially the scheme-specific parts themselves from being lengthy
   strings of ASCII text.  It is therefore still possible for the length
   of a bundle's primary header to be a very large fraction of the total
   length of the bundle when the bundle's payload is relatively small,
   as is anticipated for a number of DTN applications such as space
   flight operations (and as is in any case true of bundles carrying BP
   administrative records).

   The Compressed Bundle Header Encoding (CBHE) convention was developed
   to improve DTN transmission efficiency for such applications by
   further reducing the number of bytes used by convergence-layer
   adapters to represent EIDs in the primary blocks of bundles.


2.  Compression convention

2.1.  Constraints

   Compressed Bundle Header Encoding (CBHE) is possible only when all
   endpoint IDs in the primary block of a given bundle are "CBHE-
   conformant".  Two forms of endpoint ID are CBHE-conformant: (a) the
   null endpoint ID "dtn:none" and (b) any endpoint ID formed within the
   "dtn" scheme whose SSP comprises only a single DTN URI element whose
   operation name is of length zero and whose designator's NSS is of the
   form NODE_NUMBER.SERVICE_NUMBER.

   Any number of different namespace names may appear in the designators
   of CBHE-conformant EIDs.  However, CBHE compression is possible
   between a pair of convergence-layer adapters only when each one is
   configured to compress only those CBHE-conformant EIDs that cite some
   single assigned namespace *and* that assigned namespace is the same
   for both adapters.

   The node number is a positive integer that notionally identifies a BP
   node.  In a spacecraft flight operations context, for example,
   spacecraft identifiers might be used as node numbers.  However,
   methods for assigning node numbers to BP nodes are beyond the scope
   of this document; in particular, no requirement or guarantee of a
   one-to-one mapping between node numbers and BP nodes may be inferred.

   Node number must be an integer in the range 1 to (2^64 - 1).
   Negative integers and integers larger than (2^64 - 1) cannot be
   encoded into the SDNVs that are used for representation of scheme
   name and SSP offsets in the primary blocks of bundles and therefore
   could not be compressed as described later in this specification.



Burleigh                 Expires August 22, 2010                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                    CBHE                     February 2010


   Node number zero is reserved for representation of the null endpoint
   ID in the compressed form described later; decompressing a compressed
   null EID must always yield the standard null endpoint ID URI "dtn:
   none".

   The service number is a non-negative integer that notionally
   functions as a de-multiplexing token.  When the bundle payload is a
   protocol data unit of some protocol that has its own de-multiplexing
   identifiers, the service number may function in a manner similar to
   that of the protocol number in an IP packet, characterizing the
   encapsulated protocol; alternatively, the service number may function
   in a manner similar to that of the port number in a UDP datagram.
   Service numbers enable inbound bundles' application data units to be
   de-multiplexed to instances of application functionality that are
   designed to process them, so that effective communication
   relationships can be developed between bundle producers and
   consumers.

   Service number must not be negative or exceed (2^64 - 1) for the same
   reason that node number must not do so.

   For example, "dtn::ipn:9.37" would be a CBHE-conformant endpoint ID
   citing the namespace "ipn".

   Conversion of a CBHE-conformant EID to and from a tuple of two
   integers is therefore straightforward: all characters in the EID
   other than the node number and service number are constant (either as
   defined by CBHE or as assigned during convergence-layer adapter
   configuration) and the node number and service number are taken as
   the two integers of the tuple.  This ease of conversion enables an
   array of integers to serve the same function as a dictionary of EID
   ASCII strings.

   Note, however, that CBHE decompression cannot faithfully recreate the
   dictionary of a compressed primary block from an array of integers
   unless the order of the scheme names and scheme-specific part strings
   in the dictionary of the original, uncompressed block is known.  (The
   bundle protocol specification does not require that the strings in
   the dictionary appear in any particular order and does not require
   that redundant strings be omitted from the dictionary.)  Therefore, a
   further precondition to CBHE compression is that the strings in the
   dictionary of the bundle to be compressed must be exactly as follows,
   in this order and without addition:

   1.  The scheme name of the destination endpoint ID.

   2.  The scheme-specific part of the destination endpoint ID.




Burleigh                 Expires August 22, 2010                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                    CBHE                     February 2010


   3.  The scheme name of the source endpoint ID, if and only if
       different from any prior string in the dictionary.

   4.  The scheme-specific part of the source endpoint ID, if and only
       if different from any prior string in the dictionary.

   5.  The scheme name of the report-to endpoint ID, if and only if
       different from any prior string in the dictionary.

   6.  The scheme-specific part of the report-to endpoint ID, if and
       only if different from any prior string in the dictionary.

   7.  The scheme name of the current custodian endpoint ID, if and only
       if different from any prior string in the dictionary.

   8.  The scheme-specific part of the current custodian endpoint ID, if
       and only if different from any prior string in the dictionary.

   Note: this constraint implies that a bundle which includes any
   extension blocks containing EID references to endpoint IDs other than
   the block's destination, source, report-to, and current custodian
   cannot be CBHE-compressed.

2.2.  Method

   When the constraints summarized above are met, the CBHE block
   compression method can be applied by the convergence layer adapter at
   the time the bundle is transmitted via a convergence-layer protocol.
   In a CBHE-compressed primary block, the eight SDNVs that normally
   contain EIDs' scheme name and SSP offsets within the dictionary are
   instead used to contain the eight integer values listed below, in the
   order shown:

   1.  The node number of the destination endpoint ID, or zero if the
       destination endpoint is the null endpoint.

   2.  The service number of the destination endpoint ID, or zero if the
       destination endpoint is the null endpoint.

   3.  The node number of the source endpoint ID, or zero if the source
       endpoint is the null endpoint.

   4.  The service number of the source endpoint ID, or zero if the
       source endpoint is the null endpoint.

   5.  The node number of the report-to endpoint ID, or zero if the
       report-to endpoint is the null endpoint.




Burleigh                 Expires August 22, 2010                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                    CBHE                     February 2010


   6.  The service number of the report-to endpoint ID, or zero if the
       report-to endpoint is the null endpoint.

   7.  The node number of the current custodian endpoint ID, or zero if
       the current custodian endpoint is the null endpoint.

   8.  The service number of the current custodian endpoint ID, or zero
       if the current custodian endpoint is the null endpoint.

   Further, the dictionary is omitted from the primary block and the
   primary block's dictionary length is set to zero.

   Upon reception the receiving convergence-layer adaptation de-
   compresses the block by simply reversing the process so that the
   bundle presented to the bundle protocol agent has the standard form
   (i.e., the dictionary is reconstituted).


3.  Specification

   CBHE compression is a convergence-layer adaptation.  It is opaque to
   bundle processing.  It therefore has no impact on the
   interoperability of different Bundle Protocol implementations, but
   instead affects only the interoperability of different convergence
   layer adaptation implementations.

   Bundle Protocol convergence-layer adapters that conform to the CBHE
   specification must implement the following procedures.

3.1.  Transmission

   When and only when required by the bundle protocol agent to transmit
   to some CBHE-conformant convergence-layer adapter a bundle whose
   primary block's endpoint IDs satisfy the constraints identified in
   section 2.1 above, the convergence layer adapter MAY encode the
   primary block of the bundle in accordance with the CBHE compression
   convention described in section 2.2 above.

   Note that CBHE compression may be applied only when the receiving
   convergence-layer adapter is known to be CBHE-conformant, i.e., able
   to decode the encoded primary block.  When the convergence-layer
   adapter to which the bundle is to be transmitted is not known to be
   CBHE-conformant, CBHE compression MUST NOT be applied.  The manner in
   which this determination is made is an implementation matter.







Burleigh                 Expires August 22, 2010                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                    CBHE                     February 2010


3.2.  Reception

   Upon receiving a bundle whose dictionary length is zero (and only in
   this circumstance), a CBHE-conformant convergence layer adapter MUST
   decode the primary block of the bundle in accordance with the CBHE
   compression convention described in section 2.2 above before
   delivering it to the bundle protocol agent.

   Note that when a non-CBHE-conformant convergence layer adapter
   receives a bundle whose dictionary length is zero, it has no choice
   but to pass it to the bundle agent without modification.  In this
   case the bundle protocol agent will be unable to dispatch the
   received bundle, because it will be unable to determine the
   destination endpoint.  The behavior of the bundle protocol agent in
   this circumstance is an implementation matter.


4.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no IANA considerations.


5.  Security Considerations

   The Bundle Security Protocol may under some conditions insert
   additional endpoint ID strings into the dictionary of a bundle and
   reference those strings in BSP extension blocks.  Because a bundle
   which includes any extension blocks containing EID references to
   endpoint IDs other than the block's destination, source, report-to,
   and current custodian cannot be CBHE-compressed, bundles cannot be
   compressed under those conditions.

   Specifically, the specification detailed above implies that a bundle
   cannot be CBHE-compressed when the security source endpoint for the
   Bundle Authentication Block (BAB) is noted in the dictionary
   (typically because there is no other way for the receiving bundle
   protocol agent to determine the security source endpoint), when the
   security destination endpoint for the BAB is noted in the dictionary
   (in the rare case that the receiving endpoint is not the security
   destination endpoint), when the security source endpoint for the
   Payload Integrity Block (PIB), Payload Confidentiality Block (PCB),
   or Extension Security Block (ESB) is not the source endpoint, or when
   the security destination endpoint for the PIB, PCB, or ESB is not the
   destination endpoint.

   These caveats aside, CBHE introduces no new security considerations
   beyond those discussed in the DTN Bundle Protocol and Bundle Security
   Protocol specifications.



Burleigh                 Expires August 22, 2010                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft                    CBHE                     February 2010


6.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC3986]  Berners-Lee, T., Fielding, R., and L. Masinter, "Uniform
              Resource Identifier (URI): Generic Syntax", STD 66,
              RFC 3986, January 2005.

   [RFC5050]  Scott, K. and S. Burleigh, "Bundle Protocol
              Specification", RFC 5050, November 2007.


Author's Address

   Scott Burleigh
   Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology
   4800 Oak Grove Drive, m/s 301-490
   Pasadena, CA  91109
   USA

   Phone: +1 818 393 3353
   Email: Scott.C.Burleigh@jpl.nasa.gov




























Burleigh                 Expires August 22, 2010               [Page 10]


