


Network Working Group                                           D. Zhang
Internet-Draft                                                     X. Xu
Intended status: Informational               Huawei Technologies Co.,Ltd
Expires: January 11, 2012                                         J. Yao
                                                                   CNNIC
                                                                  Z. Cao
                                                            China Mobile
                                                           July 10, 2011


                      Investigation in HIP Proxies
                      draft-irtf-hiprg-proxies-03

Abstract

   HIP proxies play an important role in the transition from the current
   Internet architecture to the HIP architecture.  A core objective of a
   HIP proxy is to facilitate the communication between legacy (or Non-
   HIP) hosts and HIP hosts while not modifying the host protocol
   stacks.  In this document, the legacy hosts served by proxies are
   referred to as Legacy Hosts (LHs).  Currently, various design
   solutions of HIP proxies have been proposed.  These solutions may be
   applicable in different working circumstances.  In this document,
   these solutions are investigated in detail to compare their
   effectiveness in different scenarios.

Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 11, 2012.



Zhang, et al.           Expires January 11, 2012                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft        Investigation in HIP Proxies             July 2011


Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.





































Zhang, et al.           Expires January 11, 2012                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft        Investigation in HIP Proxies             July 2011


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   3.  HIP Proxies  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     3.1.  Essential Functionality of HIP Proxies . . . . . . . . . .  5
     3.2.  A Taxonomy of HIP Proxies  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.3.  DI Proxies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.4.  N-DI Proxies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     3.5.  Distributed Implementation of DI Proxies . . . . . . . . .  9
       3.5.1.  Distributed DI-HIT Proxies . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
       3.5.2.  Distributed DI-NAT Proxies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
       3.5.3.  Distributed DI-transparent Proxies . . . . . . . . . . 10
     3.6.  DI Proxies Supporting Communication Initialized by HIP
           hosts  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     3.7.  N-DI Proxies Supporting Communication Initialized by
           HIP hosts  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   4.  Issues with LBMs in Supporting LHs to Initiate
       Communication  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     4.1.  LBMs adopting Load Balancers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
       4.1.1.  Load Balancer Supporting DI Proxy Components . . . . . 13
       4.1.2.  Load Balancer Supporting N-DI Proxy Components . . . . 14
     4.2.  LBMs without Load Balancers  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
       4.2.1.  Issues Caused by Intercepting DNS Lookups  . . . . . . 14
       4.2.2.  Issues with LBMs in Capturing and Processing
               Replies from HIP hosts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   5.  Issues with LBMs which also Support HIP Hosts to Initiate
       Communication  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
     5.1.  DNS Resource Records for LHs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
     5.2.  An Asymmetric Path Issue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
   6.  Issues with Dynamic Load Balancing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
     6.1.  Operations of DI-HIT Proxies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
     6.2.  Operations of DI-NAT Proxies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
     6.3.  Operations of DI-Transparent Proxies . . . . . . . . . . . 22
   7.  Conclusions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
   8.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
   9.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
   10. Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
   11. References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
     11.1. Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
     11.2. Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24









Zhang, et al.           Expires January 11, 2012                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft        Investigation in HIP Proxies             July 2011


1.  Introduction

   The Host Identity Protocol (HIP) is a ID/Locator separating
   technology for Internet Protocol (IP) networks.  It introduces a new
   host identifier layer in the middle of the network layer and the
   transport layer so as to comprehensively address the issues of
   mobility, multi-homing and network-layer security.  The Host
   Identities (HIs) of HIP enable hosts are cryptographically
   verifiable.  When two HIP hosts initial their communication, they
   need to perform a handshaking process to authentication each other
   and distribute symmetric keys for securing subsequent packet exchange
   while legacy hosts do not have to.  Therefore, a HIP host and a
   legacy host cannot communicate with each other directly.

   As core components of HIP deployment solutions, HIP proxies have
   attracted increasing attention from both the industry and the
   academia.  A HIP proxy is a middlebox located between a legacy host
   and a HIP enabled host for protocol transition.  Under the assistance
   of a HIP proxy, a legacy host can communicate with its desired HIP
   host without updating the protocol stack.

   Currently, multiple research efforts are engaged in both design and
   performance assessment of HIP proxies.  In this document, we attempt
   to investigate several important alternatives and compare their
   effectiveness in different scenarios.  There has previously been a
   detailed discussion of HIP proxies in [SAL05].  This document can be
   regarded as a complement of that paper, and some new topics (e.g.,
   the asymmetric path issues occurred in the load-balancing mechanisms
   for HIP proxies and the necessity of extending the HIP RR for HIP
   proxies) are discussed.  Theoretically, LHs and the HIP hosts which
   the LHs intend to communicate with can be located anywhere in the
   network.  However, in this document, without mentioning otherwise, it
   is assumed that the legacy hosts served by a HIP proxy are located
   within a private network and the HIP hosts they intends to
   communciate with are located in the public network, since this is the
   most important scenario that HIP proxies are expected to support
   [SAL05].

   The remainder of this document is organized as follows.  Section 2
   lists the key terminology used in this document.  In section 3, the
   essential functions of HIP proxies are indicated.  In addition, in
   order to facilitate analysis, a classification of HIP proxies is
   proposed.  Section 4 analyzes the issues with Load Balancing
   Mechanisms (LBMs) for HIP proxies which facilitate communication
   initiated by LHs.  Section 5 analyzes the issues that HIP proxies in
   a LBM have to face if they also need to support communication
   initiated by HIP hosts.  Section 6 investigates the issues that HIP
   proxies have to deal with in supporting dynamic load balancing and



Zhang, et al.           Expires January 11, 2012                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft        Investigation in HIP Proxies             July 2011


   redundancy.  Section7 concludes the entire document.  Section 9 is
   the security considerations.


2.  Terminology

   BEX: HIP Base Exchange, a two-party cryptographic protocol used to
   establish communications context between HIP enabled hosts.

   LHs: Legacy Hosts which are encapsulated as HIP hosts by HIP proxies.

   DI Proxy: DNS lookup Inspecting Proxy, A HIP proxy which needs to
   intercept or modify DNS lookups between the hosts it serves and DNS
   servers so as to collect essential information for subsequent
   service.

   HA: HIP Association, an IP-layer communications context for two HIP
   enabled host generated during a BEX execution.

   LBM: Load Balancing Mechanism, a mechanism which is able to
   distribute workload across multiple nodes to avoid overload on a
   single component and increase the availability and scalability of the
   whole system.

   N-DI proxy: Non-DNS lookup Inspecting Proxy, a HIP proxy which needs
   not to intercept DNS lookups between the hosts it serves and DNS
   servers in order to perform protocol transform correctly.


3.  HIP Proxies

3.1.  Essential Functionality of HIP Proxies

   A primary function of HIP proxies is to facilitate the communication
   between legacy (or Non-HIP) hosts and HIP hosts while not modifying
   the host protocol stacks.  In order to achieve this, a HIP proxy
   needs to intercept the packets transported between LHs and HIP hosts
   before they arrive at their destinations.  Upon capturing such a
   packet, a HIP proxy needs to transfer the format of the packet into
   what the destination host prefers.

   Assume a proxy intercepts a packet sent out by a LH.  If the packet
   is destined to a HIP host, the proxy first tries to find an
   appropriate HIP association (HA) in its local database to process the
   packet.  If the HA exists, the proxy uses the key in the HA to
   encrypt the payload in the packet.  After transmitting the format of
   the packet and making it HIP compatible, the proxy forwards the
   packet to the HIP host.  However, if there is no proper HA found, the



Zhang, et al.           Expires January 11, 2012                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft        Investigation in HIP Proxies             July 2011


   proxy needs to use the HI and HIT assigned to the LH to carry out a
   HIP Base Exchange (BEX) and generate a new HA with the HIP host.  The
   newly generated HA is then maintained in the local database.

   Similarly, when processing a packet from a HIP host, the proxy needs
   to find a proper HA and use the keying material in the HA to decrypt
   the packet, and thus the packet is transferred into an ordinary IP
   packet and forwarded to the legacy host.

3.2.  A Taxonomy of HIP Proxies

   In practice, there are various design alternatives for HIP proxies.
   To benefit the analysis, in this document HIP proxies are classified
   into DNS lookup Intercepting Proxies (DI proxies) and Non-DNS lookup
   Intercepting Proxies (N-DI proxies).  As indicated by the name, a DI
   proxy needs to intercept DNS lookups in order to correctly process
   the follow-up communication between LHs and HIP hosts, while N-DI
   proxies do not have to.

   Note that apart from DNS, DI proxy implementation is potentially able
   to support other resolution mechanisms.  However, currently DNS is
   the only resolution mechanism analyzed and extended to support HIP
   communication.  Hence, DNS is the only resolution mechanism
   considered in this document.

   To avoid confusion, in the remainder of this document, the terms
   "lookup" and "answer" are used in specific ways.  A lookup refers to
   the entire process of translating a domain name for a legacy host.
   The answer of a lookup is the response from a resolution server which
   terminates the lookup.

3.3.  DI Proxies

   Usually, before a host communicates with a remote host, the legacy
   host needs to consult a DNS server for the IP address of its
   destination.  On this premise, a DI proxy can effectively identify
   the HIP hosts which legacy hosts may contact in near future by
   intercepting DNS lookups.

   In practice, it is common to deploy one or multiple DNS resolvers for
   a private network.  A host in the private network can thus send its
   queries to a resolver instead of communicating with authoritative DNS
   servers directly.  If the resolver does not cache the inquired RRs,
   it will try to collect them from authoritative DNS servers.  In a
   lookup process, a resolver may have to contact multiple authoritative
   DNS servers before it eventually gets the desired DNS RRs.

   On the occasions where a resolver is located out of a private



Zhang, et al.           Expires January 11, 2012                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft        Investigation in HIP Proxies             July 2011


   network, a HIP proxy located at the border of the network can
   intercept the DNS queries from LHs and then use the FQDNs obtained
   from the queries to initiate a new DNS lookup to the resolver to
   inquire about the desired information (AAAA RRs, HIP RRs, and etc.).
   If the host that the legacy host intends to communicate with is HIP
   enabled, the DNS resolver will hand out a HIP RR associated with an
   AAAA RR to the proxy.  After maintaining the needed information
   (e.g., HITs, HIs, and IPs addresses of the HIP hosts) in the local
   database for future usage, the proxy returns an answer with an AAAA
   RR to the legacy host.

   When the resolver is located inside the private network, conditions
   are a little more complex.  If a proxy is deployed on the path
   between LHs and the resolver, it can operate the same as what is
   illustrated in the above paragraph.  The proxies which can be
   deployed in this way are introduced in the remainder of this sub-
   section.  However, if a proxy is located at the border of the network
   (i.e., between the resolver and authoritative DNS servers), the proxy
   has to intercept the DNS lookups between the resolver and
   authoritative DNS servers.  Because the resolver may have to contact
   multiple authoritative DNS servers to get a desired answer, for
   efficiency, the proxy can only inspect the responses from DNS
   services and find out DNS answers.  Because the answer of a DNS
   lookup does not contain any NS RR, it can be easily distinguished
   from the intermediate responses.  After identifying a DNS answer, a
   DI proxy can locate the DNS server maintaining the desired RRs from
   the packet header and identify the FQDN of the inquired host from the
   packet payload.  Then, the proxy initiates an independent lookup to
   the DNS server to check whether the host is HIP enabled.  If it is,
   the proxy maintains the information of the host for future usage and
   returns an answer with an AAAA RR to the resolver.

   Besides intercepting DNS lookups, some DI proxies can also modify the
   contents of the AAAA RRs in the DNS answers to enhance the efficiency
   or deploying flexibility.  For instance, [RFC5338] indicates that a
   HIP proxy can return the HIT rather than the IP address of a remote
   HIP host in a DNS answer to a LH.  Consequently, when sending data
   packets to the remote HIP host, the LH will use the contained HIT as
   the destination address.  The HIP proxy can then advertise a route of
   the HIT prefix to attract the packet for HIP hosts.  [PAT07] also
   proposes a solution in which a HIP proxy maintains an IP address
   pool.  When sending a DNS answer to a LH, the proxy selects an IP
   address from its pool and uses it to replace the original IP address
   within the answer.  The legacy host will regard this IP address as
   the IP address of the host which it intends to communicate with.  In
   the subsequent communication, when the host sends a packet for the
   remote HIP host, it will use the IP address assigned by the proxy as
   the destination address.  Therefore, the HIP proxy can intercept the



Zhang, et al.           Expires January 11, 2012                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft        Investigation in HIP Proxies             July 2011


   packets for the HIP hosts by advertising the routes of the IP
   addresses in its pool.  In the remainder of this document, these two
   types of proxies are referred to as DI-HIT proxies and DI-NAT proxies
   respectively, and the DI proxies which do not modify the contents of
   DNS answers (i.e., return the IP addresses of HIP hosts in answers)
   are referred to as DI-transparent proxies.

   Compared with DI-HIT and DI-NAT proxies, DI-transparent proxies show
   limitations in multiple aspects.  For instance, in practice it is
   reasonable for a LH to publish the IP address of its proxy instead of
   its own IP address within its DNS AAAA RR so that the packets for the
   LH will be directly forwarded to the proxy.  Therefore, when a LH
   served by a DI-transparent proxy attempts to communicate with two
   remote LHs served by a HIP proxy, it is difficult for the LH to
   distinguish one remote host from the other as they both use the same
   IP address.  In addition, DI-transparent proxies cannot work properly
   in the circumstance where HIP hosts renumber their IP addresses
   during the communication due to, e.g., mobility or re-homing.  For
   DI-HIT or DI-NAT proxies, these issues can be largely mitigated as
   the IP addresses of HIP hosts will never be used by DI-HIT or DI-NAT
   proxies as identifiers.

   Moreover, it is difficult for DI-transparent proxies to advertise
   routing information to attract the packets transported between LHs
   and remote HIP hosts.  Consequently, they need to be deployed at the
   borders of private networks.  DI-HIT (or DI-NAT) proxies, however,
   can easily attract the packets for HIP hosts to themselves by
   advertising associated routes because the packets destined to HIP
   hosts use HITs (or the IP addresses selected from pools) as their
   destination addresses.  Hence, they can flexibly deployed inside the
   networks.  Therefore, in private networks which resolvers are located
   inside, DI-HIT or DI-NAT proxies can be deployed on the path between
   the resolvers and LHs and reduce the overhead on the proxies imposed
   by intercepting DNS lookups.

   It is recommended to use DNSSEC [RFC4035] to prevent attackers from
   tampering or forging DNS lookups between resolvers and DNS servers.
   This technology, however, may affect the deployment of HIP proxies.
   For instance, because DI-HIT and DI-NAT proxies need to modify the
   contents of DNS answers, they should be only deployed on the paths
   between legacy hosts and their resolvers if DNSSEC is deployed.
   Otherwise, their attempts in modifying DNS answers will be detected
   and regarded as attacks.

3.4.  N-DI Proxies

   Unlike DI proxies, an N-DI proxy needs not to intercept or modify DNS
   lookups between LHs (or resolvers) and DNS servers.



Zhang, et al.           Expires January 11, 2012                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft        Investigation in HIP Proxies             July 2011


   In [SAL05], it is indicated that an N-DI proxy can maintain a list of
   the information of the HIP hosts if the HIP hosts that LHs intend to
   contact are predicable.  After intercepting a packet from a LH, the
   proxy can ensure the packet is for a HIP host if the destination
   address of the packet is maintained in the list.

   In the circumstances where it is difficult to predict the HIP hosts
   that LHs intend to contact in advance, an N-DI proxy needs to consult
   DNS servers to find out whether the destination IP address of a
   packet is associated with a HIP host or a legacy host.  The
   information obtained from the DNS servers can be maintained within
   two lists.  One list is for the information of HIP hosts; the other
   is for the information of legacy hosts.  When intercepting a packet,
   the N-DI first compares the destination address of the packet against
   the addresses in the lists to find out whether the destination of the
   packet is HIP enabled.  If the address is not maintained in the
   lists, the proxy then has to consult resolution systems and maintains
   the information of the host which the packet is aimed for in the
   correspondent list, according the answers from resolution systems.

3.5.  Distributed Implementation of DI Proxies

   As discussed above, DI proxies have to intercept the DNS lookup
   packets between legacy hosts and DNS servers in order to facilitate
   the communication between LHs and HIP hosts.  This requires that a DI
   proxy be deployed on the boundary of the private network or on the
   path where LHs and the DNS resolver transport their lookup packets.
   In the circumstance where DNSSEC is deployed, a DI proxy cannot even
   be deployed on the boundary of the private network either, if the
   proxy needs to modify DNS lookup packets.  Such inflexibility may be
   undesirable under many circumstances.

   Such issues can be addressed by separating the DNS related
   functionality ( i.e., intercepting and modifying the DNS
   communication) from DI proxies.  The component performing the DNS
   lookup interception is referred to as the DNS lookup inspector while
   the component performing the protocol transformation is referred to
   as the proxy component.  A DNS lookup inspector is located in a place
   where it can intercept and modify DNS lookups.  In practice, a DNS
   resolver can also be extended to act as an inspector.

3.5.1.  Distributed DI-HIT Proxies

   The DNS lookup inspector of a distributed DI-HIT proxy returns HITs
   in DNS answers to LHs.  Therefore, the associated DI-HIT proxy can
   advertise routing information inside the private network to attract
   the packets using HITs as destination addresses.  Additionally, the
   inspector needs to transfer other information (e.g., IP addresses of



Zhang, et al.           Expires January 11, 2012                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft        Investigation in HIP Proxies             July 2011


   the HIP hosts and RVSes) of the HIP hosts contained in DNS RRs to the
   DI-HIT proxy component so that the proxy can perform HIP base
   exchanges with the HIP hosts on behavior of LHs.

   A DI-HIT proxy component can cooperate with multiple DNS lookup
   inspectors.  Therefore, a DI-HIT proxy component can be deployed in
   public networks to support multiple private networks.  This property
   is useful when Internet Services Providers (ISPs) intend to
   facilitate the legacy hosts in the private networks without HIP
   proxies to communicate with HIP hosts.

3.5.2.  Distributed DI-NAT Proxies

   A DNS lookup inspector of a distributed DI-NAT proxy needs to not
   only return the IP addresses in the address pool of the DI-NAT proxy
   component but also transfer the mapping information of the IP
   addresses and the correspondent HIP hosts to the DI-NAT proxy
   component.  Moreover, the resolver needs to maintain the mapping
   information so as to assign an IP address for multiple HIP hosts
   concurrently.

   Similar with Distributed DI-HIT Proxies, a DI-NAT proxy component can
   also be deployed in a public network.  In this case, the addresses in
   the address pool must be routable in the public network.

3.5.3.  Distributed DI-transparent Proxies

   A DNS lookup inspector of a distributed DI-transparent proxy needs
   not to modify DNS answers, but it needs to transport the IP addresses
   and HIs of queried HIP hosts to the DI-NAT proxy component.  In this
   case, a DI-transparent proxy component must be deployed on the
   boundary of the private network in order to guarantee that it can
   intercept all the packets it needs to process.

3.6.  DI Proxies Supporting Communication Initialized by HIP hosts

   Both DI or N-DI proxies can be employed in the cases where HIP hosts
   initial communication.  The issues with Non-DI proxies in supporting
   communciation initialized by HIP hosts are discussed in Section 3.7.
   This subsection focuses on the issues of using DI proxies in the
   communication initialized by HIP hosts.

   Most applications translate the domain name into one of more IP
   addresses before data plane communication.  HIP is no exception.  The
   HIP-enabled host first launches the DNS query to retrieve the remote
   host's HI/HIT or RVS address.  Without knowing if the remote host
   supports HIP-based exchange, the HIP host is expecting to receiving
   the remote host HIP based Identities.  Similar to what is discussed



Zhang, et al.           Expires January 11, 2012               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft        Investigation in HIP Proxies             July 2011


   in Section 3.3, in order to facilitate a HIP host to contact a remote
   legacy host, a DI-Proxy needs be deployed on the path between the HIP
   host and the DNS resolver to intercept DNS lookups.  Additionally, if
   the LH does not have HIP RR maintained in DNS servers, the proxy need
   to assign a temporary HIT to the LH and keep the relationship between
   this temporaty HIT with the LH's IP address.  The HIT will be
   forwarded to the HIP host in a DNS answer.

   Figure 1 presents a operations of an example DI proxy in facilitating
   a HIP host to communicate with a LH.

 +----------+                  +------------+            +-------------+
 | HIP Host |                  |  DI-Proxy  |            |   LH host   |
 +----------+                  +------------+            +-------------+
      | 1.DNS Query QTYPE=HIP       |                           |
      |---------------------------->|                           |
      | 2.DNS Response HIT&HI       |                           |
      |<----------------------------|                           |
      | 3.DNS Query QTYPE=A         |                           |
      |---------------------------->|                           |
      | 4.DNS Response IP-A         |                           |
      |<----------------------------|                           |
      | 5-8.                        |                           |
      | BASE EXCHANGE(I1,R1,I2,R2)  |                           |
      |<--------------------------->|                           |
      |                             |                           |
      |9.HIP PACKET FORMAT          | 10.  LEGACY IP PACKET     |
      |---------------------------->|-------------------------->|
      |                             |                           |
      |11.HIP PACKET FORMAT         | 12.  LEGACY IP PACKET     |
      |<----------------------------|<--------------------------|
      |                             |                           |
      |                             |                           |


      Figure 1: DI Proxy Supporting HIP Host Initiated Communication

   The DI-Proxy first intercepts the DNS query and iteratively forward
   the query to a DNS resolver or authoritive DNS servers to find an
   answer.  If the remote host being queried is HIP enabled, it will
   have its HI or HIT registered in the DNS and the proxy will get an
   answer.  However, if the responder is not HIP aware, and only have A
   or AAAA records in the DNS system, the query with QTYPE=HIP will
   fail.  Upon detecting that the responder is not HIP aware, the DI-
   proxy will assign a temporary HI/HIT (T-ID) generated locally to the
   LH and reply this temporary HI/HIT to the initiator.  In this
   example, in order to intercept the data packets between the HIP host
   and the LH, the proxy forwards its own IP address in the DNS answer



Zhang, et al.           Expires January 11, 2012               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft        Investigation in HIP Proxies             July 2011


   to the HIP host, and so the proxy also needs to maintain the mapping
   information of the T-ID and the IP address of the HIP host.

   Then, a HIP base exchange is carried out between the initiator and
   the proxy (step.5-8), and a HIP association is established between
   the initiator and the proxy, i.e., between the host's HI and the
   temporary HI assigned to the responder by the proxy.  When the hosts
   start exchanging HIP hosts, the proxy will intercept the packet and
   transmit the formats of the data packets.  First, the proxy will de-
   capsulate the packet and decrypt the packet to get the original IP
   packet inside.

   By inspecting the HIP header after the IP header, the proxy is aware
   of the destination's HIT/LSI.  If the HIT and LSI is mapped to one of
   the responder's IP address, the proxy will translate the packet with
   the destination address as the responder's IP address, and source
   address as the proxy IP address.  The destination port is kept
   unchanged, but the source port can be dynamically assigned.

   In addition to the centralized deployment , the DNS inspector and the
   packet translator can be distributed at different nodes.  The DNS
   inspector intercepts the DNS query and responds with the HIT assigned
   to the LH host and IP address of the packet translator, so that the
   HIP communication will hit the packet translator thereafter.  This
   way makes the deployment of this DI proxy easier and more convenient.

3.7.  N-DI Proxies Supporting Communication Initialized by HIP hosts

   In order to support the communication initiated by HIP hosts, the
   N-DI HIP proxies of a private network should have the knowledge
   essential to represent the LHs to perform HIP base exchanges.  Such
   knowledge consists of the IP addresses of the legacy hosts, their
   pre-assigned HITs, the corresponding HI key pairs, and any other
   necessary information.  In addition, such information of the LHs
   should be advertised in resolution systems (e.g., DNS and DHT) as HIP
   hosts.  Otherwise, a HIP host has to obtain the HIT of the LH in the
   opportunistic model which, however, should only be adopted in secure
   environments.


4.  Issues with LBMs in Supporting LHs to Initiate Communication

   If there is only a single HIP proxy deployed for a private network,
   the proxy may become the cause of a single-point-of-failure.  In
   addition, when the number of the users increases, the overhead
   imposed on the proxy may overwhelm its capability, which makes the
   proxy a bottleneck of the whole mechanism.  A typical solution to
   mitigate this issue is to organize multiple proxies to construct a



Zhang, et al.           Expires January 11, 2012               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft        Investigation in HIP Proxies             July 2011


   LBM.  By sharing overhead of processing packets amongst multiple HIP
   proxies, a LBM can be more scalable and fault tolerant.

4.1.  LBMs adopting Load Balancers

   Load balancers have been widely utilized in the design of LBMs.  When
   adopted in a HIP proxy LBM, a load balancer needs to pool all proxy
   resources and be located in a position where it can intercept DNS
   lookups or modify DNS lookups if necessary.  In addition, the load
   balancer needs to distribute the information it learned from the DNS
   lookups to the appropriate proxies it manages.  In some cases, the
   load balancer may also need to take the responsibility of forwarding
   the data packets to proper proxies.

   Logically, a LBM adopting Load balancer can be regarded as a
   variation of distributed HIP Proxies.  A load balancer is an extended
   DNS lookup inspector which is able to distribute overheads to
   different DI proxy components according to pre-specified policies.
   The policies adopted by different load balancers can be various.  A
   load balancer may require all the packets from a LH be processed by
   the same HIP proxy while other balancers may expect all the packets
   for a HIP host to be processed by the same HIP proxy.

4.1.1.  Load Balancer Supporting DI Proxy Components

   In a LBM where a load balancer manages multiple DI-HIT proxy
   components, the load balancer must be able to intercept DNS lookup
   packets, and forward the information about the HIP hosts being
   queried to the proxy components according to certain policies.
   Additionally, the load balancer needs to modify DNS lookup packets
   and returns HITs in DNS answers to LHs (or resolvers).  In order to
   intercept the packets sent from LHs to HIP hosts, the load balancer
   may need to advertise a route of the HIT prefix.  After intercepting
   a data packet from a LH, the balancer needs to forward the packet to
   the proxy component which can correctly process it.

   In a LBM where a load balancer manages multiple DI-NAT proxy
   components, the load balancer must be able to intercept, and forward
   the information about the HIP hosts being queried to the appropriate
   proxy components.  Additionally, the load balancer needs to modify
   DNS answers and returns IP addresses in the address pools of the
   assigned DI-NAT proxies in DNS answers to LHs (or resolvers).  DI-NAT
   proxies can advertise the routes of the IP addresses in the pools so
   that the load balancer does not have to intercept the packets between
   LHs and HIP hosts.

   In a LBM where a load balancer manages multiple DI-transparent proxy
   components, the load balancer must be able to intercept, and forward



Zhang, et al.           Expires January 11, 2012               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft        Investigation in HIP Proxies             July 2011


   the information about the HIP hosts being queried to the appropriate
   proxy components.  The load balancer does not modify DNS answers, but
   it needs to be located in a place( e.g., the egress of the private
   network) where it is able to intercept the packets sent from LHs to
   HIP hosts and forward them to the assigned proxies.

4.1.2.  Load Balancer Supporting N-DI Proxy Components

   When the HIP proxies that a load balancer manages are N-DI proxies,
   the load balancer must be located in a place ( e.g., the egress of
   the private network) where it is able to intercept the packets sent
   to HIP hosts and forward them to the appropriate proxies.  In this
   solution, the load balancer does not forward the information about
   the HIP hosts being queried to the appropriate proxies.  The N-DI
   proxies need to consult resolution systems themselves.

4.2.  LBMs without Load Balancers

   Generally, in a LBM without a load balancer, there are two methods to
   distribute communication between LHs and HIP hosts among different
   HIP proxies.  The first solution is to divide the LHs in the private
   network into different groups (e.g., according to their IP
   addresses), and the LHs in different groups are served by different
   HIP proxies.  The second solution is to divide the HIP hosts in the
   Internet into multiple groups (e.g., according to their HITs or IP
   addresses), every HIP proxy serves all the LHs in the private network
   but only take in charge of the packets to and from the HIP hosts in a
   group.  Abstractly, the two solutions are identical.  However, the
   first solution requires a private network to be divided into multiple
   sub-networks, and each of them is served by a HIP proxy.  Such
   modification to the topology of the private network may be not
   desired in many cases.  The second type of solution does not have
   such problems and is mainly discussed in the remainder of this
   document.

4.2.1.  Issues Caused by Intercepting DNS Lookups















Zhang, et al.           Expires January 11, 2012               [Page 14]

Internet-Draft        Investigation in HIP Proxies             July 2011


   +--------------------+           +------------------+
   |                    |           |                  |
   |                +---+-------+   |                  |
   | +-----------+  |HIP proxy 1+---+      +---------+ |
   | |Legacy Host|  +---+-------+   |      |HIP Host | |
   | +-----------+      |     .     |      |  (HH1)  | |
   |                    |     .     |      +---------+ |
   |                +---+--------+  |                  |
   |                |HIP proxy n +--+                  |
   |Private Network +---+--------+  | Public Network   |
   |                    |           |                  |
   +--------------------+           +------------------+
   Figure 1: An example of LBM

   Figure 1 illustrates a simple LBM without a load balancer.  In this
   mechanism, n proxies are deployed at the border of a private network.
   If such proxies are DI-HIT proxies, in order to share the overheads
   in processing data packets, each proxy needs to advertise a route of
   the HIT section it takes in charge of.  In addition, each proxy also
   needs to advertise a route of a section of IP addresses (or a default
   route for the entire IP address namespace) inside the private network
   to intercept DNS lookups.  A problem occurs when the DNS lookups and
   the data packets sent by a legacy host are intercepted by different
   proxies.  In such a case, the proxy intercepting a data packet may
   lack essential knowledge to correctly process it.  If the proxies
   adopted in Figure 1 are DI-transparent proxies, then each proxy only
   needs to advertise a route of a section of IP addresses to intercept
   both DNS lookups and data packets.  On this occasion, if a HIP host
   and the DNS server maintaining its RR fall into two different IP
   sections, the DI-transparent proxy intercepting the lookups for the
   HIP host will not be the one intercepting subsequent data packets.

   A candidate solution of this problem is to propagate the mapping
   information obtained from DNS lookups amongst HIP proxies.
   Therefore, after intercepting a DNS lookup, a HIP proxy can forward
   the learned information to the proxy expected to process the
   subsequent data packets.  Alternatively, a proxy can attempt to
   collect required information from resolution systems after
   intercepting a data packet.  This approach, however, imposes addition
   overheads to DI-proxies in exchanging lookup messages resolution
   servers.

   If the HIP proxies in Figure 1 are DI-NAT proxies, the problem is
   eliminated.  In a DI-NAT-proxy-based LBM, each DI-NAT proxy needs to
   advertise two routes, a route of the IP addresses in the pool and a
   route of a section of IP addresses for intercepting DNS lookups.
   After intercepting a DNS lookup, a DI-NAT proxy will generate an DNS
   answer with an IP address selected from its pool and send it to the



Zhang, et al.           Expires January 11, 2012               [Page 15]

Internet-Draft        Investigation in HIP Proxies             July 2011


   requester (a LH or a resolver), which can ensure the subsequent data
   packets will be transported to the same proxy.

4.2.2.  Issues with LBMs in Capturing and Processing Replies from HIP
        hosts

   Theoretically, when representing a LH to communicate with a HIP host
   in the public network, a HIP proxy can use either an IP address it
   possesses or the IP address of the LH as the source address of the
   packets forwarded to the HIP host.  However, in practice, the latter
   option may cause an asymmetric traffic issue in the load balancing
   scenarios where multiple HIP proxies provide services for a same
   group of LHs.  Assume there are two HIP proxies located at the border
   of a private network.  If the proxies adopt the latter solution, they
   need to advertise the routes of the LHs in the public network
   respectively.  As a result, it is difficult to guarantee the packets
   transported between a legacy host and a HIP host are bond to a same
   HIP proxy, and thus after a proxy intercepts a packet it may lack the
   proper HIP association to process it.

   A possible solution to address this problem is to share HIP state
   information (e.g., HIP associations, sequence number of IPsec
   packets) amongst the related HIP proxies in a real-time fashion.
   However, during communication, some context information such as the
   sequence numbers of IPsec packets can change very fast.  It is
   infeasible to synchronize the IPsec message counters for every
   transmitted or received IPsec packet, since such operations will
   occupy large amounts of bandwidth and seriously affect the
   performances of HIP proxies.  [Nir 2009] indicates that this issue
   can be partially mitigated by synchronizing IPsec message counters
   only at regular intervals, for instance, every 10,000 packets.

   An issue similar with the one mentioned above is discussed in
   [TSC05], and an extended HIP base exchange is proposed.  But the
   proposed solution only tries to help HIP-aware middle boxes obtain
   the SPIs used in a HIP base exchange and cannot be directly used to
   address the issue mentioned above.

   When adopting the preceding option, proxies need to advertise the
   routes to their addresses in the public network respectively, so that
   the packets transported between a LH and a HIP host are intercepted
   by the same proxy.  The issue discussed above can thus be addressed.
   In the following discussions, without mentioning otherwise we assume
   that a HIP proxy uses one of its IP addresses as the source IP
   addresses of the packets which it sends to a HIP host.






Zhang, et al.           Expires January 11, 2012               [Page 16]

Internet-Draft        Investigation in HIP Proxies             July 2011


5.  Issues with LBMs which also Support HIP Hosts to Initiate
    Communication

   Apart from the basic functions (i.e., supporting LHs to communicate
   with HIP hosts), in many typical scenarios, a HIP proxy LBM may also
   need to facilitate the communication initiated by HIP hosts.  In this
   section, we attempt to analyze the issues that a HIP proxy has to
   face in the conditions where HIP hosts proactively initiate
   communication with legacy hosts.

5.1.  DNS Resource Records for LHs

   In practice, the AAAA RR of a LH can consist of either the IP address
   of the LH or the address of its HIP proxy.  In the preceding
   approach, the routing infrastructure will try to forward the packets
   for the LH to the host directly.  Therefore, in this case, HIP
   proxies must be located on the path of such packets to intercept
   them.  In the latter approach, the packets for a legacy host are
   firstly forwarded to the associated HIP proxy.  Compared with the
   preceding approach, the latter approach enables a proxy to be
   deployed in a more flexible way.  In addition, using the latter
   approach, a proxy does not have to intercept the packets transported
   between HIP hosts when it works in a private network where legacy
   hosts and HIP hosts are deployed in an intermixed way.  However, the
   latter approach may cause problems in the communication between
   legacy hosts.  Normally, a HIP proxy needs to serve a number of LHs.
   When using the latter approach, the packets destined to these LHs
   will be associated with a same destination address (i.e., the IP
   address of the proxy).  Therefore, when receiving a packet from a
   legacy host located in the public network, the proxy cannot identify
   the LH to which the packet should be forwarded.

   A simple approach which combines the advantages of the above two
   solutions but avoids their disadvantages is to extend the RDATA field
   in HIP RRs [RFC5205] with a new proxy field, which contains the IP
   address of a HIP proxy.  In the extended HIP RR of a LH, the proxy
   field consists of the IP address of its HIP proxy, while the proxy
   field in the RR of an ordinary HIP host is left empty.  Therefore, a
   HIP host intending to communicate with the LH can obtain the IP
   address of the proxy from DNS servers and set it as the destination
   address of the packets.  The packets are then routed to the proxy.
   When a non-HIP host intends to communicate with the legacy host, it
   can obtain the IP address of the legacy host from the AAAA RR as
   usual and set it as the destination address of the packets; the
   packets are then transported to legacy host directly.

   It is also possible to use the RVS field in a HIP RR to transport the
   information of a HIP proxy.  However, in certain scenarios, a



Zhang, et al.           Expires January 11, 2012               [Page 17]

Internet-Draft        Investigation in HIP Proxies             July 2011


   dedicated proxy field can bring additional benefit in security.  For
   instance, it is normally assumed that the BEX protocol is able to
   establish a security channel for the hosts on the both sides of
   communication to securely exchange messages.  However, this
   presumption may be no longer valid in the presence of HIP proxies, as
   the messages between legacy hosts and proxies can be transported in
   plain text.  With the Proxy field, it is easy to distinguish the
   legacy hosts represented by HIP proxies from the ordinary HIP hosts.
   Therefore, a HIP host can assess the risks of exchanging sensitive
   information with its communicating peers in a more precise way.

5.2.  An Asymmetric Path Issue

   In a load balancing scenario where multiple HIP proxies are deployed
   at the border of a private network, the packets transported between a
   legacy host and a HIP host may be routed via different HIP proxies.
   Therefore, when a packet is intercepted by a HIP proxy, the proxy may
   find that it lacks essential knowledge to appropriately process the
   packet.  Hence, an asymmetric path issue occurs.

   In order to explain the asymmetric path issue in more detail, let us
   revisit the LBM illustrated in Figure 1.  Assume the HIP proxies in
   Figure 1 are DI-HIT proxies and their IP addresses are maintained in
   the DNS RRs of the LHs.  When a HIP host (e.g., HH1) looks up a
   legacy host at a DNS server, the DNS server returns the IP addresses
   of all the HIP proxies in an answer (see Figure 2).  Upon receiving
   the answer, HH1 needs to select an IP address and sends an I1 packet
   to the associated HIP proxy.  Assume the HIP proxy 1 is selected.
   Then after a base exchange, HIP proxy1 and HH1 share a HIP
   association.  Upon receiving the first data packet from HH1, the HIP
   proxy uses the HIP association to process the packet and forwards it
   to the legacy host.  In the forwarded packets, the HIT of HH1 is
   adopted as the source IP address, and thus the HIT of HHI is adopted
   as the destination address in the reply packets sent by the legacy
   host.  Assume that the HIT of HH1 is within the section managed by
   HIP proxy n.  According the routes advertised by the proxy n, the
   packet is forwarded to the HIP proxy n which, however, does not have
   the corresponding HIP association to deal with the packet.  Similarly
   with DI-HIT proxies, DI-transparent proxies and N-DI proxies also
   suffer from the asymmetric path issue in the load balancing
   scenarios, since they cannot guarantee the data packets transported
   between a legacy host and a HIP host stick to a single HIP proxy too.









Zhang, et al.           Expires January 11, 2012               [Page 18]

Internet-Draft        Investigation in HIP Proxies             July 2011


   +----------------------+         +--------------------------+
   |                      |         |                          |
   |                  +---+-------+ | (3)                      |
   |            (4)  -|HIP proxy 1+-+<-                        |
   |                / +---+-------+ |  \ +--------+ (1)+------+|
   |+-----------+< -      |     .   |   -|HIP Host|--> |  DNS ||
   ||Legacy Host|-        |     .   |    |  (HH1) |<-- |Server||
   |+-----------+ \   +---+-------+ |    +--------+(2) +------+|
   |           (5) - >|HIP proxy n+-+                          |
   | Private Network  +---+-------+ |    Public Network        |
   |                      |         |                          |
   +----------------------+         +--------------------------+
   Figure 2. An example of the asymmetric path issue

   As we mentioned in section 3.3.1, the approach of synchronizing HIP
   associations and IPsec associations amongst HIP proxies can be used
   to address this issue.  However, this issue will introduce additional
   communication overhead on HIP proxies.  Here, we discuss several
   other alternative solutions.

   It is a simple solution that a HIP proxy discards an I1 packet it
   receives if the packet is not original from the HIP host that the
   proxy should take charge of.  In addition, the proxy can inform the
   sender of the incident using an ICMP packet.  After waiting for a
   certain period or upon receiving a ICMP packet, a HIP host will try
   to select another HIP proxy from the list in the DNS answer and send
   an I1 packet it.  In the worst case, this process needs to be
   recursive until all the HIP proxies in the list have been contacted.
   Because a HIP host may have to send the multiple I1 packets in order
   to communicate with a LH, this solution may yield a long delay.  Note
   that in some DNS based load balancing approaches, a DNS server only
   returns one HIP proxy in an answer.  On such occasions, HIP hosts
   have to communicate with DNS servers repeatedly, and the negative
   influence caused by the communication delay can be even exacerbated.

   A solution to avoid the delay is to endow DNS servers with the
   capability of returning the IP address of an appropriate HIP proxy in
   an answer according to certain policies ( e.g., the HIT (if the proxy
   is a DI-HIT proxy or a N-DI proxy) or the IP address (if the proxy is
   a DI-transparent proxy) of a requester).  That is, the HIP proxy
   indicated in a DNS answer should be able to process the packets from
   the requester.  In this case, DNS servers actually act as load
   balancers.  In order to support this solution, DNS servers need to be
   extended to 1) maintain the information about the sections of the
   namespaces that HIP proxies take in charge of and 2) locate the
   appropriate HIP proxy according to the HIT or the IP address of a HIP
   requester.  These requirements result in modifications to current DNS
   servers in both the DNS server applications and the conversation



Zhang, et al.           Expires January 11, 2012               [Page 19]

Internet-Draft        Investigation in HIP Proxies             July 2011


   protocols between requesters and DNS servers.  For instance, a HIP
   host may need to transport its HIT in DNS requests in order to help
   DNS servers locate an appropriate HIP proxy.  A negative impact of
   this solution is to introduce additional complexity and overhead to
   DNS servers.

   Another solution is to extend RVS servers as load balancers.  After
   receiving an I1 packet from a HIP host, the load balancer then select
   a proper HIP proxy and forward the packet to it.  Using this
   solution, a DNS server only needs to reply a record on receiving a
   query from a HIP host, which reduce the traffic transported between
   DNS servers and HIP hosts.

   The asymmetric path issue can be eliminated when DI-NAT proxies are
   adopted.  A DI-NAT proxy located at the border of a private network
   maintains a pool of IP addresses which are routable in the private
   network.  After receiving a packet from a HIP host, the DI-NAT proxy
   processes the packet and forwards it to the destination legacy host.
   In addition, an IP address selected from the pool is adopted as the
   source address of the packet.  Therefore, when the legacy host sends
   responding packets to the HIP host, the packets will be transported
   to the same HIP proxy.  The asymmetric path issue is thus eliminated.


6.  Issues with Dynamic Load Balancing

   In practice, there are requirements for LBMs to support dynamic load
   balancing.  That is, when the overhead imposed on a proxy surpasses a
   threshold, the proxy can delegate all of (or a part of) its job to
   other proxies.  A proxy providing backup service for another proxy is
   called a backup proxy, and the proxy being served is called a primary
   proxy.  Note that two proxies can be backup proxies for each other on
   different sessions.  In this section, we analyze the operations of
   different types of HIP proxies in supporting dynamic load balancing.

   In some LBMs adopting load balancers, when a load balancer detects
   that the overhead imposed on a proxy is high, it can flexibly
   distribute the loads to other proxies.  However, in the LBMs where no
   load balancer is deployed, a backup proxy must be able to detect the
   abnormal condition of its primary proxy and take over the job.  To
   achieve this, a backup proxy can advertise the routes identical to
   those advertised by the primary proxy in both the private and the
   public networks.  Therefore, when the overhead imposed on the primary
   proxy is high, the primary proxy can withdraw the routes it
   previously advertised, and then the packets original sent to the
   primary proxy will be forwarded to the backup proxy.  Hereby, the
   routes advertised by a proxy for backup purposes are referred to as
   the backup routes of the proxy.  In contrast, the routes advertised



Zhang, et al.           Expires January 11, 2012               [Page 20]

Internet-Draft        Investigation in HIP Proxies             July 2011


   by a proxy to achieve its primary job are referred to as the primary
   routes of the proxy.  Normally, the backup routes have much higher
   costs than those of the correspondent primary routes, so as to avoid
   affecting the normal operations of the primary proxy.  Note that the
   proxies in a LBM can provide backup services for one another.  In
   such cases, a proxy may need to advertise both primary and backup
   routes.

   It is also important to synchronize state between primary and backup
   proxies.  Without proper HIP associations, a backup proxy cannot
   correctly take place of the primary proxy to process the packets.
   The issues with state synchronization among HIP proxies has been
   discussed above.

   In the remainder of this section, we discuss the operations of
   different types of HIP proxies in achieving dynamic load balancing
   and redundancy without the assistance of load balancers.

6.1.  Operations of DI-HIT Proxies

   As mentioned in section 3.1, a DI-HIT proxy needs to at least
   advertise two primary routes in the private network, a route of a
   section of HITs for intercepting data packets, and a route of a
   section of IP addresses for intercepting DNS lookups.  When the proxy
   cannot work properly, it can withdraw both routes to enable a backup
   proxy to take over its job.

   In some cases, a DI-HIT proxy may only want to delegate a part of its
   job to others so as to reduce the loads it undertakes.  To achieve
   this objective, the proxy can divide its routes into multiple more
   detailed routes.  When the load on the proxy is high, it can only
   withdraw a subset of the routes.  For instance, a DI-HIT proxy can
   selectively only delegate a part of the responsibility in processing
   DNS lookups to a backup proxy by withdrawing one of its lookup
   intercepting routes.

6.2.  Operations of DI-NAT Proxies

   A DI-NAT proxy needs to at least advertise two primary routes in the
   private network, a route for its IP address pool, used to intercept
   data packets, and a route for an IP address section used to intercept
   DNS lookups.  When the proxy is overloaded, it can withdraw both
   routes so that the associated backup proxy can take over the job.  In
   this case, the delegated backup proxy needs to maintain an IP address
   pool identical to the one maintained by the primary proxy.  Moreover,
   apart from synchronizing HIP associations, the synchronization of
   mappings from IP addresses to HITs is also required.  Otherwise, the
   backup proxy cannot process the received packet correctly.



Zhang, et al.           Expires January 11, 2012               [Page 21]

Internet-Draft        Investigation in HIP Proxies             July 2011


   If a DI-NAT proxy only intends to keep processing existing
   communications between LHs and HIP hosts but does not accept any
   more, it can withdraw its lookup intercepting route and let its
   backup proxy to intercept DNS lookups.  As mentioned previously, the
   DI-NAT proxies intercepting DNS lookups will be the one processing
   the subsequent data packets.  Therefore, the backup proxy will take
   place of the primary proxy to process the new traffic load.

6.3.  Operations of DI-Transparent Proxies

   Unlike DI-HIT and DI-NAT proxies, the routes advertised by a DI-
   transparent proxy are used for intercepting both DNS lookups and data
   packets.  Therefore, before a DI-transparent proxy withdraws a route,
   it needs to synchronize the states of the on-going communication
   affected by the routing adjustment to its backup proxies.


7.  Conclusions

   This document mainly analyzes and compares the performance of
   different kinds of HIP proxies in LBMs.  Amongst the HIP proxies
   discussed in the document, DI-NAT proxies show its advantages in
   multiple scenarios.  In addition, we argue that the state
   synchronization among HIP proxies is very important to achieve load
   balancing and redundancy.  A topic which is important but not covered
   in this document is the compatibility among different HIP proxies.
   The different types of HIP proxies are designed based on different
   presumptions.  The presumptions of different type of HIP proxies may
   be conflict with each other.  Then how to make a trade-off and enable
   different types of proxies work cooperatively is an important issue
   that the designers of HIP extensible solutions have to consider.


8.  IANA Considerations

   This document makes no request of IANA.


9.  Security Considerations

   One design objective of HIP is to provide peer-to-peer security
   between communicating hosts.  However, when a HIP host communicates
   with a LH under the assistance of a HIP proxy, the security of the
   communication between the HIP proxy and the LH may not be protected.
   If the HIP proxy is transparent to the HIP host, the host will
   believe that it is communicating with a ordinary HIP host and will
   not realize that the peer-to-peer security between it and the LH is
   not guaranteed.  This may cause potential security risks, especially



Zhang, et al.           Expires January 11, 2012               [Page 22]

Internet-Draft        Investigation in HIP Proxies             July 2011


   when the HIP proxy is located in the public network.  Therefore, some
   solutions should be provided for a HIP hosts to detect whether they
   are actually communicating with HIP proxies.

   When sharing HIP state information amongst HIP proxies, the integrity
   and confidentiality of the state information should be protected.
   The discussion about the similar issues can be found in [Nir 2009]
   and [Narayanan 07].

   If a HIP proxy is deployed at the border of a private network or
   within the boundary of a private network, the security issues with
   the communication between the proxy and LHs are not serious.
   However, if a proxy is deployed in the public network, both the
   communication between LHs and the proxy and the communication between
   the proxy and DNS servers should be secured.


10.  Acknowledgements

   Thanks Thomas.R.Henderson for his kindly proof-reading and comments.


11.  References

11.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC4035]  Arends, R., Austein, R., Larson, M., Massey, D., and S.
              Rose, "Protocol Modifications for the DNS Security
              Extensions", RFC 4035, March 2005.

   [RFC5205]  Nikander, P. and J. Laganier, "Host Identity Protocol
              (HIP) Domain Name System (DNS) Extensions", RFC 5205,
              April 2008.

   [RFC5338]  Henderson, T., Nikander, P., and M. Komu, "Using the Host
              Identity Protocol with Legacy Applications", RFC 5338,
              September 2008.

11.2.  Informative References

   [Narayanan 07]
              Narayanan, V., "IPsec Gateway Failover and Redundancy -
              Problem Statement and Goals", 2007.

   [Nir 2009]



Zhang, et al.           Expires January 11, 2012               [Page 23]

Internet-Draft        Investigation in HIP Proxies             July 2011


              Nir, Y., "IPsec High Availability Problem Statement",
              2009.

   [PAT07]    Salmela, P., Wall, J., and P. Jokela, "Addressing Method
              and Method and Apparatus for Establishing Host Identity
              Protocol (Hip) Connections Between Legacy and Hip Nodes,
              US. 20070274312", 2007.

   [SAL05]    Salmela, P., "Host Identity Protocol proxy in a 3G
              system", 2005.

   [TSC05]    Tschofenig, H., Gurtov, A., Ylitalo, J., Nagarajan, A.,
              and M. Shanmugam, "Traversing Middleboxes with the Host
              Identity Protocol", 2005.


Authors' Addresses

   Dacheng Zhang
   Huawei Technologies Co.,Ltd
   HuaWei Building, No.3 Xinxi Rd., Shang-Di Information Industry Base, Hai-Dian District
   Beijing,   100085
   P. R. China

   Phone:
   Fax:
   Email: zhangdacheng@huawei.com
   URI:


   Xiaohu Xu
   Huawei Technologies Co.,Ltd
   HuaWei Building, No.3 Xinxi Rd., Shang-Di Information Industry Base, Hai-Dian District
   Beijing,   100085
   P. R. China

   Phone:
   Fax:
   Email: xuxh@huawei.com
   URI:











Zhang, et al.           Expires January 11, 2012               [Page 24]

Internet-Draft        Investigation in HIP Proxies             July 2011


   Jiankang Yao
   CNNIC
   4, South 4th Street, Zhongguancun
   Beijing,   100190
   P.R. China

   Phone:
   Fax:
   Email: yaojk@cnnic.cn
   URI:


   Zhen Cao
   China Mobile
   28 Xuanwumenxi Ave,Xuanwu District
   Beijing 100053
   P.R. China

   Email: zehn.cao@gmail.com
































Zhang, et al.           Expires January 11, 2012               [Page 25]

