A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3052

        Title:      Service Management Architectures Issues and Review
        Author(s):  M. Eder, S. Nag
        Status:     Informational
        Date:       January 2001
        Mailbox:    michael.eder@nokia.com, thinker@monmouth.com
        Pages:      12
        Characters: 31859
        Updates/Obsoletes/SeeAlso:  None

        I-D Tag:    draft-irtf-nsmrg-sm-issues-00.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3052.txt


Many of the support functions necessary to exploit the mechanisms by
which differing levels of service can be provided are limited in
scope and a complete framework is non-existent.  Various efforts at
such a framework have received a great deal of attention and
represent a historical shift in scope for many of the organizations
looking to address this problem.  The purpose of this document is to
explore the problems of defining a Service management framework and
to examine some of the issues that still need to be resolved.

This memo provides information for the Internet community.  It does
not specify an Internet standard of any kind.  Distribution of this
memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.

