



INTERNET-DRAFT                                                   R. Kahn
IETF Stream                                                         CNRI
Intended Status: Informational                                 A. Maffei
                                                                    WHOI
Expires: 26 December 2012                                   24 June 2012


           Terminology and Use Cases for Interoperability of
                     Identifier Resolution Systems
                     draft-kahn-dsii-id-res-sys-00


Abstract

   Identifier Systems have been in existence for many years and are in
   widespread use. An opaque identifier conveys essentially nothing
   about the information identified and must be converted into useful
   intermediate information, known as state information, before the
   information being identified can be accessed or used. An identifier
   that is can be processed by a system in the Internet to provide
   useful and actionable intermediate state information is said to be
   resolvable. Although there is ongoing discussion about the value of
   opaque versus non-opaque identifiers, we assume the existence of a
   minimal syntax structure for the identifier and also that the
   resolution mechanisms only knows about the minimal syntax of the
   identifier. In this document we introduce the notion of
   interoperability of identifier resolution systems as a key component
   for enabling interoperability of heterogeneous information systems
   more broadly, and discuss the role of unique persistent resolvable
   identifiers.  Terminology is proposed to facilitate this discussion
   and a set of use cases demonstrating the need for interoperability of
   resolution systems are included.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as
   Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."




Kahn and Maffei         Expires 26 December 2012                [Page 1]

INTERNET-DRAFT                                              24 June 2012


   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html

Copyright and License Notice

   Copyright (c) 2012 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors. All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document. Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document. Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

1.  Introduction

   Identifier Systems have been in existence for many years and are in
   widespread use in society. They range from the simplest systems of
   enumeration to more complex means of conveying information about the
   things, values, services, or other identified items. Opaque
   identifiers, such as strings from cryptographic hash functions,
   convey essentially nothing about the information identified and must
   be resolved before they can be used in a digital environment. An
   identifier that can be processed by a system in the Internet to
   provide useful and actionable state information is said to be
   resolvable. In this document, we focus on resolvable identifiers and
   the resolution systems that support them. Specifically, we introduce
   the notion of interoperability of resolution systems and discuss the
   notion of unique persistent resolvable identifiers along with a
   common terminology for discussing these systems. This capability has
   been implemented as part of the Digital Object Architecture [1].
   Finally, a set of selected use cases that support this notion is also
   provided.











Kahn and Maffei         Expires 26 December 2012                [Page 2]

INTERNET-DRAFT                                              24 June 2012


2.  Definitions

   Identifier

      While some systems of identification have used names and semantics
      to identify a variety of things, many other systems have used
      combinations of syntax and semantics. In this document we assume
      no semantics are available in the identifier and only enough
      syntax for the resolution system to understand how to resolve it.

   Identifier Generation Rules

      These rules specify how to create a well-formed identifier for use
      within a resolution system. Normally, the rules will consist of
      syntax constraints, but may go beyond that, as in requiring that
      some or all of an identifier be generated in a specific manner.

   Identifierspace

      This refers to the set of identifiers that are generated using the
      rules.

   Digital Object

      A digital object consists of structured data in the form of a bit
      sequence or a set of bit sequences that can be interpreted by a
      computer or other computational facility. Each sequence consists
      of a type-value pair, at least one of which is the associated
      unique persistent identifier for the digital object. A digital
      object may incorporate separately identifiable digital objects or
      only the identifiers for those objects or a combination of the
      two.  The digital objects need not all be stored in one place, or
      stored at all, but if they are stored, they are generally assumed
      to be accessible from the one or more known locations in the
      Internet. Indeed some digital objects may constitute mobile
      programs that given specific tasks to perform in the Internet, and
      would interact with other programs, registries, repositories or
      information resources structured as digital objects in order to
      carry out its assigned tasks.

   Resolution System

      A system in the Internet that accepts an identifier as input and
      produces useful and actionable "state information" such that, for
      example, the digital object associated with that identifier may be
      accessed and used. This state information is intended to inform
      the user or the user's system as to specific actions to take,
      restrictions on actions and associated information such as a means



Kahn and Maffei         Expires 26 December 2012                [Page 3]

INTERNET-DRAFT                                              24 June 2012


      of authentication, public keys, and whether certain actions will
      incur costs or require allocation of significant resources such as
      storage.  It is assumed that many different resolution systems may
      exist in the Internet. Each such system may have its own
      identifier rules and produce information in different ways.

   Uniqueness

      An identifier is said to be unique at a given time with respect to
      a given resolution system if there is only one authorized set of
      useful and actionable information held by the resolution system
      for that identifier, and that information is produced by a
      resolution request with that identifier.

   Persistence

      An identifier is said to be persistent if its associated
      resolution system can be relied upon to return useful and
      actionable state information about the identified digital object
      over a period of time that is at least as long as the digital
      object exists and in the face of changes to the digital object,
      such as ownership and location, without the identifier itself
      changing. The period of time may vary somewhat depending on the
      domain of use. For example, the identifier may outlast the
      identified digital object, such that a reference to it using the
      identifier can be resolved to useful and actionable state
      information even when the digital object is no longer available.
      The quality of persistence is dependent on a combination of social
      and business infrastructure, e.g., an organization assuming
      responsibility for maintaining the resolution information and
      underlying resolution system and technology.

   Immutability

      The term immutable refers to a digital object and its associated
      identifier that is fixed and does not change. Other than the
      digital object identifier, however, other aspects of the digital
      object metadata may change over time as, for example, the object
      is moved from place to place, as long as the basic structured
      information that comprises the digital object does not change over
      time.

   Mutability

      This term refers to a digital object that is not immutable.






Kahn and Maffei         Expires 26 December 2012                [Page 4]

INTERNET-DRAFT                                              24 June 2012


   Structured Data and Metadata

      Normally, a resolution request leads to one of two basic results.
      One result is obtaining structured data in digital form that
      represents a service, resource or other information represented in
      digital form such as a document, bill of lading, or movie. The
      other result is obtaining metadata about the service, resource, or
      information. In this document, we focus on metadata that is used
      for rapid reaction by the user's system, as in clicking an
      identifier to find the location(s) of the item, or even the
      location of the systems to provide parts of the metadata. More
      general forms of metadata, such as might typically be used in a
      search system, would not be provided by the resolution system;
      rather, the user could be referred to a more substantive registry
      of such information with advanced browsing and searching
      capabilities.

3.  Use cases for Actionable Identifier Resolver Interoperability

   Interoperable Proxying

      Let us assume a user of resolution system A needs to resolve an
      identifier known only to resolution system B. We assume the user
      does not have the software needed to use resolution system B, or
      else the user might try to resolve the identifier directly from
      resolution system B.  Rather, the user asks resolution system A to
      do the resolution and system A takes on the responsibility to ask
      resolution system B. These two resolution systems are
      interoperable if a resolution request sent from resolution system
      A to resolution system B will succeed in producing the information
      in a form usable by the party who requested it. Typically, this
      will require a kind of service level agreement (SLA) between the
      two resolution system administrators to share information about
      how they store and otherwise manage resolution information in
      order to produce a useful response to the user, and also to agree
      on what various fields mean in order to do an effective
      translation into the terms of the asking resolution system.

      This document does not address how such SLAs should be structured
      or how any resolution system should operate internally. Most
      likely, only a small number of resolution systems will be
      desirable for handling the bulk of identifier resolution
      requirements. A list of such systems could be made available in
      the Internet, if desired.

      Each resolution system may have its own means of providing
      security, but this document does not address how security may be
      achieved for the overall interoperable proxy service.



Kahn and Maffei         Expires 26 December 2012                [Page 5]

INTERNET-DRAFT                                              24 June 2012


   Distributed replica management

      Retention and caching decisions depend on the status of replicas
      of digital objects managed by multiple, distributed services.
      Duplicates may, in principle, have different identifiers in
      different systems. In order to query or harvest the status of
      these digital objects, to make retention or migration decisions
      (e.g., deduplication, or migrating a digital object which a
      service is about to drop), it might be necessary to resolve
      multiple identifiers against multiple resolution services.

   Provenance tracking

      In a complex distributed workflow, source data and related data
      services may be managed separately, perhaps via heterogeneous
      systems that rely on different identifier systems. In order to
      reason over provenance it may be necessary to access these objects
      or their metadata.

   Data fusion

      In this case a digital object is assembled from component digital
      objects, which may not all be accessible via the same service or
      within the same identifierspace; as a result, the identifiers may
      not all be resolvable in the same identifierspace and the assembly
      process would require resolving each identifier separately.

   Harvesting and spidering

      In this case, which is similar to the data fusion case, an agent
      fetches a digital object which contains references to other
      digital objects and then needs to be able to resolve those
      references recursively.

4.  Security Considerations

   <This section purposely left blank in this version.>

5.  IANA Considerations

   No IANA actions are needed.

6.  Informational References

   [1] Corporation for National Research Initiatives, "A brief overview
       of the Digital Object Architecture", 1 June 2010.
       <http://cnri.reston.va.us/papers/
       OverviewDigitalObjectArchitecture.pdf>



Kahn and Maffei         Expires 26 December 2012                [Page 6]

INTERNET-DRAFT                                              24 June 2012


Authors' Addresses

   Robert Kahn
   Corporation for National Research Initiatives
   1895 Preston White Drive, Suite 100
   Reston, VA  20191
   USA
   EMail: rkahn@cnri.reston.va.us

   Andrew Maffei
   Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
   Mailstop 44
   Woods Hole, MA  02543
   USA
   EMail: amaffei@whoi.edu




































Kahn and Maffei         Expires 26 December 2012                [Page 7]
