Network Working Group                                        Manayya KB
INTERNET-DRAFT                                       
Intended status:Proposed Standard                          Feb 28, 2010                                                                                                                          
Expires: Aug 31, 2010                                  
                                                         
              
                Constrained Shortest Path First

         draft-manayya-cspf-00.txt

Status of this Memo
  
  This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
  provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

  Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
  Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
  other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
  Drafts.

  Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
  and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
  time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
  material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

  The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
  http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

  The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
  http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

  This Internet-Draft will expire on Aug 31, 2010.

Copyright Notice

  Copyright (c) 2009 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
  document authors.  All rights reserved.

  This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
  Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
  (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
  publication of this document.  Please review these documents
  carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
  to this document.

 Abstract

    Constrained Shortest Path First (CSPF) is an advanced version of 
    shortest path algorithms used in OSPF and IS-IS route computations.
    It is used in computing shortest path for label-switched paths 
    (LSPs) based upon multiple constraints. While computing path for 
    LSPs it considers topology of network, attributes of LSP and links.
    The path is computed using traffic engineering database which takes     
    the extensions of OSPF(open shortest path first) and IS-IS 
    (Intermediate system to Intermediate system) as input.


Manayya KB       Expires Aug 31, 2010                    [Page 1]




 Table of Contents


     1. Introduction..................................................2

     2. Constraints...................................................3 

     3. CSPF algorithm................................................3

     4. CSPF Process..................................................4

     5. CSPF path selection procedure.................................5

     6. Session attribute.............................................5

     7. Administrative CSPF LSP events................................6

     8. Event Triggers................................................7

     9. IANA Considerations...........................................8
    
    10. Security Considerations.......................................8     

    11. References....................................................8




1. Introduction


    OSPF and IS-IS extensions [3630] enable each router to flood 
    extra information about each of its link attributes
    (Refer section 2). 

    When the above information is flooded, each LSR stores the 
    information in a database called the traffic engineering database.
    The ingress LSR then runs a special version of SPF called 
    Constrained Shortest Path First (CSPF) which takes both the 
    information in the traffic engineering database and the constraints
    configured as an input. After pruning paths that do not meet the 
    configured constraints from the shortest-path-first (SPF) tree, 
    CSPF derives the best available path based on the information in 
    the traffic engineering database (TED). Based on the best available
    path, CSPF produces a strict Explicit Route Object (ERO) which the
    Resource Reservation Protocol (RSVP)[2205] uses to signal the LSP. 
    Ingress LSR sends PATH messages to the egress to reserve resources
    for the LSP, the egress LSR sends RESV messages back to the ingress
    to distribute the labels, this sets up the LSP. After this process,
    RSVP makes entries into the unicast routing table.



Manayya KB        Expires Aug 31, 2010                   [Page 2]

 2. Constraints: 

    CSPF considers the following constraints while performing shortest 
    path computation. 

    LSP attributes: 
    Bandwidth requirements 
    Hop limitations 
    Administrative groups (link colors) 
    Priority (setup and hold) 
    Explicit route 
    Link attributes 
    Reservable bandwidth of the links (static bandwidth minus the  
    currently reserved bandwidth) 
   

 3. The CSPF algorithm:

    a.Collect attribute information of the link to which each node is
      connected 

    b.Flood the collected attribute information to other nodes using 
      ISIS or OSPF extensions.

    c.Combine each node according to the information of the entities 
      to which each link respectively belongs and forming the topology
      structure of each protection entity of whole network and related
      link attribute information 

    d.Calculate constrained paths for the network. 

    The CSPF algorithm applies two databases: 

    1.PATHS 
    2.TENT. 
    

    The PATHS stores the information of the shortest path tree while 
    the TENT stores the information of tentative nodes which have been 
    attempted before finding the shorted path. The information of the 
    node is added to the PATHS database only when the shorted path to
    a node has been found. 

    1) Put a node doing the calculation on PATHS, and TENT is 
       pre-loaded from the local adjacency database. 
    2) While putting the node on PATHS, examine links from the node to 
       each of its neighbor nodes. If a neighbor node is already in 
       PATHS, this new path will be longer and thus ignored. If a 
       neighbor node is in TENT and the new path is shorter, the old 
       path is replaced with the new one. If the new path is the same
       length as the one in TENT, then the neighbor node has an 
       equivalent path. If a neighbor node is not in TENT, then links 
       and nodes that do not satisfy the LSP constraint conditions are
       deleted and nodes corresponding to links which satisfy the LSP 
       constraint conditions are put on TENT. 

Manayya KB         Expires Aug 31, 2010                  [Page 3]


    3) Put the nodes with least-cost from TENT to PATHS. 
    4) When TENT is empty or the destination node is already existed in
       PATHS, then the routing calculation is completed. 
    5) If there are equal-cost paths, then the most appropriate path is
       selected based on a certain policy; if there are several 
       equal-cost paths to the same destination, one appropriate path 
       needs to be selected as output of the calculation. 
       There are three selection policies: random selection, maximum 
       remaining bandwidth rate of path first and minimum remaining
       bandwidth rate of path first. 

       Random: One of the remaining paths is picked at random.  
               This rule places an equal number of LSPs on each link,  
               regardless of the available bandwidth ratio. 
       Least fill: The path with the largest minimum available 
               bandwidth ratio is preferred. This rule tries to 
               equalize the reservation on each link. 
       Most fill: The path with the smallest minimum available 
               bandwidth ratio is preferred. This rule tries to fill
               a link before moving on to alternative links.



 4. CSPF process:

    1. CSPF process begins at ingress router with parameters of 
       bandwidth, setup priority, hold priority and method used incase
       of equal cost multipath such as random, least fill or 
       most-fill. It determines the final destination (Egress router).
    2. It checks for maximum hop count, include and exclude constraints
       configured.
    3. Check each node for metric and hop count starting with Ingress.
    4. For each node check if endpoint is already visited ,if yes then
       Skip the verification. if not check the link for metric, color
       and bandwidth (for constraints) .
       The information on each node includes administrative groups 
       (Color), metrics, static bandwidth, reservable bandwidth, and 
       available bandwidth priority level. The information contained
       in the traffic engineering database should be the same across 
       all routers in the same traffic engineering domain. 
    5. If it fails then remove this link.
    6. If it passes then select the link with shortest path to neighbor
       router, go to next link and repeat the step 4.
    7. Repeat the steps 3 to 5 for all nodes
    8. The result of the CSPF algorithm is formed into a strict-hop ERO
       (Explicit Route Object)
    9. When the ERO is completed, the ERO is passed to the RSVP 
       (Resource Reservation Protocol) process, where it is used for
       signaling and establishing the LSP in the network. 
   10. If it is not possible to find the path then indicate about
       not finding a route then retry after retry interval.



Manayya KB         Expires Aug 31, 2010                  [Page 4]


 5. CSPF path selection procedure:

    - Compute LSPs one at a time, beginning with the highest priority  
      LSP (the one with the lowest setup priority value). IF LSPs have  
      equal priority, CSPF starts with those that have the highest  
      bandwidth requirement. 
    - Prune the topology database (TED) of all the links that are not  
      full duplex and do not have sufficient reservable bandwidth. 
    - If the LSP configuration includes the include statement, prune  
      all links that do not share any included colors. 
    - If the LSP configuration includes the exclude statement, prune  
      all links that contain excluded colors and do not contain a  
      color. 
    - Find the shortest path towards the LSP's egress router, taking  
      into account explicit-path constraints. 
    - If several paths have equal cost, choose the one whose last hop  
      address is the same as the LSP's destination. 
    - If several equal-cost paths remain, select the one with the  
      fewest number of hops. 
    - If several equal-cost paths remain, apply the CSPF load-balancing  
      rule configured on the LSP (least-fill, most-fill, or random). 
      The result of the above steps is a strict-hop ERO that details 
      each hop along the calculated path. The ERO is passed to the RSVP 
      protocol process, where it is used to signal and establish the 
      LSP in the network.


 6. Session attribute:

     Option 1: Retry_limit_counter

     Description: retry limit of CSPF path computations for a 
     particular path 

     Value: positive integer


 7. Administrative CSPF LSP events:

    An administrative event is an event in which the operator interface
    and CSPF engine signal the CSPF -finite state machine to start or
    stop the CSPF state machine.

    Event 1: NoRoute

    Definition: CSPF calculation failed to find a route to the 
    destination on the ingress router. This event must include an 
    address it cannot reach. The listed address in this event 
    may be the LSP egress address, an ERO address or an 
    intermediate address. 

    Status:     Mandatory


Manayya KB       Expires Aug 31, 2010                  [Page 5]


    Event 2: LinkDown      

    Definition: Traffic engineering database does not include the link.
    Status:     Mandatory

    Event 3: ComputationResultAccepted

    Definition: CSPF pruned the traffic engineering database of 
    noncompliant links and found a shortest path. CSPF generated an 
    ERO, which was then passed to the RSVP.

    Status:     Mandatory


    Event 4 : ComputationResultIgnored

    Definition: during reoptimization, a CSPF path computation for a
    potential optimal path is performed. Various checks are performed
    to evaluate whether the new path is better than the existing one. 
    If the new path is not better, the CSPF computation results for
    the new path are ignored and the new path is not signaled.

    Status:     Mandatory

    
    Event 5 : CouldNotDetermineSelf

    Definition: the traffic engineering database cannot determine the
    address of the local router

    Status:     Mandatory


    Event 6 : CantFindNon_OverlappingPath

    Definition: CSPF needed to compute an alternate path that did not
    intersect any other path.

    Status:     Mandatory



    Event 7 : Reroute due to re-optimization

    Definition: CSPF switched over to the new path after finding an 
    optimal path for LSP traffic

    Status:   Mandatory
  




Manayya KB       Expires Aug 31, 2010                     [Page 6]


    Event 8: RetryLimitExceeded

    Definition: the number of CSPF path computations for a particular
    path exceeded a configured retry limit. After this, the path is not
    recomputed or signaled, unless the user intervenes.

    Status:   Mandatory

    Event 9: EmptyRouteEvent

    Definition: destination route for the LSP is not correct

    Status:   Mandatory



 8. Event Triggers:

    1. The following actions triggers the NoRoute event.

       - when CSPF calculation is failed on the ingress router to find 
         a route to the destination 
       - A downstream node is not configured for the Resource 
         Reservation Protocol (RSVP) or Multiprotocol Label Switching
        (MPLS) or 
       - The loopback interface is not configured on the ingress/
         egress routers or
       - A faulty Explicit Route Object (ERO) that causes a loop or
         contains a invalid address.


    2. If traffic engineering database does not include the link due 
       to link failure, then LinkDown event is triggered.

    3. After generating an ERO and passed to the RSVP, 
       ComputationResultAccepted event should occur.

    4. The event ComputationResultIgnored should occur when 

       - The optimization is purely metric based, so switching to the 
         new path could increase bandwidth congestion on links. 
       - Switching to the new path could cause preemption. 
       - The metric of the new path is higher than that of the existing 
          path. 
       - The metric is the same on the new and existing paths, but the 
         number of hops in the new path is higher than on the existing
         path.




Manayya KB         Expires Aug 31, 2010                   [page 7]



    5. The event CouldNotDetermineSelf should occur when traffic 
       engineering is not configured for OSPF or ISIS.

    6.  The event CantFindNon-OverlappingPath should occur when error
        appears while running the adaptive feature to run shared 
        explicit (SE)-style reservations, where no nonoverlapping paths
        are possible. 


    7.  When the Retry_Limit_Counter expires then RetryLimitExceeded 
        event must be triggered.


    8.  when destination route for the LSP is incorrect, EmptyRoute 
        Event must be triggered.

9 IANA Considerations

   This memo includes no request to IANA.

10 Security Considerations

   The security considerations listed in OSPF [2328] and RSVP [2205]
   are applicable
   

 11. References:

 
   [3630]  D. Katz, K. Kompella, D. Yeung, "Traffic Engineering (TE) 
        Extensions to OSPF Version 2" RFC 3630, September 2003.
   [2205]  R. Braden, Ed, L. Zhang, S. Berson, S. Herzog, S. Jamin
        "Resource ReSerVation Protocol (RSVP) -- Version 1 Fun"
        RFC 2205, Sep 1997
   [2328] J. Moy, "OSPF Version 2" RFC 2328, April 1998
   
 

 Authors' Addresses

 Manayya KB
 Sunnyavle
 CA-94086

 Email: manayya@yahoo.com


  
     Comments are solicited and should be addressed to 
  manayya@yahoo.com



Manayya KB         Expires Aug 31, 2010                   [Page 8]




