


Network Working Group                                         M. Bagnulo
Internet-Draft                                                      UC3M
Intended status: Standards Track                               A. Morton
Expires: March 30, 2014                                        AT&T Labs
                                                              P. Eardley
                                                                      BT
                                                      September 30, 2013


               A(nother) Registry for Performance Metrics
                 draft-mornulo-ippm-registry-columns-00

Abstract

   This memo investigates a scheme to organize registry entries,
   especially those defined in RFCs prepared in the IP Performance
   Metrics (IPPM) Working Group of the IETF, and applicable to all IETF
   metrics.  Three aspects make IPPM metric registration difficult: (1)
   Use of the Type-P notion to allow users to specify their own packet
   types. (2) Use of flexible input variables, called Parameters in IPPM
   definitions, some which determine the quantity measured and others
   which should not be specified until execution of the measurement. (3)
   Allowing flexibility in choice of statistics to summarize the results
   on a stream of measurement packets.  Specifically, this memo proposes
   a way to organize registry entries into columns that are well-
   defined, permiting consistent development of entries over time.
   Also, this fosters development of registry entries based on existing
   reference RFCs for performance metrics, and requires expert review
   for every entry before IANA action.

Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].


Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months



Bagnulo, et al.          Expires March 21, 2014                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft               Round-trip Loss              September 2013


   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on March 21, 2014.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.































Bagnulo, et al.          Expires March 21, 2014                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft               Round-trip Loss              September 2013


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     1.1.  Background and Motivation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.  Scope  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   3.  Registry Categories and Columns  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.1.  Registry Indexes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
       3.1.1.  Element ID . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
       3.1.2.  Metric Name  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     3.2.  Metric Definition  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
       3.2.1.  Reference Definition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
       3.2.2.  Fixed Parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
       3.2.3.  Metric Units . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     3.3.  Method of Measurement  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
       3.3.1.  Reference Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
       3.3.2.  Stream Type and Stream Parameters  . . . . . . . . . .  9
       3.3.3.  Output Type and Data Format  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
       3.3.4.  Run-time Parameters and Data Format  . . . . . . . . . 10
     3.4.  Comments and Remarks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   4.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   5.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   6.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   7.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     7.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     7.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12

























Bagnulo, et al.          Expires March 21, 2014                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft               Round-trip Loss              September 2013


1.  Introduction

   This memo investigates a scheme to organize registry entries,
   especially those defined in RFCs prepared in the IP Performance
   Metrics (IPPM) Working Group of the IETF, according to their
   framework [RFC2330].  Three aspects make IPPM metric registration
   difficult: (1) Use of the Type-P notion to allow users to specify
   their own packet types. (2) Use of Flexible input variables, called
   Parameters in IPPM definitions, some which determine the quantity
   measured and others which should not be specified until execution of
   the measurement. (3) Allowing flexibility in choice of statistics to
   summarize the results on a stream of measurement packets.  This memo
   uses terms and definitions from the IPPM literature, primarily
   [RFC2330], and the reader is assumed familiar with them or may refer
   questions there as necessary.

   Although there are several standard templates for organizing
   specifications of performance metrics (see [RFC2679] for an example
   of the traditional IPPM template, based to large extent on the
   Benchmarking Methodology Working Group's traditional template in
   [RFC1242], and see [RFC6390] for a similar template), none of these
   templates was intended to become the basis for the columns of an
   IETF-wide registry of metrics.  As we examine the aspects of metric
   specifications which need to be registered, we will see that none of
   the existing metric templates fully satisfies the needs of a
   registry.

   The authors of [draft-bagnulo-ippm-new-registry] and
   [draft-bagnulo-ippm-new-registry-independent] made important
   contributions to this memo in the registry column structure, and the
   problem of registry development in general.  We also acknowledge
   input from the authors of [draft-claise-ippm-perf-metric-registry],
   especially the value of an Element ID and the need for naming
   conventions.

1.1.  Background and Motivation

   The motivation for having such registry is to allow a controller to
   request a measurement agent to execute a measurement using a specific
   metric.  Such request can be performed using any control protocol
   that refers to the value assigned to the specific metric in the
   registry.  Similarly, the measurement agent can report the results of
   the measurement and by referring to the metric value it can
   unequivocally identify the metric that the results correspond to.

   There was a previous attempt to define a metric registry RFC 4148
   [RFC4148].  However, it was obsoleted by RFC 6248 [RFC6248] because
   it was "found to be insufficiently detailed to uniquely identify IPPM



Bagnulo, et al.          Expires March 21, 2014                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft               Round-trip Loss              September 2013


   metrics... [there was too much] variability possible when
   characterizing a metric exactly" which led to the RFC4148 registry
   having "very few users, if any".

   Our approach learns from this, by tightly defining each entry in the
   registry with only a few parameters open for each.  The idea is that
   the entries in the registry represent different measurement tests,
   whilst the run-time parameters set things like source and destination
   addresses that don't change the fundamental nature of the test.  The
   downside of this approach is that it could result in an explosion in
   the number of entries in the registry.  We believe that less is more
   in this context - it is better to have a reduced set of useful
   metrics rather than a large set of metrics with questionable
   usefulness.  Therefore this document defines that the registry only
   includes commonly used metrics that are well defined; hence we
   require both reference specification required AND expert review
   policies for the assignment of values in the registry.

   There are a couple of side benefits of having such registry.  First
   the registry could serve as an inventory of useful and used metrics,
   that are normally supported by different implementations of
   measurement agents.  Second, the results of the metrics would be
   comparable even if they are performed by different implementations
   and in different networks, as the metric is properly defined.

   The registry forms part of a Characterization Plan.  It describes
   various factors that need to be set by the party controlling the
   measurements, for example: specific values for the parameters
   associated with the selected registry entry (for instance, source and
   destination addresses); and how often the measurement is made.  The
   Characterization Plan determines the individual Measurement
   Instructions that will be communicated to measurement agents, whose
   task is then to execute the Instruction autonomously.

   Measurement Instructions might look something like: "Dear measurement
   agent: Please start test DNS(example.com) and RTT(server.com,150)
   every day at 2000 GMT.  Run the DNS test 5 times and the RTT test 50
   times.  Do that when the network is idle.  Generate both raw results
   and 99th percentile mean.  Send measurement results to collector.com
   in IPFIX format".  The Characterization Plan depends on the
   requirements of the controlling party.  For instance the broadband
   consumer might want a one-off measurement made immediately to one
   specific server; a regulator might want the same measurement made
   once a day until further notice to the 'top 10' servers; whilst an
   operator might want a varying series of tests (some of which will be
   beyond those defined in the registry) as determined from time to time
   by their operational support system.  While the registries defined in
   this document help to define the Characterization Plan, its full



Bagnulo, et al.          Expires March 21, 2014                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft               Round-trip Loss              September 2013


   specification falls outside the scope of this document, and other
   IETF work as currently chartered.


2.  Scope

   Specifically, this memo proposes a way to organize registry entries
   into columns that are well-defined, permiting consistent development
   of entries over time.  Also, this fosters development of registry
   entries based on existing reference RFCs for performance metrics, and
   requires expert review for every entry before IANA action.

   In this memo, we attempt a combinatoric registry, where all factors
   that can be reasonably specified ARE specified, and changing even one
   factor would require a new registry entry (row).  It is believed that
   this exercise can also be instructive for a registry based on
   independent factors, [draft-bagnulo-ippm-new-registry-independent]
   but that topic is beyond the scope of this effort.

   Entries in the registry must reference an existing RFC or other
   recognized standard, and are subject to expert review.  The expert
   review must make sure that the proposed metric is operationally
   useful.  This means that the metric has proven to be useful in
   operational/real scenarios.


3.  Registry Categories and Columns

   This section briefly describes the categories and columns proposed
   for the registry, as this is likely to be a topic for discussion and
   revision.  Below, categories are described at the 3.x heading level,
   and columns are at the 3.x.y heading level.  The Figure below
   illustrates this organization.

   Taken as a whole, the entries in the columns give a registered
   instance of a metric with sufficient specificity to promote
   comparable results across independent implementations.  In other
   words, a *complete description* of a Metric Instance.  Some instances
   may not require entries in all columns, but this is preferred to more
   general organization because each column serves as a check-list item
   and helps to avoid omissions during registration and expert review.










Bagnulo, et al.          Expires March 21, 2014                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft               Round-trip Loss              September 2013


 Registry Categories and Columns, shown as
                                                Category
                                                ------------------
                                                Column |  Column |
Registry Index
---------------------------
Element ID |  Metric Name |


Metric Definition
--------------------------------------------------------
Reference Definition | Fixed Parameters | Metric Units |


Method of Measurement
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Reference Method | Stream Type and Param | Output Type | Run-time Param |


Comments and Remarks
--------------------



3.1.  Registry Indexes

   This category includes multiple indexes to the registry entries, the
   element ID and metric name.

3.1.1.  Element ID

   An integer having enough digits to uniquely identify each entry in
   the Registry.

3.1.2.  Metric Name

   A metric naming convention is TBD.

   The current guidance from Section 13 of [RFC2330], where Type-P is a
   feature of all IPPM metric names, is:

   "... we introduce the generic notion of a "packet of type P", where
   in some contexts P will be explicitly defined (i.e., exactly what
   type of packet we mean), partially defined (e.g., "with a payload of
   B octets"), or left generic.  Thus we may talk about generic IP-type-
   P-connectivity or more specific IP-port-HTTP-connectivity.  Some
   metrics and methodologies may be fruitfully defined using generic
   type P definitions which are then made specific when performing



Bagnulo, et al.          Expires March 21, 2014                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft               Round-trip Loss              September 2013


   actual measurements.  Whenever a metric's value depends on the type
   of the packets involved in the metric, the metric's name will include
   either a specific type or a phrase such as "type-P". ..."

   Registry entries are a context where Type-P must be defined.

   IPPM Metric names have also included the typically included the
   stream type, to distinguish between singleton and sample metrics (see
   [RFC2330] for the definition of these terms).

3.2.  Metric Definition

   This category includes columns to prompt the entry of all necessary
   detalis related to the metric definition, including the RFC reference
   and values of input factors, called fixed parameters.

3.2.1.  Reference Definition

   This entry provides references to relevant sections of the RFC(s)
   defining the metric, as well as any supplemental information needed
   to ensure an unambiguous definition for implementations.

3.2.2.  Fixed Parameters

   Fixed Parameters are input factors that must be determined and
   embedded in the measurement system for use when needed.  The values
   of these parameters is specified in the Registry.

   Where referenced metrics supply a list of Parameters as part of their
   descriptive template, a sub-set of the Parameters will be designated
   as Fixed Parameters.  For example, Fixed Parameters determine most or
   all of the IPPM Framework convention "packets of Type-P" as described
   in [RFC2330], such as transport protocol, payload length, TTL, etc.

   A Parameter which is Fixed for one Registry entry may be designated
   as a Run-time Parameter for another Registry entry.

3.2.3.  Metric Units

   The measured results of a metric must be expressed using some
   standard dimension or units of measure.  This column provides the
   units (and if possible, the data format, whose specification will
   simplify both measurement implementation and collection/storage
   tasks, see the Output Type column below).

   When a sample of singletons (see [RFC2330] for definitions of these
   terms) is collected, this entry will specify the units for each
   measured value.



Bagnulo, et al.          Expires March 21, 2014                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft               Round-trip Loss              September 2013


3.3.  Method of Measurement

   This category includes columns for references to relevant sections of
   the RFC(s) and any supplemental information needed to ensure an
   unambiguous methods for implementations.

3.3.1.  Reference Method

   This entry provides references to relevant sections of the RFC(s)
   describing the method of measurement, as well as any supplemental
   information needed to ensure unambiguous interpretation for
   implementations referring to the RFC text.

3.3.2.  Stream Type and Stream Parameters

   Principally, two different streams are used in IPPM metrics, Poisson
   distributed as described in [RFC2330] and Periodic as described in
   [RFC3432].  Both Poisson and Periodic have their own unique
   parameters, and the relevant set of values is specified in this
   column.

   Some metrics, such as those intended for passive monitoring or RTCP
   and RTCP-XR metrics, will not specifiy an entry for this column.

   Each entry for this column contains the following information:

   o  Value: The name of the packet stream scheduling disipline

   o  Stream Parameters: The values and formats of input factors for
      each type of stream.  For example, the average packet rate and
      distribution truncation value for streams with Poisson-distributed
      inter-packet sending times.

   o  Reference: the specification where the stream is defined

   The simplest example of stream specification is Singleton scheduling,
   where a single atomic measurement is conducted.  Each atomic
   measurement could consist of sending a single packet (such as a DNS
   request) or sending several packets (for example, to request a a
   webpage).  Other streams support a series of atomic measurements in a
   "sample", with a schedule defining the timing between each transmited
   packet and subsequent measurement.

3.3.3.  Output Type and Data Format

   For entries which involve a stream and many singleton measurements, a
   statistic may be specified in this column to summarize the results to
   a single value.  If the complete set of measured singletons is



Bagnulo, et al.          Expires March 21, 2014                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft               Round-trip Loss              September 2013


   output, this will be specified here.

   Some metrics embed one specific statistic in the reference metric
   definition, while others allow several output types or statistics.

   Each entry in the output type column contains the following
   information:

   o  Value: The name of the output type

   o  Data Format: provided to simplify the communication with
      collection systems and implementation of measurement devices.

   o  Reference: the specification where the output type is defined

   The output type defines the type of result that the metric produces.
   It can be the raw results or it can be some form of statistic.  The
   specification of the output type must define the format of the
   output.  Note that if two different statistics are required from a
   single measurement (for example, both "Xth percentile mean" and
   "Raw"), then a new output type must be defined ("Xth percentile mean
   AND Raw").

3.3.4.  Run-time Parameters and Data Format

   Run-Time Parameters are input factors that must be determined,
   configured into the measurement system, and reported with the results
   for the context to be complete.  However, the values of these
   parameters is not specified in the Registry, rather these parameters
   are listed as an aid to the measurement system implementor or user
   (they must be left as variables, and supplied on execution).

   Where metrics supply a list of Parameters as part of their
   descriptive template, a sub-set of the Parameters will be designated
   as Run-Time Parameters.

   The Data Format of each Run-time Parameter SHALL be specified in this
   column, to simplify the control and implementation of measurement
   devices.

   Examples of Run-time Parameters include IP addresses, measurement
   point designations, start times and end times for measurement, and
   other measurement-specific information.

3.4.  Comments and Remarks

   Besides providing additional details which do not appear in other
   categories, this open Category (single column) allows for unforeseen



Bagnulo, et al.          Expires March 21, 2014                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft               Round-trip Loss              September 2013


   issues to be addressed by simply updating this Informational entry.


4.  Security Considerations

   This registry has no known implications on Internet Security.


5.  IANA Considerations

   Metrics previously defined in IETF were registered in the IANA IPPM
   METRICS REGISTRY, however this process was discontinued when the
   registry structure was found to be inadequate, and the registry was
   declared Obsolete [RFC6248].

   The form of metric registration will finalized in the future, and no
   IANA Action is requested at this time.


6.  Acknowledgements

   The author thanks Brian Trammell for suggesting the term "Run-time
   Parameters", which led to the distinction between run-time and fixed
   parameters implemented in this memo.


7.  References

7.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC2330]  Paxson, V., Almes, G., Mahdavi, J., and M. Mathis,
              "Framework for IP Performance Metrics", RFC 2330,
              May 1998.

   [RFC2679]  Almes, G., Kalidindi, S., and M. Zekauskas, "A One-way
              Delay Metric for IPPM", RFC 2679, September 1999.

   [RFC2680]  Almes, G., Kalidindi, S., and M. Zekauskas, "A One-way
              Packet Loss Metric for IPPM", RFC 2680, September 1999.

   [RFC2681]  Almes, G., Kalidindi, S., and M. Zekauskas, "A Round-trip
              Delay Metric for IPPM", RFC 2681, September 1999.

   [RFC3393]  Demichelis, C. and P. Chimento, "IP Packet Delay Variation
              Metric for IP Performance Metrics (IPPM)", RFC 3393,



Bagnulo, et al.          Expires March 21, 2014                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft               Round-trip Loss              September 2013


              November 2002.

   [RFC3432]  Raisanen, V., Grotefeld, G., and A. Morton, "Network
              performance measurement with periodic streams", RFC 3432,
              November 2002.

   [RFC4737]  Morton, A., Ciavattone, L., Ramachandran, G., Shalunov,
              S., and J. Perser, "Packet Reordering Metrics", RFC 4737,
              November 2006.

   [RFC5357]  Hedayat, K., Krzanowski, R., Morton, A., Yum, K., and J.
              Babiarz, "A Two-Way Active Measurement Protocol (TWAMP)",
              RFC 5357, October 2008.

   [RFC5905]  Mills, D., Martin, J., Burbank, J., and W. Kasch, "Network
              Time Protocol Version 4: Protocol and Algorithms
              Specification", RFC 5905, June 2010.

7.2.  Informative References

   [RFC1242]  Bradner, S., "Benchmarking terminology for network
              interconnection devices", RFC 1242, July 1991.

   [RFC4148]  Stephan, E., "IP Performance Metrics (IPPM) Metrics
              Registry", BCP 108, RFC 4148, August 2005.

   [RFC5481]  Morton, A. and B. Claise, "Packet Delay Variation
              Applicability Statement", RFC 5481, March 2009.

   [RFC6248]  Morton, A., "RFC 4148 and the IP Performance Metrics
              (IPPM) Registry of Metrics Are Obsolete", RFC 6248,
              April 2011.

   [RFC6390]  Clark, A. and B. Claise, "Guidelines for Considering New
              Performance Metric Development", BCP 170, RFC 6390,
              October 2011.















Bagnulo, et al.          Expires March 21, 2014                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft               Round-trip Loss              September 2013


Authors' Addresses

   Marcelo Bagnulo
   Universidad Carlos III de Madrid
   Av. Universidad 30
   Leganes, Madrid  28911
   SPAIN

   Phone: 34 91 6249500
   Email: marcelo@it.uc3m.es
   URI:   http://www.it.uc3m.es


   Al Morton
   AT&T Labs
   200 Laurel Avenue South
   Middletown,, NJ  07748
   USA

   Phone: +1 732 420 1571
   Fax:   +1 732 368 1192
   Email: acmorton@att.com
   URI:   http://home.comcast.net/~acmacm/


   Philip Eardley
   British Telecom
   Adastral Park, Martlesham Heath
   Ipswich
   ENGLAND

   Email: philip.eardley@bt.com



















Bagnulo, et al.          Expires March 21, 2014                [Page 13]
