


Network Working Group                                         P. Hoffman
Internet-Draft                                            VPN Consortium
Intended status: Standards Track                           June 15, 2012
Expires: December 17, 2012


           Proposal for Canonical and Other Formats for RFCs
                draft-hoffman-rfcformat-canon-others-02

Abstract

   This document proposes a new, XML-based canonical format for RFCs
   that explicitly allows external art as a normative part of the RFC.
   If the RFC Editor chooses this format, they will also publish non-
   canonical versions of RFCs in order to accomodate the largest target
   audience of readers.  Having a simple, stable canonical format and a
   varying number of non-canonical formats that can change over time
   allows the RFC Editor to add useful formats, particularly in HTML,
   that can keep up with the needs of all RFC readers.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 17, 2012.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2012 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must



Hoffman                 Expires December 17, 2012               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft         RFCs: Canonical and Others              June 2012


   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


1.  Introduction

   A clear result of the decades-long discussion about the format of
   published RFCs is that different RFC readers have different needs and
   desires.  No single format will be sufficient, or even useful, to all
   people who read RFCs.  Another clear result is that the format
   described in [RFC2223] and its follow-ons is no longer the best
   format for publishing protocols, process descriptions, research
   findings, and the many other types of documents that are part of the
   modern RFC series.

   This document proposes to deal with these issues in a way that meets
   the needs and desires of the widespread RFC-reading community.  For
   every RFC, the RFC Editor will publish all of the following:

   o  A canonical version of the RFC that is in XML format

   o  Canonical versions of any art referred to in the canonical RFC

   o  Multiple additional forms of the RFC, most notably at least in one
      or more HTML formats

   Submission to the RFC Editor (the "input format") will be in the same
   XML format as the canonical version of an RFC.  This allows an author
   to use differencing tools to track all changes that are made to the
   document that they submitted to the RFC Editor.

   Today, all RFCs are easily retrievable by all readers.  In the
   future, all of the versions of an RFC and its art must be easily
   accessible as well.  To make this easier, the RFC Editor will
   establish a permanent URL template for each RFC that leads to a page
   that lists all of the versions and art; a copy of that URL will be
   included near the beginning of the RFC in the boilerplate so that new
   RFC readers can find it.  Further, it will be easy for advanced RFC
   users to mirror the entire collection of RFC material.

   A major motivation behind the "one canonical, many non-canonical"
   proposal here is to allow the RFC Editor to easily change the non-
   canonical formats in the future without having to change the
   canonical format.  For example, the recent discussion of RFC formats
   has shown that many people strongly desire good HTML versions of
   RFCs, but there is not agreement of exactly what format the HTML
   should take.  Further, it is completely clear that the HTML standard



Hoffman                 Expires December 17, 2012               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft         RFCs: Canonical and Others              June 2012


   will evolve in the coming years and decades, and some of the new
   features that will be added will be quite useful in RFCs.  Allowing
   the RFC Editor to add additional HTML formats to the RFC collection,
   even for RFCs that have been published in the past, gives the
   greatest value to RFC readers without forcing any changes on the
   canonical RFC format.

   Similarly, it is clear that HTML is not the only useful format for
   RFCs.  Some people really like plain text; others want PDFs or other
   printer-ready paginated formats; still others want different formats
   that can be converted to different reading devices.  Some people want
   detailed metadata for RFCs so that they can better mine them for
   relevant information.  All of these people can be accommodated by the
   RFC Editor publishing multiple non-canonical versions of RFCs.  The
   canonical version of the RFC and all the non-canonical versions of
   the RFC should have predictable URLs so that tools can easily find
   (for example) an RFC in the reader's preferred HTML style just by
   knowing the RFC number.

   The method that the RFC Editor uses to create the non-canonical
   formats for RFCs is left up to the RFC Editor.  For example, they
   might generate it directly from the input files, through an
   intermediate format, or something else.


2.  Canonical RFC Format and Content

   Canonical RFCs are in XML format.  The most salient rules for the
   format and content of those files are:

   o  The format for the XML will be specified by the RFC Editor.  It is
      likely that the XML format will be similar to that which is now
      referred to as "xml2rfc" ([RFC2629] and its informal successors),
      and it is also likely that the format will be different from
      "xml2rfc" in that the IETF community has found many problems with
      that format.

   o  It is explicitly allowed to have art in external files.  Those
      files are referred to in figures in the RFC as URLs that point to
      the RFC Editor's web site.  These art files might be instead of
      text art in a document (such as for a diagram that is too complex
      to render well in text), or might be better variants for text art.
      The RFC Editor will determine which graphic formats are allowed,
      and it is likely that at least one vector format and one pixel-
      based format will be permitted.

   o  The text encoding for the document is UTF-8.




Hoffman                 Expires December 17, 2012               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft         RFCs: Canonical and Others              June 2012


   o  The RFC Editor can decide where it is and is not appropriate to
      use non-ASCII characters from the Unicode repertoire in the RFC.
      For example, the RFC Editor might make rules about using non-ASCII
      characters in people's names, reference titles, examples in text,
      and so on.

   o  Text art that internal to the document is limited to 95 columns.
      This is reasonable for printing on laser printers from the past 25
      years, and allows much more expressive art than the current
      maximum of approximately 70 columns.

   Text art encompasses many types of content.  The unifying feature is
   that it is one or more lines of text that must be rendered with a
   monospace font in order to be fully understood in the context of the
   document.  Thus, text art includes graphical representations such as
   packet diagrams, flow diagrams, and flow charts, but it also includes
   other text that needs to have column alignment such as multi-line
   ABNF.

   This proposal does not deal with how mathematical equations might be
   included in the canonical RFC format.  An author can do it as text or
   as art in an external file.  The RFC Editor might allow an equation-
   specific format from external art files.


3.  Additional Formats Provided by the RFC Editor

   The RFC Editor will derive and publish non-canonical documents in
   multiple formats from the RFC.  If the RFC-reading community agrees
   on a single HTML format, that will certainly be published.  If the
   RFC-reading community cannot agree on just one HTML format, the RFC
   Editor might publish non-canonical versions of an RFC in multiple
   HTML formats.

   Depending on interest from the RFC-reading community, the RFC Editor
   will also publish non-canonical versions in other formats.  For
   example, it is likely that the RFC Editor will publish in at least
   one format of PDF.  Because some tools in widespread use rely on the
   current RFC format, the RFC Editor might also publish a non-canonical
   version in using the rules in RFC 2333 (line lengths, page headers,
   and so on).

   The RFC Editor will also publish metadata for each canonical RFC.  It
   will include document-wide metadata including title, author
   information, date of publication, list of references, a structured
   table of contents, and so on.  The metadata will be available in a
   file separate from the canonical RFC to which it refers.




Hoffman                 Expires December 17, 2012               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft         RFCs: Canonical and Others              June 2012


4.  IANA Considerations

   None


5.  Security Considerations

   None


6.  Informative References

   [RFC2223]  Postel, J. and J. Reynolds, "Instructions to RFC Authors",
              RFC 2223, October 1997.

   [RFC2629]  Rose, M., "Writing I-Ds and RFCs using XML", RFC 2629,
              June 1999.


Author's Address

   Paul Hoffman
   VPN Consortium

   Email: paul.hoffman@vpnc.org


























Hoffman                 Expires December 17, 2012               [Page 5]

