


Network Working Group                                         P. Hoffman
Internet-Draft                                            VPN Consortium
Intended status: Standards Track                            May 12, 2012
Expires: November 13, 2012


           Proposal for Canonical and Other Formats for RFCs
                draft-hoffman-rfcformat-canon-others-00

Abstract

   This document proposes a modernized text-based canonical format for
   RFCs that explicitly allows external art as a normative part of the
   RFC.  If the RFC Editor chooses this format, they will also publish
   non-canonical versions of RFCs in order to accomodate the largest
   target audience of readers.  Having a simple, stable canonical format
   and a varying number of non-canonical formats that can change over
   time allows the RFC Editor to add useful formats, particularly in
   HTML, that can keep up with the needs of all RFC readers.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on November 13, 2012.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2012 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must



Hoffman                 Expires November 13, 2012               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft         RFCs: Canonical and Others               May 2012


   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


1.  Introduction

   A clear result of the decades-long discussion about the format of
   published RFCs is that different RFC readers have different needs and
   desires.  No single format will be sufficient, or even useful, to all
   people who read RFCs.  Another clear result is that the format
   described in [RFC2223] and its follow-ons is no longer the best
   format for publishing protocols, process descriptions, research
   findings, and the many other types of documents that are part of the
   modern RFC series.

   This document proposes to deal with these issues in a way that meets
   the needs and desires of the widespread RFC-reading community.  For
   every RFC, the RFC Editor will publish all of the following:

   o  A canonical version of the RFC using a modernized version of the
      current text-based format

   o  Canonical versions of any art referred to in the canonical RFC

   o  Multiple additional forms of the RFC, most notably at least in one
      or more HTML formats

   o  Metadata for the RFC

   Today, all RFCs are easily retrievable by all readers.  In the
   future, all of the versions of an RFC, its art, and its metadata must
   be easily accessible as well.  To make this easier, the RFC Editor
   will establish a permanent URL template for each RFC that leads to a
   page that lists all of the versions, art, and metadata; a copy of
   that URL will be included near the beginning of the RFC in the
   boilerplate so that new RFC readers can find it.  Further, it will be
   easy for advanced RFC users to mirror the entire collection of RFC
   material.

   A major motivation behind the "one canonical, many non-canonical"
   proposal here is to allow the RFC Editor to easily change the non-
   canonical formats in the future without having to change the
   canonical format.  For example, the recent discussion of RFC formats
   has shown that many people strongly desire good HTML versions of
   RFCs, but there is not agreement of exactly what format the HTML
   should take.  Further, it is completely clear that the HTML standard
   will evolve in the coming years and decades, and some of the new



Hoffman                 Expires November 13, 2012               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft         RFCs: Canonical and Others               May 2012


   features that will be added will be quite useful in RFCs.  Allowing
   the RFC Editor to add additional HTML formats to the RFC collection,
   even for RFCs that have been published in the past, gives the
   greatest value to RFC readers without forcing any changes on the
   canonical RFC format.

   Similarly, it is clear that HTML is not the only useful format for
   RFCs.  Some people really like plain text; others want PDFs or other
   printer-ready paginated formats; still others want different formats
   that can be converted to different reading devices.  Some people want
   detailed metadata for RFCs so that they can better mine them for
   relevant information.  All of these people can be accommodated by the
   RFC Editor publishing multiple non-canonical versions of RFCs.


2.  Canonical RFC Format

   Canonical RFCs are text files.  The format of those files is:

   o  Text paragraphs consist of a single line with no line wrapping.

   o  The document has no page breaks and thus no page headers and
      footers.

   o  It is explicitly allowed to have art in external files.  Those
      files are referred to in figures in the RFC as URLs that point to
      the RFC Editor's web site.  The RFC Editor will determine which
      graphic formats are allowed, and it is likely that at least SVG
      and GIF will be permitted.

   o  The text encoding for the document is UTF-8.  The RFC Editor can
      decide where it is and is not appropriate to use non-ASCII
      characters in the RFC.  For example, the RFC Editor might make
      rules about using non-ASCII characters in people's names,
      reference titles, examples in text, and so on.

   o  Text art that internal to the document is limited to 95 columns.
      This is reasonable for printing on laser printers from the past 25
      years, and allows much more expressive art than the current
      maximum of approximately 70 columns.


3.  Additional Formats Provided by the RFC Editor

   The RFC Editor will derive and publish non-canonical documents in
   multiple formats from the RFC.  If the RFC-reading community agrees
   on a single HTML format, that will certainly be published.  If the
   RFC-reading community cannot agree on just one HTML format, the RFC



Hoffman                 Expires November 13, 2012               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft         RFCs: Canonical and Others               May 2012


   Editor might publish non-canonical versions of an RFC in multiple
   HTML formats.

   Depending on interest from the RFC-reading community, the RFC Editor
   will also publish non-canonical versions in other formats.  For
   example, it is likely that the RFC Editor will publish in at least
   one format of PDF.  Because some tools in widespread use rely on the
   current RFC format, the RFC Editor might also publish a non-canonical
   version in using the rules in RFC 2333 (line lengths, page headers,
   and so on).

   The RFC Editor will also publish metadata for each canonical RFC.  It
   will include document-wide metadata including title, author
   information, date of publication, list of references, and so on.  The
   metadata will also include position-dependent information such as a
   structured table of contents, the start and end lines for each piece
   of text art, and so on.

   The metadata will be available in a file separate from the canonical
   RFC to which it refers.  Some of the non-canonical formats (notably,
   HTML) allow rich internal metadata; in those cases, the RFC Editor
   will simply include the metadata in the non-canonical documents
   themselves.


4.  Input Format for RFCs

   This document does not suggest an input format for RFCs.  The RFC
   Editor needs to decide that in coordination with all of the
   representatives of the various RFC streams.  Fortunately, the
   decision of the input format does not need to be tied to the decision
   of the canonical RFC format or the non-canonical versions available
   at any time.  Even if the canonical RFC format is the one described
   in this document, there is no reason that the input format to the RFC
   Editor has to be the same format: it could be XML, HTML, and so on.
   The conversion from the input format to the canonical and non-
   canonical formats used by the RFC Editor is done by the RFC Editor
   with their own tools and human-based processes.

   It is important to note that the RFC format described here includes
   external art files.  The RFC Editor will have to also specify how
   those art files are submitted (by upload, by URL, and so on).

   Many RFCs are later revised, sometimes by different authors many
   years after the original version was published.  Also, some RFCs
   liberally copy a great deal of text from earlier RFCs.  Whatever was
   given to the RFC Editor for a particular RFC should be preserved and
   made available to other authors, possibly as one of the non-canonical



Hoffman                 Expires November 13, 2012               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft         RFCs: Canonical and Others               May 2012


   versions of the RFC.


5.  IANA Considerations

   None


6.  Security Considerations

   None


7.  Informative References

   [RFC2223]  Postel, J. and J. Reynolds, "Instructions to RFC Authors",
              RFC 2223, October 1997.


Author's Address

   Paul Hoffman
   VPN Consortium

   Email: paul.hoffman@vpnc.org


























Hoffman                 Expires November 13, 2012               [Page 5]

