A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3454

        Title:      Preparation of Internationalized Strings
                    ("stringprep")
        Author(s):  P. Hoffman, M. Blanchet
        Status:     Standards Track
        Date:       December 2002
        Mailbox:    paul.hoffman@imc.org, Marc.Blanchet@viagenie.qc.ca
        Pages:      91
        Characters: 138684
        Updates/Obsoletes/SeeAlso:  None

        I-D Tag:    draft-hoffman-stringprep-07.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3454.txt


This document describes a framework for preparing Unicode text strings
in order to increase the likelihood that string input and string
comparison work in ways that make sense for typical users throughout
the world.  The stringprep protocol is useful for protocol identifier
values, company and personal names, internationalized domain names,
and other text strings.

This document does not specify how protocols should prepare text
strings.  Protocols must create profiles of stringprep in order to
fully specify the processing options.

This document is a product of the IDN Working Group of the IETF.

This is now a Proposed Standard Protocol.

This document specifies an Internet standards track protocol for
the Internet community, and requests discussion and suggestions
for improvements.  Please refer to the current edition of the
"Internet Official Protocol Standards" (STD 1) for the
standardization state and status of this protocol.  Distribution
of this memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.
