


Network Working Group                                    P. Hoffman, Ed.
Internet-Draft                                            VPN Consortium
Obsoletes: 4677 (if approved)                               July 5, 2012
Intended status: Informational
Expires: January 6, 2013


             Publishing the "Tao of the IETF" as a Web Page
                    draft-hoffman-tao-as-web-page-03

Abstract

   This document describes how the "Tao of the IETF", which has been
   published as a series of RFCs in the past, will instead be published
   as a web page.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 6, 2013.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2012 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.




Hoffman                  Expires January 6, 2013                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                 Tao as Web                      July 2012


1.  Introduction

   The "Tao of the IETF" ("Tao") describes the inner workings of IETF
   meetings and Working Groups, discusses organizations related to the
   IETF, and introduces the standards process.  It is not a formal IETF
   process document but instead an informational overview.  The Tao has
   traditionally been published as an RFC.  It has been RFCs 1391, 1539,
   1718, 3160; it is currently [RFC4677].

   There is now a strong desire in the IETF community to turn the Tao
   into a web page that can be edited more easily than an RFC.  This
   document describes how that will happen.  At the same time, this
   document formally obsoletes the last version of the Tao that was
   published as an RFC because that last version, RFC 4677, will no
   longer be considered the "latest" version of the Tao: the new web
   page will.

   This document contains the procedure agreed to by the IESG.  The Tao
   has traditionally been an IETF consensus document, which means that
   the IESG has had the final say about what the Tao contained before it
   was sent to the RFC Editor.  Thus, the IESG should have final say for
   what the Tao says when it is a web page.


2.  Procedure for Publishing and Editing the Tao

   The Tao will be published at <http://www.ietf.org/tao.html> and
   <https://www.ietf.org/tao.html>.  The initial content for the Tao web
   page is based on the last Internet-Draft that was meant to replace
   RFC 4677.

   The Tao will be edited by one person who is chosen by the IESG.
   Suggestions for changes to the Tao will be discussed on an open, Tao-
   specific mailing list.

   The editor of the Tao decides which proposed changes should be
   submitted to the IESG for approval.  The editor will publish the
   proposed changes in a version at
   <http://www.ietf.org/tao-possible-revision.html>.  The IESG may
   accept as many of the proposed changes as it wishes.  The IESG will
   then submit the changed version to the IETF Secretariat for
   publication on the IETF web page at the URLs given above.

   Each version of the Tao will have a visible timestamp near the
   beginning of the document.  All published versions will be archived
   using URLs of the form
   <http://www.ietf.org/tao-archive/tao-YYYYMMDD.html>.




Hoffman                  Expires January 6, 2013                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                 Tao as Web                      July 2012


3.  Proposals for How The Tao Web Page Should Be Developed

   During the discussion that led to this document, there were many
   proposals for how the Tao as a web page should be published and
   edited.  Some wanted just a web page; some wanted a web page and
   periodic snapshots as RFCs; some wanted a wiki that could be easily
   edited by anyone in the IETF community, with a master editor who
   would revert bad edits; some wanted a wiki with a more limited group
   of contributors.  The procedure in Section 2 above was the rough
   consensus of the discussion.


4.  IANA Considerations

   None.


5.  Security Considerations

   The Tao is available over TLS at <https://www.ietf.org/tao.html>.


6.  Informative References

   [RFC4677]  Hoffman, P. and S. Harris, "The Tao of IETF - A Novice's
              Guide to the Internet Engineering Task Force", RFC 4677,
              September 2006.


Author's Address

   Paul Hoffman (editor)
   VPN Consortium

   Email: paul.hoffman@vpnc.org
















Hoffman                  Expires January 6, 2013                [Page 3]

