

   Working Group: ARMD                                  Himanshu Shah 
   Intended Status: Proposed Standard                      Ciena Corp 
   Internet Draft                                       
                                                       Anoop Ghanwani 
   Expiration Date: May, 2011                                 Brocade 
                                            
                                                          Nabil Bitar 
                                                              Verizon 
                                                     
                                                     October 25, 2010 
                                                                      
                                         
                                                                      
                                                                      
 
    
 
              ARP Broadcast Reduction for Large Data Centers 
                   draft-shah-armd-arp-reduction-01.txt 
                                      
 
 
Status of this Memo 
    
   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the 
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents 
   at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html 
    
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html 
    
   This Internet-Draft will expire on May 25, 2011 
    
    
    
Copyright Notice 
    
   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the 
   document authors.  All rights reserved. 
    
     
   Shah, et al.            Expires May 2011                          1 
   Internet Draft   draft-shah-arp-reduction-01.txt 
                                    
    
   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal 
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents 
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of 
   publication of this document. Please review these documents 
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with 
   respect to this document.  Code Components extracted from this 
   document must include Simplified BSD License text as described in 
   Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without 
   warranty as described in the Simplified BSD License. 
    
    
Abstract 
    
   With the emergence server virtualization technologies, a host is 
   able to support multiple Virtual Machines (VMs) in a single physical 
   machine. Data centers can leverage these capabilities to instantiate 
   on the order of 10s to 100s of VMs in a server. Each VM operates as 
   an independent IP host with a set of Virtual Network Interface Cards 
   (vNICs), each having its own MAC address and mapping to a physical 
   Ethernet interface. These physical servers are typically installed 
   in a rack with their Ethernet interfaces connected to a top-of-rack 
   (ToR) switch. The ToR switches are interconnected through End-of-
   the-Row (EoR) or aggregation switches which are in turn connected to 
   core switches.  
    
   As discussed in [ARP-Problem] the host VMs use ARP broadcasts to 
   find other host VMs and use periodic (broadcast) Gratuitous ARPs to 
   refresh their IP to MAC address binding in other VM hosts. Such 
   broadcasts in a large data center with potentially thousands of VM 
   hosts in a Layer 2 based topology can overwhelm the network. 
    
   This memo proposes mechanisms to reduce the number of broadcasts 
   that are sent throughout the network. This is done by having the ToR 
   switches intelligently process ARP packets, rather than simply 
   broadcasting them throughout the broadcast domain.  
    
   While this document specifically addresses ARP, the Neighbor 
   Discovery mechanisms used by IPv6 hosts that make use of multicast 
   rather than broadcast also pose similar issues for the data center. 
   The solutions defined herein should be equally applicable to hosts 
   running IPv6.  The details will be specified in a subsequent 
   revision. 
    
    
    
    
Conventions 
    
   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",  
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this 
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC 2119].  
        
     
   Shah, et al.            Expires May 2011                          2 
   Internet Draft   draft-shah-arp-reduction-01.txt 
                                    
    
 
    
Table of Contents 
    
     
 Copyright Notice .................................................... 1 
Abstract.............................................................. 2 
1.0 Overview.......................................................... 3 
 1.1 Terminology ..................................................... 5 
2.0 Configuration..................................................... 6 
3.0 Building the ARP Tables........................................... 6 
 3.1 ARP Request ..................................................... 6 
 3.2 ARP Reply ....................................................... 7 
 3.3 Gratuitous ARP .................................................. 7 
 3.4 Uplink Versus Downlink Processing ............................... 8 
 3.5 Host Mobility ................................................... 8 
4.0 Concluding Remarks................................................ 9 
5.0 Security Considerations ......................................... 10 
6.0 Acknowledgments ................................................. 10 
7.0 References....................................................... 10 
 7.1 Normative References ........................................... 10 
 7.2 Informative References ......................................... 10 
8.0 Author's Address................................................. 10 
    
    
    
    
1.0 Overview 
    
   The traditional topology in a data center consists of racks of 
   servers connected to top-of-rack (ToR) switches, which connect to 
   aggregation switches, which in turn connect to core switches.  The 
   network architecture is typically a combination Layer 2 and Layer 3 
   functionality.  In some architectures, Layer 2 is terminated at the 
   ToR, with Layer 3 being run in the aggregation and core devices.  In 
   other architectures, Layer 2 may be extended all the way to the 
   aggregation switch.  The primary concerns that have influenced 
   network architectures in the data center have been keeping broadcast 
   domains manageable and the spanning tree diameter contained. 
    
   Moving forward, these traditional network architectures are being 
   challenged due to emerging technologies such as server 
   virtualization.   
    
     
   Shah, et al.            Expires May 2011                          3 
   Internet Draft   draft-shah-arp-reduction-01.txt 
                                    
    
   The effect of server virtualization in the data center brings some 
   challenges.  Because of virtualization, the number of hosts seen by 
   the network increases dramatically - 10 to 100 times the number of 
   physical servers.  These virtual hosts are referred to as Virtual 
   machines (VMs).  In addition, virtualized environments offer a 
   feature referred to as "VM mobility" wherein a VM can be relocated 
   to run on a different physical server.  In order for the VM mobility 
   to be non-disruptive to other hosts that have communication in 
   progress with the VM being moved, the VM must retain its MAC address 
   and IP address.  Because of the requirement to retain the MAC and IP 
   address, it is desirable to develop network architectures that would 
   offer the least restrictions in terms of VM mobility.   
    
   As an example, in a network architecture where TOR switches 
   terminate the L2 domain, the range of VM mobility would be 
   restricted to a single ToR switch.  It would be more preferable to 
   allow the flexibility of moving the VM anywhere within the data 
   center, or perhaps even a different data center. 
    
   Technologies such as TRILL [TRILL] overcome some of the issues of 
   spanning trees that forced traditional Layer 2 topologies to be 
   severely constrained.  However, because of virtualization there are 
   2 specific problems that are introduced with respect to broadcast 
   traffic. 
    
     1. A larger number of hosts.  A single physical server now hosts 
        multiple VMs taking the scale factor to a different level.  If 
        each VM issues the same number of broadcasts as a physical 
        server, the amount of broadcast traffic will increased 10 to 
        greater than 100 times. 
     2. If the Layer 2 domains are extended to go across data centers, 
        then broadcast traffic will now go across the backbone.  If 
        Layer 2 was terminated at the ToR switch, the increase in 
        broadcast traffic would be been restricted to a single ToR 
        switch, but as discussed earlier, this restriction is not 
        desirable. 
 
    
   Excessive broadcast traffic in Layer 2 networks results in wastage 
   of network bandwidth, as well as in the wastage of CPU resources due 
   to all of the VMs processing superfluous ARP broadcasts (IPv6 gets 
   rid of the latter by running ND as a multicast service rather than a 
   broadcast service). 
    
   The solution presented here attempts to minimize the negative 
   effects of ARP broadcast packets. The solution requires the first 
   hop Ethernet switches, typically the ToR switch, to maintain an ARP 
   table that is learned from the ARP packets received by the switch.  
   The switch then selectively propagates the ARP packet to, or proxy-
   responds on behalf of, the remote peer. These types of ARP 
   processing principles are well-known and are described in L2VPN 
   Working Group documents such as [ARP-Mediation] and [IPLS]. 
    
     
   Shah, et al.            Expires May 2011                          4 
   Internet Draft   draft-shah-arp-reduction-01.txt 
                                    
    
   The following sections describe the details of ARP snooping, the 
   learning and maintenance of ARP tables, the use of learned 
   information to limit broadcast propagation, and proxy (the response) 
   on behalf of the remote peers. 
    
     
1.1 Terminology 
    
    
        ToR            Top-of-Rack. An Ethernet switch present on top 
                       of a rack which provides network connectivity to 
                       the servers present on the rack.   
    
        Downlink       The Ethernet link between the ToR switch and a 
                        directly connected  host (server in the rack). 
          
         
        Uplink         The network- facing Ethernet connection in the 
                        ToR switch. Typically, the uplinks from ToRs 
                        connect to end-of-row or aggregation switches.  
         
        EoR            End-of-Row.  An Ethernet switch to which the 
                        ToR switches connect, also referred to as an 
                        aggregation switch. Uplinks from ToR switches 
                        connect to an EoR switch and uplinks from EoR 
                        switches connect to a core switch.  
         
        Host/Server    A host or server running the IP protocol. This 
                        could be a physical entity or a logical entity 
                        (such as a Virtual Machine) in a physical host. 
                        The term server refers to its role in the data 
                        center. Both terms are used interchangeably to 
                        refer to an IP host. 
         
        Local hosts    Used in the context of a ToR switch to denote 
                        the VM hosts connected to a ToR on the 
                        downlink, i.e. directly attached hosts.  
         
        Remote hosts    Used in the context of a ToR switch to denote 
                        the hosts that are accessible through uplink of 
                        the ToR.  
         
        VM             Virtual Machine. This is a logical instance of 
                        a host that operates independently in a 
                        physical host and has its own IP and MAC 
                        addresses. VMs allow efficient use of physical 
                        host resources (such as multiple CPU cores). 
         
         
         
       
     
   Shah, et al.            Expires May 2011                          5 
   Internet Draft   draft-shah-arp-reduction-01.txt 
                                    
    
 
2.0 Configuration 
    
   It is assumed that ARP reduction mechanisms that are defined in this 
   document will be limited to ToR switches.   The maximum benefit of 
   restraining ARP broadcasts in the network is achieved by the first 
   hop switches (the ones directly connected to the hosts) without 
   placing additional burden on second or third tier switches.  
    
   First, the ToR switches would need to be configured in order to 
   enable the ARP reduction feature. Every Ethernet interface needs to 
   be identified as either a downlink or uplink within the context of 
   this feature. 
     
   In addition the operator may optionally configure various ARP 
   reduction related parameters such as: 
     . ARP aging timer. 
     . Size of the ARP table. 
     . Static entries of IP to MAC address. 
    
    
3.0 Building the ARP Tables 
 
   When ARP reduction is enabled, the ToR switch will monitor all ARP 
   traffic transiting the switch (regardless of uplink port or downlink 
   port) and will process any ARP packets in the following manner:  
     . ARP Request packets must be redirected to control plane CPU. 
     . Gratuitous ARP packets (ARP Reply packet with a broadcast MAC 
        DA) must be redirected to control plane CPU. 
     . Other ARP Reply packets (ARP Reply packet with a unicast MAC 
        DA) should be bi-casted; one copy sent to control plane CPU and 
        other copy forwarded out normally. 
 
    
3.1 ARP Request 
    
   The ToR examines the source IP and the source hardware address (MAC 
   address) in the ARP Request . The source IP and MAC address 
   association is learned, or is updated/refreshed if already learned. 
   The destination IP address is searched in the ARP table. If an entry 
   exists, the associated MAC address from the table is used to prepare 
   a unicast ARP Reply packet. The same MAC address is used as the 
   source MAC address in the MAC header, as well as for the target 
   hardware address, in the unicast ARP Reply packet. 
    
   If the destination IP address in the ARP Request is not present in 
   the ARP table, then the original ARP Request packet is broadcast to 
   all the switch ports that are members of the same VLAN except the 
   source port that the ARP Request was received from. However, if the 
   requested (destination) IP address is present in the ARP table, a 
   unicast ARP Reply packet is prepared as described above and sent to 
   the switch port from which the ARP Request was received and original 
   ARP Request packet is dropped. 
     
   Shah, et al.            Expires May 2011                          6 
   Internet Draft   draft-shah-arp-reduction-01.txt 
                                    
    
    
   The intent is to prevent propagation of ARP Request broadcasts as 
   much as possible using the information present in the ARP table. The 
   following observations can be made from such behavior. 
      . Most of the ARP Request packets from the local hosts of a ToR 
         switch for the local hosts of that ToR switch can be prevented 
         from being broadcast on uplinks or downlinks. 
      . Most of the ARP Request packets from remote hosts of a ToR 
         switch for local hosts of that ToR switch can be prevented 
         from being broadcast on downlinks or other uplinks of the ToR 
         switch. 
      . Many of the ARP Request packets from local hosts of a ToR 
         switch for remote hosts of that ToR switch can be prevented 
         from being forwarded on uplinks if the remote host IP to MAC 
         association is known to the ToR switch. 
    
    
3.2 ARP Reply 
    
   The unicast ARP Reply is examined to learn/update the ARP table for 
   source and destination IP/MAC address association, but is also 
   forwarded out as a normal frame. 
    
    
3.3 Gratuitous ARP 
    
   Gratuitous ARP is a broadcast ARP Reply packet with the destination 
   IP address set to the IP address of the sender and target hardware 
   address set to the MAC address of the sender. It is typically used 
   by IP hosts (including VMs) to keep its IP-to-MAC address 
   association fresh in its peers' ARP cache.  
    
   The ToR switch should process Gratuitous ARP in the following 
   manner. 
      . Learn/update/refresh the ARP table entry. 
      . If the IP address is new, or exists but with a different 
         hardware address, then the Gratuitous ARP packet is forwarded 
         out; otherwise the packet is discarded. 
    
   The goal for handling of Gratuitous ARP packets received from the 
   downlinks (i.e. local hosts) is to avoid propagating it into the 
   'network' (i.e. to the uplinks), unless there is a new association.  
    
   By suppressing the propagation of Gratuitous ARP packets, the peer 
   IP hosts will end up aging out the corresponding ARP table entries.  
   This will result in generation of the broadcast ARP Requests by 
   those IP hosts if they need to continue to communicate with the IP 
   host whose Gratuitous ARPs were obstructed. The handling of the ARP 
   Request by the first-hop ToR switch, as described above, will be 
   able to respond to this request based on the ARP cache maintained in 
   the ToR switch. In essence, the presence of large ARP tables with 
   longer aging times compensates for the smaller ARP table present in 
     
   Shah, et al.            Expires May 2011                          7 
   Internet Draft   draft-shah-arp-reduction-01.txt 
                                    
    
   the IP hosts and eliminates the need for periodic use of Gratuitous 
   ARPs in order to refresh the ARP table in the IP hosts.   
      
 
3.4 Uplink Versus Downlink Processing 
    
   With respect to processing of the ARP packets as described above, 
   the behavior is different depending on whether the packet was 
   received from an uplink or downlink in the following ways. 
    
     . The aging timer will typically be higher for entries learned 
        from an uplink versus those learned from a downlink.  The 
        reason for this is to avoid flooding ARP broadcast packets on 
        uplinks since they have a much larger negative impact. 
     . If ARP table fills up, then entries learned from downlinks 
        (i.e. directly attached hosts) will take precedence over those 
        learned from an uplink (i.e. remote hosts).  This will trade 
        off sending broadcasts on host links versus sending them into 
        the core of the network.  The reason for this is that access 
        links are typically lower bandwidth, and also this will 
        conserve CPU resources involved in processing unnecessary ARP 
        traffic. 
 
 
3.5 Host Mobility 
    
   As mentioned earlier, server virtualization technology allows 
   mobility of VMs to different physical servers. The flexibility to 
   move VMs is one of the key benefits of server virtualization. VM 
   mobility could be manual (operator initiated) or may be done 
   automatically in reaction to demands placed by the application 
   users. The important point is that in either case, VM movement is 
   not transparent and is made known to the network.  
    
   There is ongoing work in IEEE 802.1 standards organization (IEEE 
   802.1Qbg) to coordinate/communicate the presence and capabilities of 
   the VMs to the directly connected network switch. 
    
   VMs typically retain their MAC and IP address across a VM mobility 
   event, and as such, there would be little impact to the ARP table 
   maintained by the ARP reduction mechanism described herein.  
   However, the ARP reduction mechanism would benefit from knowing if a 
   VM is completely decommissioned so that the ToR switch can remove 
   the ARP entry that it has for that VM in a timely fashion, rather 
   than waiting for it to age out. 
    
    
3.6 Scaling Considerations 
    
   Depending on the number of hosts in the network, the ARP table in a 
   ToR switch needed for the ARP reduction mechanisms described above 
   can be quite large. Although it is possible to implement some of the 
   mechanisms for ARP reduction in hardware in the forwarding plane, 
     
   Shah, et al.            Expires May 2011                          8 
   Internet Draft   draft-shah-arp-reduction-01.txt 
                                    
    
   the number of ARP entries favors maintaining the ARP table in the 
   control plane memory.  
    
    
3.7 Miscellaneous Issues 
    
   Because of the distributed nature of the mechanisms described 
   herein, there are a few additional issues that warrant consideration 
   from the network operator. 
    
   Earlier in the document, we had mentioned the configuration of a 
   aging timer for ARP entries.  A longer timer for holding onto ARP 
   entries helps with reduction of broadcasts.  However, having a "too 
   large timer" can lead to problems in certain situations. 
    
   Consider the following scenario.  Host A is attached to ToR switch 
   #1, and host B is attached to ToR switch #2.  If host B issues an 
   ARP Request for host A, and if the entry is available at switch #2, 
   then switch #2 would send the ARP Reply on behalf of host A.  It is 
   possible that host A is no longer available, but there is no way for 
   switch #2 to know this, and it would continue to respond on behalf 
   of host A, until its entry for host A has aged out.  In this case, 
   it is easy to see that a smaller aging timer would be beneficial.  
   Additionally, since host B has an ARP aging timer, it means that 
   host B would find out about host A's unavailability only after its 
   entry has aged out, which would be some time after it the entry has 
   aged out of switch #2. 
    
   Another issue that can be somewhat problematic could be the 
   inconsistency of tables in switches.  Once again, consider a 
   scenario similar to the one described above with two hosts each 
   connected to its respect ToR switch.  Let the ARP entries at both A 
   and B be learned by both switches.  Now assume that the IP address 
   on host A changes.  This change is signaled to switch #1 which in 
   turn broadcasts the message on its uplink.  Now, if this message is 
   discarded due to network congestion or signal integrity issues, then 
   switch #2 will not learn about the change and will continue to 
   respond to host B's ARP Requests for host A's old IP address with 
   stale information.  This lasts until the ARP entry for A ages out at 
   Switch #2. 
 
    
4.0 Concluding Remarks 
    
   Based on the procedures described in this document, it is possible 
   for ToR switches in the data center to contain ARP broadcasts 
   significantly. The solution is based on well known, non-intrusive 
   procedures and strives to curtail ARP broadcasts that are 
   increasingly becoming a cause for concern in the data centers. In 
   essence, ToR switches offload some of the ARP table management from 
   the IP hosts to themselves. The ARP table aging timer can be tuned 
   higher by the operator based on the available switch resources and 
   network traffic behavior. The larger capacity of the ARP table 
     
   Shah, et al.            Expires May 2011                          9 
   Internet Draft   draft-shah-arp-reduction-01.txt 
                                    
    
   coupled with a long aging time for entries in the table directly 
   translates to more effective subduing of the ARP broadcasts.  
    
    
5.0  Security Considerations 
    
   Security aspects will be addressed in a subsequent revision. 
 
 
6.0  Acknowledgments 
 
   This document resulted from discussions with Linda Dunbar (Huawei), 
   Sue Hares (Huawei), and T Sridhar (Force10).  We would like to 
   acknowledge their contribution to this work. 
    
    
7.0 References 
    
7.1 Normative References 
 
   [ARP] D. Plummer, "An Ethernet Address Resolution Protocol:  Or 
      Converting Network Protocol Addresses to 48.bit Ethernet 
      Addresses for Transmission on Ethernet Hardware, " RFC 826 (also 
      STD 37), November 1982.  
    
   [ARP-Problem] L.Dunbar et al., "Scalable Address Resolution for 
      Large Data Center Problem Statements," <draft-dunbar-arp-for-
      large-dc-problem-statement-00>, July 2010. 
    
    
7.2 Informative References 
    
   [ARP-Mediation] H. Shah et al., "ARP Mediation for IP interworking 
      in Layer 2 VPN," <draft-ietf-l2vpn-arp-mediation-14>, July 2010. 
     
   [IPLS] H.Shah et al., "IP-only LAN service," 
      <draft-ietf-l2vpn-ipls-09>, February 2010. 
 
   [PROXY-ARP] J. Postel, "Multi-LAN Address Resolution," RFC 925, 
      October 1984. 
    
   [TRILL] R. Perlman et al., "RBridges: Base Protocol Specification", 
      <draft-ietf-trill-rbridge-protocol-16>, March 2010. 
    
    
8.0 Author's Address 
    
   Himanshu Shah 
   Ciena Corp 
   Email: hshah@ciena.com 
 
   Anoop Ghanwani 
     
   Shah, et al.            Expires May 2011                         10 
   Internet Draft   draft-shah-arp-reduction-01.txt 
                                    
    
   Brocade 
   Email: anoop@brocade.com 
    
   Nabil Bitar 
   Verizon 
   Email: nabil.n.bitar@verizon.com 
    
    
    
 
     
   Shah, et al.            Expires May 2011                         11 
