
INTERNET-DRAFT                                                 N. Elkins
Intended Status: Informational                           Inside Products
                                                            M. Ackermann
                                                           BCBS Michigan
                                                               W. Jouris
                                                         Inside Products
                                                              K. Haining
                                                                 US Bank
                                                              S. Perdomo
                                                                    DTCC
Expires: April 2014                                      October 3, 2013


                   IPv6 Packet Sequence Number Needed
           draft-elkins-v6ops-ipv6-packet-sequence-needed-01


Abstract

   To diagnose performance and connectivity problems, metrics on real
   (non-synthetic) transmission are critical for timely end-to-end
   problem resolution. Such diagnostics may be real-time or after the
   fact, but must not impact an operational production network. The base
   metrics are: packet sequence number and packet timestamp.  Metrics
   derived from these will be described separately. This document
   provides the background and rationale for the packet sequence number
   which is a part of the IPv6 Performance and Diagnostic Metrics
   Destination Option (PDM).

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as
   Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html

Elkins                   Expires April 14, 2014                 [Page 1]

INTERNET DRAFT-elkins-v6ops-ipv6-packet-sequence-needed-01  October 2013


Copyright and License Notice

   Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors. All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document. Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document. Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.



Table of Contents

   1  Background  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.1 Why Packet Sequence Number . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.2 IPv4 IPID : DeFacto Sequence Number  . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
       1.2.1 Description of IPID in IPv4  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
       1.2.2 DeFacto Use of IPID  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
       1.2.3 Merits of DeFacto Usage  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
       1.2.4 Use Cases of IPv4 IPID in Diagnostics  . . . . . . . . .  5
     1.3 TCP sequence number is not enough  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     1.4 Inadequacy of current measurement techniques . . . . . . . .  7
       1.4.1 SNMP / CMIP Counters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
       1.4.2 Router / Firewall Logs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
       1.4.3 Netflow  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
       1.4.4 Access to Intermediate Devices . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
       1.4.5 Modifications to an Operational Production Network . . .  8
   2 Solution Parameters  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     2.1 Packet Trace Meets Criteria  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
       2.1.1 Limitations of Packet Capture  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
       2.1.2 Problem Scenario 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
       2.1.3 Problem Scenario 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   3 Rationale for Proposed Solution (PDM)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   4  Backward Compatibility  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   5  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   6  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   7  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     7.1  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   8 Acknowledgments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13





 


Elkins                   Expires April 14, 2014                 [Page 2]

INTERNET DRAFT-elkins-v6ops-ipv6-packet-sequence-needed-01  October 2013


1  Background

   To diagnose performance and connectivity problems, metrics on real
   (non-synthetic) transmission are critical for timely end-to-end
   problem resolution. Such diagnostics may be real-time or after the
   fact, but must not impact an operational production network. The base
   metrics are: packet sequence number and packet timestamp.  Metrics
   derived from these will be described separately.

   For background, please see draft-ackermann-tictoc-pdm-ntp-usage-00
   [ACKPDM], draft-elkins-6man-ipv6-pdm-dest-option-02 [ELKPDM], draft-
   elkins-v6ops-ipv6-end-to-end-rt-needed-01 [ELKRSP], draft-elkins-
   v6ops-ipv6-pdm-recommended-usage-01 [ELKUSE] and draft-elkins-ippm-
   pdm-metrics-00 [ELKIPPM]. These drafts are companions to this
   document.    

   As discussed in the above Internet Drafts, current methods are
   inadequate for these purposes because they assume unreasonable access
   to intermediate devices, are cost prohibitive, require infeasible
   changes to a running production network, or do not provide timely
   data. The IPv6 Performance and Diagnostic Metrics destination option
   (PDM) provides a solution to these problems.  This document will
   detail the background and need for the packet sequence number.

1.1 Why Packet Sequence Number

   In many networks, during network diagnostics of an end-to-end
   connection, it becomes necessary to find the device along the network
   path creating problems.  Diagnostic data may be collected at multiple
   places along the path (if possible), or at the source and
   destination. Then, the diagnostic data must be matched.  Packet
   sequence number is critical in this matching process.  The timestamp
   or even the IP addresses may be different at different devices.  In
   IPv4 networks, the IPID field was used as a de facto sequence number.
   This will be discussed at greater length in section 1.2.

   This method of data collection along the path is of special use on
   large multi-tier networks to determine where packet loss or packet
   corruption is happening.  Multi-tier networks are those which have
   multiple routers or switches on the path between the sender and the
   receiver.  







 


Elkins                   Expires April 14, 2014                 [Page 3]

INTERNET DRAFT-elkins-v6ops-ipv6-packet-sequence-needed-01  October 2013


1.2 IPv4 IPID : DeFacto Sequence Number

   With IPv4 networks, on many stack implementations, but not all, the
   IPID field has the property of sequentiality.


1.2.1 Description of IPID in IPv4

   In IPv4, the 16 bit IP Identification (IPID) field is located at an
   offset of 4 bytes into the IPv4 header and is described in RFC0791
   [RFC0791]. In IPv6, the IPID field is a 32-bit field contained in the
   Fragment Header defined by section 4.5 of RFC2460 [RFC2460].
   Unfortunately, unless fragmentation is being done by the source node,
   the IPv6 packet will not contain this Fragment Header, and therefore
   will have no Identification field.

   The intended purpose of the IPID field, in both IPv4 and IPv6, is to
   enable fragmentation and reassembly, and as currently specified is
   required to be unique within the maximum segment lifetime (MSL) on
   all datagrams.  The MSL is often 2 minutes.


1.2.2 DeFacto Use of IPID

   In many networks, the IPID field is used for more than fragmentation.
    During network diagnostics, packet traces may be taken at multiple
   places along the path, or at the source and destination. Then,
   packets can be matched by looking at the IPID.

   The inclusion of the IPID makes it easier for a device(s) in the
   middle of the network, or on the receiving end of the network, to
   identify flows belonging to a single node, even if that node might
   have a different IP address.  For example, in the case of sessions
   going through a NAT or proxy server. 

   For its de-facto diagnostic mode usage, the IPID field needs to be
   available whether or not fragmentation occurs.  It also needs to be
   unique in the context of the session, and across all the connections
   controlled by the stack.  In IPv4, the IPID is in the main header, so
   it is available for all packets.  As it is a 16-bit field, it wrapped
   during the course of the session and thus had some limitations.

   Even with these limitations, the IPID has been valuable and useful in
   IPv4 for diagnostics and problem resolution.  It is a practical
   solution that is 'good enough' in many instances.  Not having it
   available in IPv6, may be a major detriment to new IPv6 deployments
   and contribute to protracted downtimes in existing IPv6 operations.

 


Elkins                   Expires April 14, 2014                 [Page 4]

INTERNET DRAFT-elkins-v6ops-ipv6-packet-sequence-needed-01  October 2013


1.2.3 Merits of DeFacto Usage

   As network technology evolves, the uses to which fields are put can
   change as well.  De-facto use is powerful, and should not be lightly
   ignored.  In fact, it is a testament to the power and pervasiveness
   of the protocol that users create new uses for the original
   technology.

   For example, the use of the IPID goes beyond the vision of the
   original authors.  This sort of thing has happened with numerous
   other technologies and protocols.  

   The implementation of the traceroute command sends ICMP echo packets
   with a varying TTL.  This is a very useful for diagnostics yet
   departs from the original purpose of TTL. 

   Similarly, cell phones have evolved to be more than just a means of
   vocal communication, including Internet communications, photo-
   sharing, stock exchange transactions, etc.  Indeed, the Internet
   itself has evolved, from a small network for researchers and the
   military to share files into the pervasive global information
   superhighway that it is today.

1.2.4 Use Cases of IPv4 IPID in Diagnostics
   Use Case # 1 --- Large Insurance Company
      -  (estimated time saved by use of IPID:  7 hours)

   Performance Tool produces extraneous packets 

    - Issue was whether a performance tool was accurately replicating
      session flow during performance testing.
    - Trace IPIDs showed more unique packets within same flow from
      performance tool compared to IE Browser.
    - Having the clear IPID sequence numbers also showed where and why
      the extra packets were being generated.
    - Solution: Problem rectified in subsequent version of performance
      tool.
    - Without IPID, it was not clear if there was an issue at all.

   Use Case #2 --- Large Bank
      -   (estimated time saved by use of IPID:  4 hours)

   Batch transfer duration increases 12x

    -  A data transfer which formerly took 30 minutes to complete 
       started taking 6-8 hours to complete.
    -  Was there packet loss?  All the vendors said no.
    -  The other applications on the network did not report any 
 


Elkins                   Expires April 14, 2014                 [Page 5]

INTERNET DRAFT-elkins-v6ops-ipv6-packet-sequence-needed-01  October 2013


       problems.
    -  4 trace points were used, and the IPIDs in the packets were 
       compared.
    -  The comparison showed 7% packet loss.
    -  Solution: WAN hardware was replaced and problem fixed.
    -  Without IPID, no one would agree a problem existed

   Use Case #3 --- Large Bank
      -    (estimated time saved by use of IPID: 6 hours)

   Very slow interactive performance

    - All network links looked good.
    - Traces showed duplicated small packets (which can be OK).
    - We saw that the IPID was the same in both packets but the TTL
      was always + 1.
    - A network device was "splitting" only small packets over two
      interfaces.
    - The small packets were control info, telling other side to slow
      down.
    - It erroneously looked like network congestion.
    - Solution:  Network device replaced and good interactive
      performance restored.
    - Without IPID, flows would have appeared OK.

   Use Case #4 --- Large Government Agency
      -    (estimated time saved by use of IPID: 9 hours)

   VPN drops

    - Cell phone connections to law enforcement were being dropped. 
      The connections were going through a VPN. 
    - All parties (both sides of VPN connection, application, etc.) said
      it was not their problem.  The problem went on for weeks. 
    - Finally, we took a trace which showed packets with IPID and TTL
      that did not match others in the flow AT ALL coming from the 
      router nearest the application server end of VPN. 
    - Solution:  Provider for VPN for application server changed.  
      Problem resolved. 
    - Without IPID, much harder to diagnose problem. 
    - (Same case also happened with large corporation.  Again, all 
      parties saying not their fault until proven via packet trace.)

1.3 TCP sequence number is not enough 

   TCP Sequence number is defined in RFC0793 [RFC0793].  Indeed, the TCP
   Sequence Number along with the TCP Acknowledgment number can be used
   to calculate dropped packets, duplicate packets, out-of-order packets
 


Elkins                   Expires April 14, 2014                 [Page 6]

INTERNET DRAFT-elkins-v6ops-ipv6-packet-sequence-needed-01  October 2013


   etc. That is, IF the packet flow itself reflects accurately what
   happened on the wire!  

   See Scenario 1 (Section 1.5.2) and Scenario 2 (Section 1.5.3) for
   what happens with packet trace capture in real networks.

   The TCP Sequence Number is, obviously, available only for TCP and not
   other transport protocols.

1.4 Inadequacy of current measurement techniques

   The question arises of whether current methods of instrumentation
   cannot be used without a change to the protocol.  Current methods of
   measuring network data, other than packet traces, are inadequate
   because they assume unreasonable access to intermediate devices, are
   cost prohibitive, require infeasible changes to a running production
   network, or do not provide timely data.  This section will discuss
   each of these in detail.

   Current methods include both instrumentation and third party
   products.  These include SNMP, CMIP, router logs, and firewall logs.

1.4.1 SNMP / CMIP Counters

   The traditional network performance counters measured by SNMP or CMIP
   do not provide information at the granularity desired on the behavior
   of application flows across the network.  The problem is that such
   counters do not contain enough data be able to provide a detailed and
   realistic view of the end-to-end behavior of a connection.

1.4.2 Router / Firewall Logs

   Router and firewall logs may provide some information for diagnostics
    But as discussed in section 1.4.5, routers and firewalls in a
   production network are generally set to do minimal logging and
   diagnostics to allow maximum efficiency and throughput.  Such devices
   cannot be asked to collect detailed data for an operational problem,
   as this requires a change to a production network. 


1.4.3 Netflow

   Netflow is instrumentation which is available from some middle
   devices.  As discussed in detail in section 1.4.5, such devices are
   generally set to do minimal logging and diagnostics to allow maximum
   efficiency and throughput.  

   Correlations to produce some level of response time data may be
 


Elkins                   Expires April 14, 2014                 [Page 7]

INTERNET DRAFT-elkins-v6ops-ipv6-packet-sequence-needed-01  October 2013


   possible from Netflow.  But, it is not an adequate picture of end-to-
   end response time as Netflow is in an intermediate device and is not
   in a position to know what has happened at a client.

1.4.4 Access to Intermediate Devices

   The above current methods require access to the transport
   infrastructure - that is, the routers, switches or other intermediate
   devices.  In some cases, this is possible; in others, the connections
   in question may cross a number of administrative entities (both in
   the transport and in the endpoints).  When it is the enterprise at
   the endpoint which is interested in the diagnostics, the
   administrative entities who own the devices in the middle of the path
   have no stake in operational measurement at the enterprise or
   application level.   They have no reason to provide the necessary
   data or to impact the basic transport with the instrumentation
   necessary to capture flow-oriented data as a continuous stream
   suitable for general consumption. 

   In other words, if you don't own the path end-to-end, you will not be
   able to get the data you need if you are required to get it from the
   devices in the middle.  Not only that, the devices in the middle do
   not have the instrumentation necessary to make it easy to do end-to-
   end diagnostics because they are not responsible for that and so do
   not want to burden their devices with doing those kind of functions.
   

   Many EDCO networks may not own the path end-to-end.  They may be
   working with a business partner's network or crossing the Internet.

1.4.5 Modifications to an Operational Production Network

   Even when the enterprise does own all the devices along the entire
   path, to get enough data to adequately resolve a problem means
   changing the device configuration to do detailed diagnostics.  In a
   production network, devices are generally set to do minimal logging
   and diagnostics.  This is to allow maximum efficiency and throughput.
   The more logging and diagnostics such devices do, the fewer resources
   they have for actually transmitting traffic across the network.

   So, if devices are to be asked to collect more data for an
   operational problem, this requires a change to a production network. 
   This is generally not possible as it destabilizes a critical network
   during business hours, thus potentially disrupting many customers. 
   Making changes is usually a lengthy process requiring change control,
   testing on a test network, etc.  On networks which are critical to
   the business function, such as the networks we are discussing, it is
   hardly likely that changing configuration "in flight" is an option.
 


Elkins                   Expires April 14, 2014                 [Page 8]

INTERNET DRAFT-elkins-v6ops-ipv6-packet-sequence-needed-01  October 2013


2 Solution Parameters

   What is needed is: 

   1) A method to identify and/or track the behavior of a connection  
   without assuming access to the transport devices. 

   2) A method to observe a connection in flight without introducing  
   agents at endpoints. 

   3) a method to observe arbitrary flows at multiple points within a  
   network and correlate the results of those observations in a  
   consistent manner. 

   4) A method to signal and correlate transport issues to application  
   end-to-end behavior.

   5) A method which does not require changes to a production network in
     real time. 

   6) Adequate granularity in the measurement technique to provide the  
   needed metrics.

2.1 Packet Trace Meets Criteria

   The only instrumentation which provides enough detail to diagnose
   end-to-end problems is a packet trace. Packet traces do not require
   changes to devices in production mode because in many large EDCO
   networks, products are available to capture packets in passive mode. 
   Such products continuously monitor network traffic. Often, they are
   used not for diagnostic reasons but for regulatory reasons.  For
   example, there may be legal requirements to log all stock exchange
   transactions.

   Products for packet tracing are available freely and can be used at a
   client host without disrupting major portions of the network.  

2.1.1 Limitations of Packet Capture

   Even though packets are the only reliable way to provide data at the
   needed granularity, there are limitations with collecting packet
   traces in some situations.  They are as follows:

2.1.2 Problem Scenario 1

   1. Packets are captured for analysis at places like large core
   switches.  All packets are kept.  Again, not necessarily for
   diagnostic reasons but for regulatory ones. For example, records of
 


Elkins                   Expires April 14, 2014                 [Page 9]

INTERNET DRAFT-elkins-v6ops-ipv6-packet-sequence-needed-01  October 2013


   all stock trades may need to be kept for a certain number of years. 

   2. When there is a problem, an analyst extracts the needed
   information.

   3. If the extract is done incorrectly, as often happens, or the
   packet capture itself is incorrect, then there may be false duplicate
   packets which can be quite misleading and can lead to wrong
   conclusions. Are these real TCP duplicates?  Is there congestion on
   the subnet? Are these retransmissions?  Situations have been seen
   where routers incorrectly send two packets instead of one - is this
   such a situation?




































 


Elkins                   Expires April 14, 2014                [Page 10]

INTERNET DRAFT-elkins-v6ops-ipv6-packet-sequence-needed-01  October 2013


2.1.3 Problem Scenario 2

   1. In this scenario, packets are captured for analysis at places like
   a middleware box.  It may be because problems are suspected with the
   box itself or it is a central point of the suspected failure.

   2. The box may not offer any way to tailor the packet capture.  "You
   will get what we give you, how we give it to you!" is their
   philosophy.

   3. The packet capture incorrectly duplicates only packets going to
   certain nodes.  

   4. Again, there are false duplicate packets which can be misleading
   and can lead to wrong conclusions. Are these real TCP duplicates?  Is
   there congestion on the subnet?  Situations have been seen where
   routers incorrectly send two packets instead of one - is this such a
   situation?

3 Rationale for Proposed Solution (PDM)

   The current IPv6 specification does not provide a packet sequence
   number or similar field in the IPv6 main header.  One option might be
   to force all IPv6 packets to contain a Fragment Header.  In packets
   which are entire in and of themselves, the fragment ID would be zero
   - that is, an atomic fragment. Why was a new destination option
   header defined rather than recommending that Fragment Header be used?

   Our reasoning was that the PDM destination option header would
   provide multiple benefits : the packet sequence number and the
   timestamp to calculate response time.  See draft-elkins-v6ops-ipv6-
   end-to-end-rt-needed-01 [ELKRSP].





4  Backward Compatibility

   The scheme proposed in this document is backward compatible with all
   the currently defined IPv6 extension headers. According to RFC2460
   [RFC2460], if the destination node does not recognize this option, it
   should skip over this option and continue processing the header.





 


Elkins                   Expires April 14, 2014                [Page 11]

INTERNET DRAFT-elkins-v6ops-ipv6-packet-sequence-needed-01  October 2013


5  Security Considerations

   No security considerations are seen.


6  IANA Considerations

   There are no IANA considerations.

7  References

7.1  Normative References

   [RFC0791]  Postel, J., "Internet Protocol", STD 5, RFC 791, September
              1981.

   [RFC0793]  Postel, J., "Transmission Control Protocol", STD 7,
              RFC 793, September 1981.

   [RFC2460]  Deering, S. and R. Hinden, "Internet Protocol, Version 6
              (IPv6) Specification", RFC 2460, December 1998.


   [ACKPDM]  Ackermann, M., "draft-ackermann-tictoc-pdm-ntp-usage-00",
              Internet Draft, September 2013.

   [ELKPDM]  Elkins, N., "draft-elkins-6man-ipv6-pdm-dest-option-02",
              Internet Draft, September 2013.

   [ELKRSP]  Elkins, N., "draft-elkins-v6ops-ipv6-end-to-end-rt-needed-
              01", Internet Draft, September 2013.

   [ELKUSE]  Elkins, N., "draft-elkins-v6ops-ipv6-pdm-recommended-usage-
              01", Internet Draft, September 2013

   [ELKIPPM] Elkins, N., "draft-elkins-ippm-pdm-metrics-00", Internet
              Draft, September 2013.


8 Acknowledgments

              The authors would like to thank Rick Troth and Fred Baker
              for their comments.





 


Elkins                   Expires April 14, 2014                [Page 12]

INTERNET DRAFT-elkins-v6ops-ipv6-packet-sequence-needed-01  October 2013


Authors' Addresses



                 Nalini Elkins
                 Inside Products, Inc.
                 36A Upper Circle
                 Carmel Valley, CA 93924
                 United States
                 Phone: +1 831 659 8360
                 Email: nalini.elkins@insidethestack.com
                 http://www.insidethestack.com


                 Michael S. Ackermann
                 Blue Cross Blue Shield of Michigan
                 P.O. Box 2888
                 Detroit, Michigan 48231
                 United States
                 Phone: +1 310 460 4080
                 Email: mackermann@bcbsmi.com
                 http://www.bcbsmi.com

                 Keven Haining
                 US Bank
                 16900 W Capitol Drive 
                 Brookfield, WI 53005 
                 United States
                 Phone: +1 262 790 3551 
                 Email: keven.haining@usbank.com 
                 http://www.usbank.com

                 Sigfrido Perdomo
                 Depository Trust and Clearing Corporation
                 55 Water Street
                 New York, NY 10055
                 United States
                 Phone: +1 917 842 7375
                 Email: s.perdomo@dtcc.com
                 http://www.dtcc.com

                 William Jouris
                 Inside Products, Inc.
                 36A Upper Circle
                 Carmel Valley, CA 93924
                 United States
                 Phone: +1 925 855 9512
                 Email: bill.jouris@insidethestack.com
 



Elkins                   Expires April 14, 2014                [Page 13]


