


Network Working Group                                         R. Housley
Internet-Draft                                       Vigil Security, LLC
Obsoletes: 2050 (if approved)                                  J. Curran
Intended status: Informational                                      ARIN
Expires: August 31, 2013                                       G. Huston
                                                                   APNIC
                                                               D. Conrad
                                                        Virtualized, LLC
                                                              March 2013

                  The Internet Numbers Registry System
                    draft-housley-rfc2050bis-00.txt

Abstract

   This document provides information about the current Internet Numbers
   Registry System used in the distribution of globally unique Internet
   Protocol (IP) address space and autonomous system (AS) numbers.

   This document also provides information about the processes for
   further evolution of the Internet Numbers Registry System.

   This document replaces RFC 2050.

   This document does not propose any changes to the Internet Numbers
   Registry System.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 31, 2013.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.





Housley, Curran, Huston, Conrad Expires August 31, 2013         [Page 1]

Internet-Draft          Internet Registry System              March 2013


   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (http://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction and Goals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  2
   2.  Internet Numbers Registry System Structure . . . . . . . . . .  3
   3.  Internet Numbers Registry Technical Considerations . . . . . .  4
   4.  Internet Numbers Registry Evolution  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   5.  Summary of Changes Since RFC 2050  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   6.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   7.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   8.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   9.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     9.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     9.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8

1.  Introduction and Goals

   The administrative structures of the Internet Numbers Registry System
   described in this document are largely the result of the interaction
   of operational practices, existing routing technology, number
   resource assignments that have occurred over time, and network
   architectural history.  Further discussion and analysis of these
   interactions are outside the scope of this document.

   Internet number resources are currently distributed according to the
   following (non-exclusive) goals:

      

       1) Allocation Pool Management: Due to the fixed lengths of IP
          addresses and AS numbers, the pools from which these resources
          are allocated are finite.  As such, allocations must be made
          in accordance with the operational needs of those running the
          networks that make use of these number resources and by taking
          into consideration pool limitations at the time of allocation.

       2) Hierarchical Allocation: Given current routing technology, the
          distribution of IP addresses in a hierarchical manner
          increases the likelihood of continued scaling of the
          Internet's routing system.  As such, it is a goal to allocate
          IP addresses in such a way that permits these addresses
          aggregated into a minimum number of routing announcements.
          However, whether IP addresses are actually announced to the
          Internet, and the manner of their advertisement into the




Housley, Curran, Huston, Conrad Expires August 31, 2013         [Page 2]

Internet-Draft          Internet Registry System              March 2013

          Internet's routing system is an operational consideration
          outside of the scope of the Internet Numbers Registry System.

       3) Registration Accuracy: A core requirement of the Internet
          Numbers Registry System is to maintain a registry of
          allocations to ensure uniqueness and to provide accurate
          registration information of those allocations in order to meet
          a variety of operational requirements.

   These goals may sometimes conflict with each other or be in conflict
   with the interests of individual end-users, Internet service
   providers, or other number resource consumers.  Careful analysis,
   judgment, and cooperation among registry system providers and
   consumers at all levels via community-developed policies is necessary
   to find appropriate compromises to facilitate Internet operations.

2.  Internet Numbers Registry System Structure

   The Internet Registry (IR) hierarchy was established to provide for
   the allocation of IP addresses and AS numbers with consideration to
   the above goals.  This hierarchy is rooted in the Internet Assigned
   Numbers Authority (IANA) address allocation function, which serves a
   set of "Regional Internet Registries" (RIRs); the RIRs then serve a
   set of "Local Internet Registries" (LIRs) and other customers.  LIRs
   in turn serve their respective number resource consumers (which may
   be themselves, their customers, "sub-LIRs", etc.)

   IANA 

      The Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA) is the traditional
      name for the technical team making and publishing the assignments
      of Internet protocol technical parameters, including Internet
      Protocol (IP) address space.  As a result of a Memorandum of
      Understanding (MOU)[RFC2860] between the IETF, IAB, and ICANN, the
      technical work of the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA)
      is now performed by ICANN. Today, IANA administers IP address
      space and AS numbers according to global number resource policies
      as developed per the agreement between ICANN and the Regional
      Internet Registries [ASOMOU] and documented in [ICANNv4],
      [ICANNv6], and [ICANNASN].

   Regional IRs 













Housley, Curran, Huston, Conrad Expires August 31, 2013         [Page 3]

Internet-Draft          Internet Registry System              March 2013

      In order to promote distribution of the Internet number resource
      registration function, RFC 1366 proposed delegating responsibility
      to regional bodies.  These bodies became known as the Regional
      Internet Registries (RIRs). The RIRs operate in continent-sized
      geopolitical regions.  Currently there are five RIRs: AfriNIC
      serving Africa, APNIC serving parts of Asia and the Pacific
      region, ARIN serving North America and parts of the Caribbean,
      LACNIC serving Latin America and parts of the Caribbean, and RIPE
      NCC serving Europe, parts of Asia and the Middle East.  The RIRs
      were established via a global policy process that has been
      documented as the ICANN "Internet Consensus Policy 2" [ICP-2],
      which details the principles and criteria for establishment of
      Regional Internet Registries.  The RIRs also conduct regional
      number policy development used in the administration of their
      number resources.

   Local IRs 

      Local Internet Registries (LIRs) are established through a
      relationship with the body from which they received their
      addresses, typically the RIR that serves the region in which they
      operate, a parent LIR, or other allocating entity.  LIRs that span
      multiple regions may establish relationships with multiple RIRs.
      LIRs typically perform IP address allocation services for their
      customers such as ISPs, end users, or other "child" LIRs.

3.  Internet Numbers Registry Technical Considerations

   As a result of the system of technical standards and guidelines
   established by the IETF as well as historical and operational
   constraints, there have been technical considerations regarding the
   services provided by the Internet Numbers Registry System as it
   evolved.  These technical considerations have included:

      

       1) Reverse DNS: In situations where reverse DNS was used, the
          policies and practices of the Internet Numbers Registry System
          have included consideration of the technical and operational
          requirements posed by reverse DNS zone delegation [RFC3172].

       2) Public WHOIS: The policies and practices of the Internet
          Numbers Registry System have included consideration of the
          technical and operational requirements for supporting WHOIS
          services [RFC3013].

   As the Internet and the Internet Numbers Registry System continue to
   evolve, it may be necessary for the Internet community to examine
   these and related technical and operational considerations and how
   best to meet them.

4.  Internet Numbers Registry Evolution



Housley, Curran, Huston, Conrad Expires August 31, 2013         [Page 4]

Internet-Draft          Internet Registry System              March 2013


   Over the years, the Internet Numbers Registry System has developed
   mechanisms by which the structures, policies, and processes of the
   Internet Numbers Registry System itself can evolve to meet the
   changing demands of the global Internet community.  Further evolution
   of the Internet Numbers Registry System is expected to occur in an
   open, transparent, and broad multi-stakeholder manner.

   Per the delineation of responsibility for Internet address policy
   issues specified in the IETF/IAB/ICANN MOU [RFC2860], discussions
   regarding the evolution of the Internet Numbers Registry System
   structure, policy, and processes are to take place within the ICANN
   framework and will respect ICANN's core values [ICANNBL].  These core
   values encourage broad, informed participation reflecting the
   functional, geographic, and cultural diversity of the Internet at all
   levels of policy development and decision-making, as well as the
   delegation of coordination functions and recognition of the policy
   roles of other responsible entities that reflect the interests of
   affected parties.  The discussions regarding Internet Numbers
   Registry evolution must also continue to consider the overall
   Internet address architecture and technical goals referenced in this
   document.

   The foregoing does not alter the IETF's continued responsibility for
   the non-policy aspects of Internet addressing such as the
   architectural definition of IP address and AS number spaces and
   specification of associated technical goals and constraints in their
   application, assignment of specialized address blocks, and
   experimental technical assignments as documented in RFC 2860. In
   addition, in the cases where the IETF sets technical recommendations
   for protocols, practices, or services which are directly related to
   IP address space or AS numbers, such recommendations must be taken
   into consideration in Internet Numbers Registry System policy
   discussions regardless of venue.

5.  Summary of Changes Since RFC 2050

   Since RFC 2050 was published, the Internet and the Internet Numbers
   Registry System have undergone significant change.  This document
   describes the Internet Numbers Registry System as it presently exists
   and omits policy and operational procedures that have been superseded
   by ICANN and RIR policy since RFC 2050 publication.

6.  Security Considerations

   It is generally recognized that accuracy and public availability of
   Internet registry data is often an essential component in researching
   and resolving security and operational issues on the Internet.

7.  IANA Considerations





Housley, Curran, Huston, Conrad Expires August 31, 2013         [Page 5]

Internet-Draft          Internet Registry System              March 2013


   The IANA will continue to provide the root of the IP address and
   autonomous system number hierarchies and will maintain a registry
   that provides registration information for any allocations made by
   the IANA.

8.  Acknowledgements

   Several people have made comments on draft versions of this document.
   The authors would like to thank Randy Bush, Brian Carpenter, Daniel
   Karrenberg, Olaf Kolkman, Scott Bradner, Leslie Daigle and Adiel
   Akplogan for their constructive feedback and comments.  Additionally,
   we are indebted to the authors of RFC 1466 and RFC 2050 for their
   earlier contributions in this area.

9.  References

9.1.  Normative References

   [ASOMOU]   Published by ICANN, "ICANN Address Supporting Organization
              (ASO) MoU", October 2004.

              http://archive.icann.org/en/aso/aso-mou-29oct04.htm

   [ICANNASN]
              Ratified by ICANN, "Internet Assigned Numbers Authority
              (IANA) Policy for Allocation of ASN Blocks to Regional
              Internet Registries", September 2010.

              http://www.icann.org/en/resources/policy/global-addressing
              /global-policy-asn-blocks-21sep10-en.htm

   [ICANNBL]  ICANN, "Bylaws for Internet Corporation for Assigned Names
              and Numbers", December 2012.

              http://www.icann.org/en/about/governance/bylaws

   [ICANNv4]  Ratified by ICANN, "Global Policy for Post Exhaustion IPv4
              Allocation Mechanisms by the IANA", May 2012.

              http://www.icann.org/en/resources/policy/global-addressing
              /allocation-ipv4-post-exhaustion

   [ICANNv6]  Ratified by ICANN, "Internet Assigned Numbers Authority
              (IANA) Policy For Allocation of IPv6 Blocks to Regional
              Internet Registries", September 2006.

              http://www.icann.org/en/resources/policy/global-addressing
              /allocation-ipv6-rirs

   [ICP-2]    Published by ICANN, "ICP-2: Criteria for Establishment of
              New Regional Internet Registries", July 2001.

              http://www.icann.org/icp/icp-2.htm

Housley, Curran, Huston, Conrad Expires August 31, 2013         [Page 6]

Internet-Draft          Internet Registry System              March 2013


   [RFC2860]  Carpenter, B., Baker, F. and M. Roberts, "Memorandum of
              Understanding Concerning the Technical Work of the
              Internet Assigned Numbers Authority", RFC 2860, June 2000.

   [RFC3013]  Killalea, T., "Recommended Internet Service Provider
              Security Services and Procedures", BCP 46, RFC 3013,
              November 2000.

   [RFC3172]  Huston, G., "Management Guidelines & Operational
              Requirements for the Address and Routing Parameter Area
              Domain ("arpa")", BCP 52, RFC 3172, September 2001.

   [RFC6484]  Kent, S., Kong, D., Seo, K. and R. Watro, "Certificate
              Policy (CP) for the Resource Public Key Infrastructure
              (RPKI)", BCP 173, RFC 6484, February 2012.

9.2.  Informative References

   [RFC1466]  Gerich, E., "Guidelines for Management of IP Address
              Space", RFC 1466, May 1993.

   [RFC1518]  Rekhter, Y. and T. Li, "An Architecture for IP Address
              Allocation with CIDR", RFC 1518, September 1993.

   [RFC1814]  Gerich, E., "Unique Addresses are Good", RFC 1814, June
              1995.

   [RFC1900]  Carpenter, B. and Y. Rekhter, "Renumbering Needs Work",
              RFC 1900, February 1996.

   [RFC1918]  Rekhter, Y., Moskowitz, R., Karrenberg, D., Groot, G. and
              E. Lear, "Address Allocation for Private Internets", BCP
              5, RFC 1918, February 1996.

   [RFC2050]  Hubbard, K., Kosters, M., Conrad, D., Karrenberg, D. and
              J. Postel, "INTERNET REGISTRY IP ALLOCATION GUIDELINES",
              BCP 12, RFC 2050, November 1996.

   [RFC2317]  Eidnes, H., de Groot, G. and P. Vixie, "Classless IN-
              ADDR.ARPA delegation", BCP 20, RFC 2317, March 1998.

   [RFC2350]  Brownlee, N. and E. Guttman, "Expectations for Computer
              Security Incident Response", BCP 21, RFC 2350, June 1998.

   [RFC3221]  Huston, G., "Commentary on Inter-Domain Routing in the
              Internet", RFC 3221, December 2001.

   [RFC3707]  Newton, A., "Cross Registry Internet Service Protocol
              (CRISP) Requirements", RFC 3707, February 2004.

   [RFC4632]  Fuller, V. and T. Li, "Classless Inter-domain Routing
              (CIDR): The Internet Address Assignment and Aggregation
              Plan", BCP 122, RFC 4632, August 2006.

Housley, Curran, Huston, Conrad Expires August 31, 2013         [Page 7]

Internet-Draft          Internet Registry System              March 2013


Authors' Addresses

   Russ Housley
   Vigil Security, LLC
   918 Spring Knoll Drive
   Herndon, VA 20170
   USA
   
   Phone: +1 703 435 1775
   Email: housley@vigilsec.com


   John Curran
   American Registry for Internet Numbers (ARIN)
   3635 Concorde Parkway
   Chantilly, VA 20151-1125
   USA
   
   Phone: +1 703 227 9845
   Email: jcurran@arin.net


   Geoff Huston
   Asia Pacific Network Information Centre (APNIC)
   6 Cordelia St
   South Brisbane, QLD 4101
   Australia
   
   Phone: +61 7 3858 3100
   Email: gih@apnic.net


   David Conrad
   Virtualized, LLC
   2310 Homestead Road, C1#240
   Los Altos, CA 94024
   USA
   
   Phone: +1-650-397-6102
   Email: drc@virtualized.org













Housley, Curran, Huston, Conrad Expires August 31, 2013         [Page 8]
