



INTERNET DRAFT                                               R. Housley
Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF)                   Vigil Security
Intended Status: Standards Track                                T. Polk
                                                                   NIST
Expires: 13 April 2010                                  13 October 2010

          Database of Long-Lived Symmetric Cryptographic Keys
              <draft-housley-saag-crypto-key-table-04.txt>

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.

Abstract

   This document specifies the information contained in a database of
   long-lived cryptographic keys used by many different security
   protocols.  The database design supports both manual and automated
   key management.  In many instances, the security protocols do not
   directly use the long-lived key, but rather a key derivation function



Housley & Polk                                                  [Page 1]

INTERNET DRAFT                                              October 2010


   is used to derive a short-lived key from a long-lived key.

1. Introduction

   This document specifies the information that needs to be included in
   a database of long-lived cryptographic keys.  This conceptual
   database is designed to support both manual key management and
   automated key management.  The intent is to allow many different
   implementation approaches to the specified cryptographic key
   database.

   Security protocols such as TCP-AO [RFC5925] are expected to use an
   application program interface (API) to select a long-lived key from
   the database.  In many instances, the long-lived keys are not used
   directly in security protocols, but rather a key derivation function
   is used to derive short-lived key from the long-lived keys in the
   database.  In other instances, security protocols will directly use
   the long-lived key from the database.  The database design supports
   both use cases.

2. Conceptual Database Structure

   The database is characterized as a table, where each row represents a
   single long-lived symmetric cryptographic key.  Each key should only
   have one row; however, in the (hopefully) very rare cases where the
   same key is used for more than one purpose, multiple rows will
   contain the same key value.  The columns in the table represent the
   key value and attributes of the key.

   To accommodate manual key management, then formatting of the fields
   has been purposefully chosen to allow updates with a plain text
   editor.

   The table has the following columns:

      LocalKeyID
         LocalKeyID is a 16-bit integer in hexadecimal.  The LocalKeyID
         can be used by a peer to identify this entry in the database.
         For pairwise keys, the most significant bit in LocalKeyID is
         set to zero, and the integer value must be unique among all the
         pairwise keys in the database.  For group keys, the most
         significant bit in LocalKeyID is set to one, but collisions
         among group key identifiers must be accommodated.

      PeerKeyID
         For pairwise keys, the peersKeyID field is a 16 bit integer in
         hexadecimal provided by the peer.  If the peer has not yet
         provided this value, the PeerKeyID is set to "unknown".  For



Housley & Polk                                                  [Page 2]

INTERNET DRAFT                                              October 2010


         group keying, the PeerKeyID field is set to "group", which
         easily accommodates group keys generated by a third party.

      Peers
         The Peers field identifies the peer system or set of systems
         that have this key configured in their own database of long-
         lived keys.  For pairwise keys, the database on the peer system
         LocalKeyID field will contain the value specified in the
         PeerKeyID field in the local database.  For group keying, the
         Peers field names the group, not the individual systems that
         comprise the group.

      Interfaces
         The Interfaces field identifies the set of interfaces for which
         it is appropriate to use this key.  When the long-lived value
         in the Key field is intended for use on any interface, the
         Interfaces field is set to "all".

      Protocol
         The Protocol field identifies a single security protocol where
         this key may be used to provide cryptographic protection.

      KDF
         The KDF field indicates which key derivation function is used
         to generate short-lived keys from the long-lived value in the
         Key field.  When the long-lived value in the Key field is
         intended for direct use, the KDF field is set to "none".

      KDFInputs
         The KDFInputs field is used when supplementary public or
         private data is supplied to the KDF.  For protocols that do not
         require additional information for the KDF, the KDFInputs field
         is set to "none".  The Protocol field will determine the format
         of this field if it is not "none".

      AlgID
         The AlgID field indicates which cryptographic algorithm to be
         used with the security protocol for the specified peer.  The
         algorithm may be an encryption algorithm and mode (such as
         AES-128-CBC), an authentication algorithm (such as HMAC-SHA1-96
         or AES-128-CMAC), or any other symmetric cryptographic
         algorithm needed by a security protocol.  If the KDF field
         contains "none", then the long-lived key is used directly with
         this algorithm, otherwise the derived short-lived key is used
         with this algorithm.  When the long-lived key is used to
         generate a set of short-lived keys for use with the security
         protocol, the AlgID field identifies a ciphersuite rather than
         a single cryptographic algorithm.



Housley & Polk                                                  [Page 3]

INTERNET DRAFT                                              October 2010


      Key
         The Key is a hexadecimal string representing a long-lived
         symmetric cryptographic key.  The size of the Key depends on
         the KDF and the AlgID.  For example, a KDF=none and
         AlgID=AES128 requires a 128-bit key, which is represented by 32
         hexadecimal digits.

      Direction
         The Direction field indicates whether this key may be used for
         inbound traffic, outbound traffic, or both.  The supported
         values are "in", "out", and "both", respectively.  The Protocol
         field will determine which of these values are valid.

      NotBefore
         The NotBefore field specifies the earliest date and time in
         Universal Coordinated Time (UTC) at which this key should be
         considered for use.  The format is YYYYMMDDHHSSZ, where four
         digits specify the year, two digits specify the month, two
         digits specify the day, two digits specify the hour, and two
         digits specify the minute.  The "Z" is included as a clear
         indication that the time is in UTC.

      NotAfter
         The NotAfter field specifies the latest date and time at which
         this key should be considered for use.  The format is the same
         as the NotBefore field.

   Note that some security protocols use a KeyID value of zero for
   special purposes, so care is needed if this KeyID value is included
   in the table.

3. Key Selection and Rollover

   When a system desires to protect a unicast protocol data unit for a
   remote system H using security protocol P via interface I, the local
   system selects a long-lived key at time T from the database, any key
   that satisfies the following conditions may be used:

      (1)  the Peer field includes H;

      (2)  the PeerKeyID field is not "unknown";

      (3)  the Protocol field matches P;

      (4)  the Interfaces field includes I;

      (5)  the Direction field is either "out" or "both"; and




Housley & Polk                                                  [Page 4]

INTERNET DRAFT                                              October 2010


      (6)  NotBefore <= T <= NotAfter.

   The value in the PeerKeyID field is used to identify the selected key
   to remote system H.

   Group key selection is different than pairwise key selection.  When a
   system desires to protect a multicast protocol data unit for a group
   of systems G using security protocol P via interface I, the local
   system selects a long-lived key at time T from the database, any key
   that satisfies the following conditions may be used:

      (1)  the Peer field includes the multicast group G;

      (2)  the PeerKeyID field is "group";

      (3)  the Protocol field matches P;

      (4)  the Interfaces field includes I;

      (5)  the Direction field is either "out" or "both"; and

      (6)  NotBefore <= T <= NotAfter.

   The value in the LocalKeyID field is used to identify the selected
   key since all of the systems in the group G use the same identifier.

   During algorithm transition, multiple entries may exist associated
   with different cryptographic algorithms or ciphersuites.  Systems
   should support selection of keys based on algorithm preference.

   In addition, multiple entries with overlapping use periods are
   expected to be employed to provide orderly key rollover.  In these
   cases, the expectation is that systems will transition to the newest
   key available.  To meet this requirement, this specification
   recommends supplementing the key selection algorithm with the
   following differentiation: select the long-lived key specifying the
   most recent time in the NotBefore field.

   When a system participates in a security protocol, a sending peer
   system H2 has selected a long-lived key and the LocalKeyID is
   included in the protocol control information.  When retrieving the
   long-lived key (for direct use or for key derivation), the local
   system should confirm the following conditions are satisfied before
   use:

      (1)  the Peer field includes H2;

      (2)  the Protocol field matches P;



Housley & Polk                                                  [Page 5]

INTERNET DRAFT                                              October 2010


      (3)  the Interface field includes I;

      (4)  the Direction field is either "in" or "both"; and

      (5)  NotBefore <= T <= NotAfter.

   Note that the key usage is loosely bound by the times specified in
   the NotBefore and NotAfter fields.  New security associations should
   not be established except within the period of use specified by these
   fields, while allowing some grace time for clock skew.  However, if a
   security association has already been established based on a
   particular long-lived key, exceeding the lifetime does not have any
   direct impact.  Implementations of protocols that involve long-lived
   security association should be designed to periodically interrogate
   the database and rollover to new keys without tearing down the
   security association.

   For group keying, the local system should confirm the following
   conditions are satisfied before use:

      (1)  the Peer field includes the multicast group G;

      (2)  the PeerKeyID field is "group";

      (3)  the Protocol field matches P;

      (4)  the Interface field includes I;

      (5)  the Direction field is either "in" or "both"; and

      (6)  NotBefore <= T <= NotAfter.

4. Operational Considerations

   If usage periods for long-lived keys do not overlap and system clocks
   are inconsistent, it is possible to construct scenarios where systems
   cannot agree upon a long-lived key.  When installing a series of keys
   to be used one after the other (sometimes called a key chain),
   operators should configure the NotAfter field of the preceding key to
   be several days after the NotBefore field of the subsequent key to
   ensure that clock skew is not a concern.

   For group keys, the most significant bit in LocalKeyID must be set to
   one.  Collisions among group key identifiers can be avoided by
   subdividing the remaining 15 bits of the LocalKeyID field into an
   identifier of the group key generator and an identifier assigned by
   that generator.




Housley & Polk                                                  [Page 6]

INTERNET DRAFT                                              October 2010


5. Security Considerations

   Management of encryption and authentication keys has been a
   significant operational problem, both in terms of key synchronization
   and key selection.  For example, current guidance [RFC3562] warns
   against sharing TCP MD5 keying material between systems, and
   recommends changing keys according to a schedule.  The same general
   operational issues are relevant for the management of other
   cryptographic keys.

   It is recognized in [RFC4107] that automated key management is not
   viable in some situations.  The conceptual database specified in this
   document is intended to accommodate both manual key management and
   automated key management.  A future specification to automatically
   populate rows in the database is envisioned.

   Designers should recognize the warning provided in [RFC4107]:

      Automated key management and manual key management provide very
      different features.  In particular, the protocol associated with
      an automated key management technique will confirm the liveness of
      the peer, protect against replay, authenticate the source of the
      short-term session key, associate protocol state information with
      the short-term session key, and ensure that a fresh short-term
      session key is generated.  Further, an automated key management
      protocol can improve interoperability by including negotiation
      mechanisms for cryptographic algorithms.  These valuable features
      are impossible or extremely cumbersome to accomplish with manual
      key management.

6. IANA Considerations

   No IANA actions are required.

   {{{ RFC Editor: Please remove this section prior to publication. }}}

7. Acknowledgments

   This document reflects many discussions with many different people
   over many years.  In particular, the authors thank Jari Arkko, Ran
   Atkinson, Ron Bonica, Ross Callon, Lars Eggert, Pasi Eronen, Adrian
   Farrel, Sam Hartman, Gregory Lebovitz, Sandy Murphy, Eric Rescorla,
   Mike Shand, Dave Ward, and Brian Weis for their insights.

8. Informational References

   [RFC3562]  Leech, M., "Key Management Considerations for the TCP MD5
              Signature Option", RFC 3562, July 2003.



Housley & Polk                                                  [Page 7]

INTERNET DRAFT                                              October 2010


   [RFC4107]  Bellovin, S. and R. Housley, "Guidelines for Cryptographic
              Key Management", RFC 4107, BCP 107, June 2005.

   [RFC5925]  Touch, J., Mankin, A., and R. Bonica, "The TCP
              Authentication Option", RFC 5925, June 2010.

Authors' Addresses

   Russell Housley
   Vigil Security, LLC
   918 Spring Knoll Drive
   Herndon, VA 20170
   USA
   EMail: housley@vigilsec.com

   Tim Polk
   National Institute of Standards and Technology
   100 Bureau Drive, Mail Stop 8930
   Gaithersburg, MD 20899-8930
   USA
   EMail: tim.polk@nist.gov






























Housley & Polk                                                  [Page 8]
