A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3564

        Title:      Requirements for Support of Differentiated
                    Services-aware MPLS Traffic Engineering
        Author(s):  F. Le Faucheur, W. Lai
        Status:     Informational
        Date:       July 2003
        Mailbox:    flefauch@cisco.com, wlai@att.com
        Pages:      22
        Characters: 50808
        Updates/Obsoletes/SeeAlso:  None

        I-D Tag:    draft-ietf-tewg-diff-te-reqts-07.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3564.txt


This document presents Service Provider requirements for support of
Differentiated Services (Diff-Serv)-aware MPLS Traffic Engineering
(DS-TE).

Its objective is to provide guidance for the definition, selection
and specification of a technical solution addressing these
requirements.  Specification for this solution itself is outside the
scope of this document.

A problem statement is first provided.  Then, the document describes
example applications scenarios identified by Service Providers where
existing MPLS Traffic Engineering mechanisms fall short and
Diff-Serv-aware Traffic Engineering can address the needs.  The
detailed requirements that need to be addressed by the technical
solution are also reviewed.  Finally, the document identifies the
evaluation criteria that should be considered for selection and
definition of the technical solution.

This document is a product of the Internet Traffic Engineering Working
Group of the IETF.

This memo provides information for the Internet community.  It does
not specify an Internet standard of any kind.  Distribution of this
memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.

