
A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3041

        Title:      Privacy Extensions for Stateless Address
                    Autoconfiguration in IPv6
        Author(s):  T. Narten, R. Draves
        Status:     Standards Track
        Date:       January 2001
        Mailbox:    narten@raleigh.ibm.com, richdr@microsoft.com
        Pages:      17
        Characters: 44446
        Updates/Obsoletes/SeeAlso:  None

        I-D Tag:    draft-ietf-ipngwg-addrconf-privacy-04.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3041.txt


Nodes use IPv6 stateless address autoconfiguration to generate
addresses without the necessity of a Dynamic Host Configuration
Protocol (DHCP) server.  Addresses are formed by combining network
prefixes with an interface identifier.  On interfaces that contain
embedded IEEE Identifiers, the interface identifier is typically
derived from it.  On other interface types, the interface identifier
is generated through other means, for example, via random number
generation.  This document describes an extension to IPv6 stateless
address autoconfiguration for interfaces whose interface identifier is
derived from an IEEE identifier.  Use of the extension causes nodes to
generate global-scope addresses from interface identifiers that change
over time, even in cases where the interface contains an embedded IEEE
identifier.  Changing the interface identifier (and the global-scope
addresses generated from it) over time makes it more difficult for
eavesdroppers and other information collectors to identify when
different addresses used in different transactions actually correspond
to the same node.

This document is a product of the IPNG Working Group of the IETF.

This is now a Proposed Standard Protocol.

This document specifies an Internet standards track protocol for
the Internet community, and requests discussion and suggestions
for improvements.  Please refer to the current edition of the
"Internet Official Protocol Standards" (STD 1) for the
standardization state and status of this protocol.  Distribution
of this memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.

