A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3542

        Title:      Advanced Sockets Application Protocol Interface
                    (API) for IPv6
        Author(s):  W. Stevens, M. Thomas, E. Nordmark, T. Jinmei
        Status:     Informational
        Date:       May 2003
        Mailbox:    matt@3am-software.com, Erik.Nordmark@sun.com,
                    jinmei@isl.rdc.toshiba.co.jp
        Pages:      77
        Characters: 173028
        Obsoletes:  2292

        I-D Tag:    draft-ietf-ipngwg-rfc2292bis-09.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3542.txt


This document provides sockets Application Program Interface (API) to
support "advanced" IPv6 applications, as a supplement to a separate
specification, RFC 3493.  The expected applications include Ping,
Traceroute, routing daemons and the like, which typically use raw
sockets to access IPv6 or ICMPv6 header fields.  This document
proposes some portable interfaces for applications that use raw
sockets under IPv6.  There are other features of IPv6 that some
applications will need to access: interface identification (specifying
the outgoing interface and determining the incoming interface), IPv6
extension headers, and path Maximum Transmission Unit (MTU)
information.  This document provides API access to these features too.
Additionally, some extended interfaces to libraries for the "r"
commands are defined.  The extension will provide better backward
compatibility to existing implementations that are not IPv6-capable.

This document is a product of the IP Version 6 Working Group of the
IETF.

This memo provides information for the Internet community.  It does
not specify an Internet standard of any kind.  Distribution of this
memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.
