


Network Working Group                                         C. Huitema
Internet-Draft                                     Microsoft Corporation
Intended status: Informational                         November 06, 2013
Expires: May 10, 2014


              Passive Traffic Analysis Threats and Defense
              draft-huitema-perpass-trafficanalysis-00.txt

Abstract

   Traffic analysis is used by various entities to derive "meta data"
   about Internet communications, such as who communicates with whom or
   what, and when.  We analyze how meta-data can be extracted by
   monitoring IP headers, DNS traffic, and clear-text headers of
   commonly used protocols.  We then propose a series of actions that
   would make traffic analysis more difficult.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on May 10, 2014.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.












Huitema                   Expires May 10, 2014                  [Page 1]

Internet-DraftPassive Traffic Analysis Threats and Defense November 2013


   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Passive Analysis Targets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   3.  Analysis of IP headers  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   4.  Linking IP addresses to user identities . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     4.1.  Monitoring POP3, IMAP or SIP clients for identifying
           users of IP addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     4.2.  Retrieving IP addresses from mail headers . . . . . . . .   6
     4.3.  Tracking address use with web cookies . . . . . . . . . .   7
     4.4.  Tracking address use with network graphs  . . . . . . . .   7
     4.5.  Static IPv6 interface identifiers . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     4.6.  Stuff we have not thought off yet . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   5.  Defenses against IP header monitoring . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     5.1.  Client server encryption  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     5.2.  Clean-up E-mail headers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     5.3.  Source address obfuscation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     5.4.  Network address translation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
     5.5.  IPv6 privacy addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
     5.6.  Frequent address renumbering  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
     5.7.  Multihoming . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
     5.8.  Virtual Private Networks  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
     5.9.  Web proxies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
     5.10. Onion routing and shuffle nets  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
     5.11. And there is more . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   6.  Recommendations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   7.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   8.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   9.  Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
   10. References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
     10.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
     10.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14

1.  Introduction

   The massive monitoring attacks that we know about seem to fall into
   three categories: listening to the content of communications in



Huitema                   Expires May 10, 2014                  [Page 2]

Internet-DraftPassive Traffic Analysis Threats and Defense November 2013


   transit, accessing content of documents and past exchanges at a
   server, and analyzing traffic to find patterns of communications and
   deduce social exchanges.

   Other efforts address the "listening on conversations" attack, and
   how to prevent them with more or better encryption.  There are some
   good ideas for reducing the risk of accessing contents on server,
   such as storing encrypted contents on servers, or enabling
   distributed services so that users can chose server locations that
   they find more acceptable.  Enabling encryption will also reduce the
   capability to extract information from the e-mail or http headers.
   This draft focuses on a different set of threats, the monitoring and
   analysis of Internet Protocol headers to extract "metadata" such as
   the structure of social graphs or the timing of social events.

   This draft proceeds by analyzing first the information that the
   monitoring entities desire to acquire and that privacy advocates
   would like to protect.  These monitoring tools are expected to work
   for both IPv4 [RFC0791] and IPv6 [RFC2460].  We present then the
   mechanism of IP header monitoring, and discuss the critical problem
   of associating IP addresses to user identities.  We then review a
   series of mechanisms that might be used to mitigate IP header
   monitoring.

2.  Passive Analysis Targets

   Questioned about revelation that his secret services were monitoring
   all the phone calls of the populace, a famous leader defended himself
   by saying that no, we don't listen to your phone calls, we merely
   gather "meta data."  It turns out that meta data such as who called
   what telephone number and at what time is actually very valuable.

   The first target of traffic analysis is the graph of connectivity
   within a given population.  If we known that two phone numbers
   frequently call each other, we can infer that there is a relation
   between the owners of these numbers.  For example, if investigative
   services discover a pattern of calls between an old general and some
   young lady, they can infer the existence of some inappropriate
   relation, and eventually force the general to relinquish his
   leadership position.  Similarly, if we find a pattern of frequent
   calls between a small set of telephone numbers, we can infer the
   existence of some tight-knit network.  Further analysis can then lead
   to the evaluation that these are just the members of the same family
   or the same sports team, or on the contrary it can find that these
   are political opponents organizing themselves, or maybe in rare cases
   some members of an underground criminal organization.





Huitema                   Expires May 10, 2014                  [Page 3]

Internet-DraftPassive Traffic Analysis Threats and Defense November 2013


   The graph of connectivity may sometimes take very simple forms.  For
   example, visiting the web site of a banned organization may be
   sufficient to get flagged as a dissident by some autocratic regimes.

   The second target of traffic analysis is the discovery of traffic
   surges, or the opposite, sudden absence of traffic indicating that a
   particular group has gone silent.  If the monitoring of traffic
   reveals increased activity between a particular group, secondary
   analysis can be used to obtain more information on the activities of
   the group.  That secondary analysis will be able to find the
   difference between a family preparing a birthday event, a sports team
   training for a particular competition, a group of activists planning
   a political protest, and maybe in rare cases a group of criminals
   planning some nefarious act.

   Traffic can operate across multiple media.  Analysis of phone calls
   reveals patterns between phone numbers, but similar analysis can be
   applied to IP addresses.  Traffic analysis becomes much more valuable
   if the IP address can be associated with a personal email address or
   with a personal phone number.  This correlation is also a target of
   traffic analysis.

   Traffic analysis may also reveal the targets location.  If the same
   user appears to connect to the Internet from a succession of IP
   addresses at different locations, the monitoring services can deduce
   the itinerary of that user.

   For the defenders, the targets of traffic analysis become as many
   assets to be protected.  In the following analysis, we will focus on
   ways to thwart discovery of the graph of connectivity, timing of
   activity, and correlation between identifiers.

3.  Analysis of IP headers

   Internet traffic can be monitored by tapping Internet links, or by
   installing monitoring tools in Internet routers.  Of course, a single
   link or a single router only provides access to a fraction of the
   global Internet traffic.  However, monitoring a number of high
   capacity links or monitoring a set of routers placed at strategic
   locations provides access to a good sampling of Internet traffic.

   Tools like Cisco's NetFlow [RFC3954] allow administrators to acquire
   statistics about "sequence of packets with some common properties
   that pass through a network device."  The most common set of
   properties is the "five tuple" of source and destination addresses,
   protocol type, and source and destination ports.  These statistics
   are commonly used for network engineering, but could certainly be
   used for other purposes.



Huitema                   Expires May 10, 2014                  [Page 4]

Internet-DraftPassive Traffic Analysis Threats and Defense November 2013


   Let's assume for a moment that IP addresses can be correlated to
   specific services or specific users.  Analysis of the sequences of
   packets will quickly reveal which users use what services, and also
   which users engage in peer-to-peer connection with other users.
   Analysis of traffic variations over time can be used to detect
   increased activity by particular users, or in the case of peer-to-
   peer connections increased activity within groups of users.

4.  Linking IP addresses to user identities

   In Section 3, we have assumed that IP addresses can be correlated
   with specific user identities.  This can be done in various ways.

   Tools like reverse DNS lookup can be used to retrieve the DNS names
   of servers.  In fact, since the addresses of servers tend to be quite
   stable and since servers are relatively less numerous than users, we
   can expect that large scale monitoring services maintain databases of
   servers' IP addresses to facilitate such retrieval.  On the other
   hand, the reverse lookup of users addresses is less informative.  For
   example, a lookup of the address currently used by my home network
   returns a name of the form "c-xxx-xxx-xxx-xxx.hsd1.wa.comcast.net" in
   which the symbols "xxx-xxx-xxx-xxx" correspond to the IP address used
   by my home network.  This particular type of reverse DNS lookup does
   not reveal much interesting information.

   Traditionally, the police has relied on Internet Service Providers
   (ISP) to provide identification on a case by case basis of the
   "owner" of a specific IP address.  This is a reasonably expedient
   process for police investigations, but large scale monitoring
   requires something more efficient.  If the monitoring service can
   secure the cooperation of the ISP, they may obtain the link between
   identity and address through some automated update process.  We may
   expect that some ISP will not willingly cooperate with large scale
   monitoring of their customers, in which case the monitoring entities
   have to rely on other methods.

   Even if the ISP does not cooperate, identity can often be obtained by
   analyzing the traffic.  We will discuss in the next section how SMTP
   and HTTP can leak information that links the IP address to the
   identity of the user.

4.1.  Monitoring POP3, IMAP or SIP clients for identifying users of IP
      addresses








Huitema                   Expires May 10, 2014                  [Page 5]

Internet-DraftPassive Traffic Analysis Threats and Defense November 2013


   POP3 [RFC1939] and IMAP [RFC3501] are used to retrieve mail from mail
   servers, while a variant of SMTP [RFC5321] is used to submit messages
   through mail servers.  The IMAP connections originate from the
   client, and typically start with an authentication exchange in which
   the client proves its identity by answering a password challenge.

   If the protocol is executed in clear text, monitoring services can
   "tap" the links to the mail server, retrieve the user name provided
   by the client, and associate it with the IP address used to establish
   the connection.

   The same attack can be executed against the SIP protocol, [RFC3261]
   if the connection between the SIP UA and the SIP server operates in
   clear text.

   There are many instant messaging services operating over the Internet
   using proprietary protocols.  If any of these proprietary protocols
   includes clear-text transmission of the user identity, it can be
   tapped to provide an association between the user identity and the IP
   address.

4.2.  Retrieving IP addresses from mail headers

   The SMTP protocol specification [RFC5321] requires that each
   successive SMTP relay adds a "Received" header to the mail headers.
   The purpose of these headers is to enable audit of mail transmission,
   and perhaps to distinguish between regular mail and spam.  Here is an
   extract from the headers of a message recently received from the
   "perpass" mailing list:

   Received: from xxx-xxx-xxx-xxx.zone13.example.org (HELO ?192.168.1.100?)
    (xxx.xxx.xxx.xxx)
    by lvpsyyy-yyy-yyy-yyy.example.net with ESMTPSA
    (DHE-RSA-AES256-SHA encrypted, authenticated);
    27 Oct 2013 21:47:14 +0100
   Message-ID: <526D7BD2.7070908@example.org>
   Date: Sun, 27 Oct 2013 20:47:14 +0000
   From: Some One <some.one@example.org>


   This is the first "Received" header attached to the message by the
   first SMTP relay.  For privacy reason, the field values have been
   anonymized.  We learn here that the message was submitted by "Some
   One" on October 27, from a host behind a NAT (192.168.1.100) that
   used the IP address "xxx.xxx.xxx.xxx."  The information remained in
   the message, and is accessible by all recipients of the "perpass"
   mailing list, or indeed by any monitoring service that sees at least
   one copy of the message.



Huitema                   Expires May 10, 2014                  [Page 6]

Internet-DraftPassive Traffic Analysis Threats and Defense November 2013


   For monitoring services, such information is just plain candy.
   Monitor enough e-mail traffic and you can regularly update the
   mapping between IP addresses and individuals.  Even if the SMTP
   traffic was encrypted, the monitoring service could still register to
   receive a copy of public mailing lists like "perpass," and then log
   the header fields.

   Similar information is available in the SIP headers [RFC3261].

4.3.  Tracking address use with web cookies

   Many web sites only encrypt a small fraction of their transactions.
   A popular pattern was to use HTTPS for the login information, and
   then use a "cookie" to associate following clear-text transactions
   with the user's identity.  Cookies are also used by various
   advertisement services to quickly identify the users and serve them
   with "personalized" advertisements.  Such cookies are particularly
   useful if the advertisement services wants to keep tracking the user
   across multiple sessions that may use different IP addresses.

   As cookies are sent in clear text, a monitoring service can build a
   database that associates cookies to IP addresses.  If the IP address
   is already identified, the cookie can be linked to the user identify.
   After that, if the same cookie appears on a new IP address, the new
   IP address can be immediately associated with the pre-determined
   identity.

4.4.  Tracking address use with network graphs

   There have been many publicly reported instances in which the police
   managed to find the owner of a "disposable" cell phone.  In theory
   this is hard, because there is no direct registration of the owner's
   identity.  But in practice, the identity can be inferred through
   analysis of network graphs.

   Suppose that the new owner of the cell phone uses it carelessly to
   call his mother, his brother, his boss and his preferred restaurant.
   Mother, brother, boss and restaurant are part of the "network graph"
   already collected by pervasive monitoring, and in fact constitute an
   almost unique signature of this particular individual.  A quick
   database search and voila, the cell phone is identified.

   The same approach can be applied to IP addresses.  Users do a lot of
   repeat visits to web sites, mail servers, game servers, instant
   messaging servers, etc.  These visits tend to follow time patterns.
   It is easy to imagine that if a particular pattern was seen from
   address "A" one day, and the same pattern from address "B" the next
   day, then A and B point to the same user, whose computer just got a



Huitema                   Expires May 10, 2014                  [Page 7]

Internet-DraftPassive Traffic Analysis Threats and Defense November 2013


   new address.  At that point, the user may be identified only as a
   "case number," but the real identity can be filled as soon as email
   monitoring is successful, or sip monitoring, or maybe some ISP
   cooperation.

4.5.  Static IPv6 interface identifiers

   The IP Version 6 Addressing Architecture [RFC4291] suggests that "for
   all unicast addresses, except those that start with the binary value
   000, Interface IDs... may have universal scope when derived from a
   universal token (e.g., IEEE 802 48-bit MAC or IEEE EUI-64 identifiers
   [EUI64])."

   When implementors follow this recommendation, the IID part of the
   IPv6 address becomes a globally unique 64 bit number.  Even if the
   IPv6 host moves to a new location, the IID will remain constant.
   Monitoring services can use that property to correlate IPv6 addresses
   belonging to the same host, and thus to the same user.

4.6.  Stuff we have not thought off yet

   The previous sections listed a number of known ways to extract
   identities from IP addresses.  This is by no means an exhaustive
   list.  There are certainly other possibilities, for example
   monitoring of public Wi-Fi networks and tracking of association
   between MAC addresses and IP addresses, or monitoring of various
   authentication services.

5.  Defenses against IP header monitoring

   In the current state of the Internet, defense against monitoring is
   very hard.  There are many ways to associate IP addresses with user
   identity.  Tapping of big Internet pipes is bound to provide a trove
   of data.  Retrieving social graphs and detecting surges of activity
   is well within the means of a well funded monitoring service.  But
   this does not mean that the Internet engineering community should
   just give up.  Even if we cannot stop this monitoring completely, we
   can certainly make it harder and less reliable.

   The first version of this internet draft presents a list of potential
   defenses that have been mentioned in various discussions.  This list
   is not exhaustive, and is also not prioritized.  It is merely a
   recollection of a number of suggestions.

5.1.  Client server encryption

   The previous analysis shows that IP traffic analysis is facilitated
   by the discovery of relations between IP addresses and users.



Huitema                   Expires May 10, 2014                  [Page 8]

Internet-DraftPassive Traffic Analysis Threats and Defense November 2013


   Encryption of the client-server protocols will deprive monitoring of
   this source of information.

   The analysis was conducted for mail protocols (POP3, IMAP, SMTP) and
   for SIP.  Encrypting these protocols is of course a priority.  But if
   we want to really mitigate the threat of disclosing identity to
   address mappings, we should encrypt any protocol that carries a
   description of the user identity.

   Encryption may not always completely remove the possibility to
   monitor connections.  Encrypted traffic may still contain patterns,
   such as for example VOIP connections sending one RTP audio message
   every 20 ms.  With elaborate pattern analysis, monitoring entities
   may be able to find user-specific patterns in the encrypted messages.
   Studying cryptographic protection against such analysis is probably
   beyond the scope of this document.

5.2.  Clean-up E-mail headers

   The email service is by itself a rich target for traffic analysis.
   Analyzing who sent mail to whom and when provides a rich set of meta
   data, even when the messages' contents are encrypted.  This would
   probably justify a draft focusing just on email trafic analysis and
   protection.  Since this document focuses on IP header monitoring, we
   will just point here a tiny problem related to discovery of linkage
   between IP and email addresses.

   The initial "Received" field of e-mail headers carries the IP address
   from which the e-mail was submitted.  This is equivalent to
   broadcasting the mapping between that IP address and the user
   identity.  We should seriously consider the tradeoff between privacy
   and auditability that this feature afford.

   A reasonable tradeoff could be to not publish the IP address or the
   domain name of the initial submitter, and to start the "Received"
   list with the IP address of the mail server.  We should however
   consider the case where the first server is a "home" server, whose
   public IP address is the same as that of the user.  Ideally, we
   should not publish that either.

   The same reasoning should apply to any protocol that publishes a
   trace of successive server addresses in its headers.  At some point,
   auditability should give way to privacy.

5.3.  Source address obfuscation

   Jon Crowcroft suggested a nice idea a few years ago, although for a
   different reason: sourceless network architecture [SNA].  Send



Huitema                   Expires May 10, 2014                  [Page 9]

Internet-DraftPassive Traffic Analysis Threats and Defense November 2013


   packets with no source address, and you make the metadata much less
   useful.  (Of course, if the packet is to get a reply, the source
   address needs to be encrypted in the payload.)

   The idea is largely theoretical, and would require significant
   changes in a number of widely deployed protocols, including TCP.

5.4.  Network address translation

   Many home networks use "network address translation" (NAT) [RFC3022]
   to share a single IPv4 address between several computers, and
   possibly several users.  NAT are also used in some enterprise
   networks, and in some Wi-Fi "hot spots."  Some ISP have also begun to
   use NAT, providing "private" addresses to their subscribers.

   NAT complicates the task of IP header monitoring, because a
   particular address may be shared between multiple users.  If the
   address is only shared between few users, like the members of a
   family sharing a home network, monitoring services can probably use
   analysis techniques to retrieve the individual connections, and NAT
   may not be more than a speed bump.  If the sharing pool is much
   larger, like all the subscribers to a medium size ISP, monitoring
   becomes significantly harder.

5.5.  IPv6 privacy addresses

   It is ironic to notice that as IPv6 improves "address transparency"
   by removing the need for address translation, it also makes
   monitoring significantly easier than when using NAT.  But the Privacy
   Extensions for Stateless Address Autoconfiguration in IPv6 [RFC4941]
   allow users to configure temporary IPv6 addresses out of a global
   prefix.  Privacy addresses are meant to be used for a short time,
   typically no more than a day, and are specifically designed to render
   monitoring based on IPv6 addresses harder.

   Privacy extensions only affect the least significant 64 bits of the
   IPv6 address.  The most significant 64 bits remain unaffected.  The
   64 bit prefix is typically allocated to a small network, e.g., a
   single household or a Wi-Fi hot spot.  It has pretty much the same
   identifying power as an IPv4 address.  If the network is small in
   size, the use of privacy addresses, just like the use of NAT, will be
   a mere speed bump for IP header monitoring.









Huitema                   Expires May 10, 2014                 [Page 10]

Internet-DraftPassive Traffic Analysis Threats and Defense November 2013


5.6.  Frequent address renumbering

   In the days of modem networking, a computer would receive a new IPv4
   address each time it connected to the Internet.  Always on broadband
   connections may or may not provide the subscribers with permanent
   stable addresses.  Some users pay extra for the convenience of a
   stable address.  Of course, stable addresses greatly facilitate IP
   header monitoring.

   In contrast, we could imagine that the broadband modem is re-
   provisioned at regular interval with a new IPv4 address, or with a
   new IPv6 address prefix.  Some convenience will be lost, and TCP
   connections active before the renumbering will have to be
   reestablished.  However, the renumbering will significantly
   complicate the task of IP header monitoring.

5.7.  Multihoming

   Multihoming is the practice of using multiple connections
   simultaneously.  If done well, multihoming will split the graph of
   connectivity in interesting ways.  Packets will travel over different
   routes, IP addresses will be different.  Multihoming could make IP
   header monitoring harder.

5.8.  Virtual Private Networks

   Virtual private networks (VPN) allow users to set up a "tunnel"
   across the Internet to a "virtual" connection point, and effectively
   provide a form of multihoming.  Since the connections are virtual,
   VPN could also provide a form of frequent address renumbering.  As
   such, VPN can provide some resistance against IP address monitoring.

   VPN's require careful configuration and setup to prevent leakage of
   identifying information.  Tech that purports to secure or privatize
   your communication but that actually leaks - or worse, can be coerced
   into revealing your traffic, is worse than no tech at all.

5.9.  Web proxies

   Sending HTTP requests through web proxy is a way to hide the actual
   IP source of the request, and as such a way to complicate monitoring.

   Much like VPN, web proxies are a two edged sword.  If the proxy is
   compromised, the true origin of the traffic can be retrieved.
   Moreover, the proxy could become an observation point to monitor the
   web traffic.





Huitema                   Expires May 10, 2014                 [Page 11]

Internet-DraftPassive Traffic Analysis Threats and Defense November 2013


   If the monitoring services can observe the traffic coming in and out
   of the proxies, they can use correlation methods to match incoming
   and outgoing flows.  This is obvious in the trivial case where there
   is just 1 user of the proxy.  The monitoring will reveal that a
   message to the proxy from address A was quickly followed by a message
   from the proxy to address B, and the monitoring service will infer a
   connection from address A to address B. Even if the number of proxy
   users increase, the monitoring services may still be able to use
   timing information and correlate input and output messages.

5.10.  Onion routing and shuffle nets

   Services like Tor provide an obvious form of resistance against IP
   header monitoring.

5.11.  And there is more

   There are certainly more potential defenses, which will emerge during
   the discussion of this draft.

6.  Recommendations

   The following recommendations are an attempt to summarize the threat
   and mitigation analysis in the previous sections:

   o  Use encryption.  In particular, never send a user identity in
      clear text.

   o  Ask "submission" SMTP server to obfuscate the IP address of the
      user, and not place it in mail headers.

   o  Not completely written yet...

7.  Security Considerations

   This draft does not introduce new protocols.  It does present a
   series of attacks on existing protocols, and proposes an assorted set
   of mitigations.

8.  IANA Considerations

   This draft does not require any IANA action.









Huitema                   Expires May 10, 2014                 [Page 12]

Internet-DraftPassive Traffic Analysis Threats and Defense November 2013


9.  Acknowledgments

   The inspiration for this draft came from discussions in the Perpass
   mailing list.  Some of the text was contributed in messages to the
   list by Dave Nix, Brian Trammel and Brian Carpenter.  Stephen Farrell
   provided guidance and useful suggestions.  Thanks to Linus Nordberg
   for checkproofing the draft.

10.  References

10.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2026]  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision
              3", BCP 9, RFC 2026, October 1996.

10.2.  Informative References

   [RFC0791]  Postel, J., "Internet Protocol", STD 5, RFC 791, September
              1981.

   [RFC1939]  Myers, J. and M. Rose, "Post Office Protocol - Version 3",
              STD 53, RFC 1939, May 1996.

   [RFC2460]  Deering, S. and R. Hinden, "Internet Protocol, Version 6
              (IPv6) Specification", RFC 2460, December 1998.

   [RFC3022]  Srisuresh, P. and K. Egevang, "Traditional IP Network
              Address Translator (Traditional NAT)", RFC 3022, January
              2001.

   [RFC3261]  Rosenberg, J., Schulzrinne, H., Camarillo, G., Johnston,
              A., Peterson, J., Sparks, R., Handley, M., and E.
              Schooler, "SIP: Session Initiation Protocol", RFC 3261,
              June 2002.

   [RFC3501]  Crispin, M., "INTERNET MESSAGE ACCESS PROTOCOL - VERSION
              4rev1", RFC 3501, March 2003.

   [RFC3954]  Claise, B., "Cisco Systems NetFlow Services Export Version
              9", RFC 3954, October 2004.

   [RFC4291]  Hinden, R. and S. Deering, "IP Version 6 Addressing
              Architecture", RFC 4291, February 2006.

   [RFC4941]  Narten, T., Draves, R., and S. Krishnan, "Privacy
              Extensions for Stateless Address Autoconfiguration in
              IPv6", RFC 4941, September 2007.




Huitema                   Expires May 10, 2014                 [Page 13]

Internet-DraftPassive Traffic Analysis Threats and Defense November 2013


   [RFC5321]  Klensin, J., "Simple Mail Transfer Protocol", RFC 5321,
              October 2008.

   [SNA]      Crowcroft, J. and M. Bagnulo, "SNA: Sourceless Network
              Architecture", June 2008,
              <http://www.cl.cam.ac.uk/~jac22/talks/sna.ppt>.

Author's Address

   Christian Huitema
   Microsoft Corporation
   One Microsoft Way
   Redmond, WA  98052-6399
   U.S.A.

   Email: huitema@huitema.net



































Huitema                   Expires May 10, 2014                 [Page 14]

