Network Working Group                                           B. Liu 
Internet Draft                                                S. Jiang 
Intended status: Informational            Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd 
Expires: March 04, 2013                                   B. Carpenter 
                                                University of Auckland 
                                                             S. Venaas 
                                                         Cisco Systems 
                                                    September 03, 2012 
                                      
                    IPv6 Site Renumbering Gap Analysis 
                   draft-ietf-6renum-gap-analysis-03.txt 


Status of this Memo 

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the 
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79. 

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF). Note that other groups may also distribute working 
   documents as Internet-Drafts. The list of current Internet-Drafts is 
   at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/. 

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 

   This Internet-Draft will expire on March 04, 2013. 

Copyright Notice 

   Copyright (c) 2012 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the 
   document authors. All rights reserved. 

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal 
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents 
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of 
   publication of this document. Please review these documents 
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect 
   to this document. Code Components extracted from this document must 
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of 
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as 
   described in the Simplified BSD License. 




 
 
 
Liu, et al.            Expires March 04 2013                 [Page 1] 

Internet-Draft   IPv6 Site Renumbering Gap Analysis     September 2012 
    

    

Abstract 

   This document briefly introduces the existing mechanisms could be 
   utilized by IPv6 site renumbering and tries to cover most of the 
   explicit issues and requirements of IPv6 renumbering. Through the gap 
   analysis, the document provides a basis for future works that 
   identify and develop solutions or to stimulate such development as 
   appropriate. The gap analysis is presented following a renumbering 
   event procedure clue. 

 

Table of Contents 

    
   1. Introduction ................................................. 4 
   2. Overall Requirements for Renumbering ......................... 4 
   3. Existing Components for IPv6 Renumbering ..................... 5 
      3.1. Relevant Protocols and Mechanisms ....................... 5 
      3.2. Management Tools ........................................ 6 
      3.3. Procedures/Policies ..................................... 6 
   4. Managing Prefixes ............................................ 7 
      4.1. Prefix Delegation ....................................... 7 
      4.2. Prefix Assignment ....................................... 7 
   5. Address Configuration ........................................ 7 
      5.1. Host Address Configuration .............................. 7 
      5.2. Router Address Configuration ............................ 9 
      5.3. Static Address Configuration ........................... 10 
   6. Updating Address-relevant Entries ........................... 10 
      6.1. DNS Records Update ..................................... 10 
      6.2. In-host Server Address Update .......................... 11 
      6.3. Filters ................................................ 11 
   7. Renumbering Event Management ................................ 12 
      7.1. Renumbering Notification ............................... 12 
      7.2. Synchronization Management ............................. 13 
      7.3. Renumbering Monitoring ................................. 13 
   8. Miscellaneous ............................................... 13 
      8.1. Multicast .............................................. 13 
      8.2. Mobility ............................................... 15 
   9. Gaps considered unsolvable .................................. 15 
      9.1. Address Configuration .................................. 15 
      9.2. Address-relevant Entries Update ........................ 15 
      9.3. Miscellaneous .......................................... 16 
   10. Security Considerations .................................... 16 
   11. IANA Considerations......................................... 17 
 
 
Liu, et al.            Expires March 04, 2013                 [Page 2] 

Internet-Draft   IPv6 Site Renumbering Gap Analysis     September 2012 
    

   12. Acknowledgments ............................................ 17 
   13. References ................................................. 17 
      13.1. Normative References .................................. 17 
      13.2. Informative References ................................ 18 
    









































 
 
Liu, et al.            Expires March 04, 2013                 [Page 3] 

Internet-Draft   IPv6 Site Renumbering Gap Analysis     September 2012 
    

    

1. Introduction 

   As introduced in [RFC5887], renumbering, especially for medium to 
   large sites and networks, is currently viewed as an expensive, 
   painful, and error-prone process, avoided by network managers as much 
   as possible. If IPv6 site renumbering continues to be considered 
   difficult, network managers will turn to Provider Independent (PI) 
   addressing for IPv6 to attempt to minimize the need for future 
   renumbering. However, widespread use of PI may create very serious 
   BGP4 scaling problems. It is thus desirable to develop tools and 
   practices that may make renumbering a simpler process to reduce 
   demand for IPv6 PI space. 

   This document performs a gap analysis to provide a basis for future 
   work to identify and develop solutions or to stimulate such 
   development as appropriate. The gap analysis is organized by the main 
   steps of a renumbering process, which include prefix management, node 
   address (re)configuration, and updating address-relevant entries in 
   various devices such as firewalls, routers and servers, etc. Besides 
   these steps, the aspect of renumbering event management is also 
   presented independently, which intends to identify some 
   operational/administrative gaps in renumbering.  

   This document starts from existing work in [RFC5887],  
   [I-D.chown-v6ops-renumber-thinkabout] and [RFC4192]. This document 
   does further analysis and identifies the valuable and solvable  
   issues, digs out of some undiscovered gaps, and gives some solution 
   suggestions. 

2. Overall Requirements for Renumbering 

   This section introduces the overall ultimate goals we want to achieve 
   in a renumbering event. In general, we need to leverage renumbering 
   automation to avoid human intervention as much as possible at 
   reasonable cost. Some existing mechanisms have already provided 
   useful ability. Further efforts may be achieved in the future. 

   The automation can be divided into four aspects as follows. 

   o Prefix delegation and delivery should be automatic and accurate in 
      aggregation and coordination. 

   o Address reconfiguration should be automatically achieved through 
      standard protocols with minimum human intervention. 

 
 
Liu, et al.            Expires March 04, 2013                 [Page 4] 

Internet-Draft   IPv6 Site Renumbering Gap Analysis     September 2012 
    

   o Address-relevant entry updates should be performed integrally and 
      without error.  

   o Renumbering event management is needed to provide the functions of 
      renumbering notification, synchronization, and monitoring .etc. 

   Besides automation, session survivability is another important issue 
   during renumbering since application outage is one of the most 
   obvious impacts that make renumbering painful and expensive. Session 
   survivability is a fundamental issue that cannot solved within 
   renumbering context only, however, we have an enormous advantage in 
   IPv6 which is the ability to overlap the old and new prefixes and to 
   use the address lifetime mechanisms in SLAAC and DHCPv6. That is 
   fully described in [RFC4192], which provides a smooth transition 
   mechanism from old to new prefixes. In most of the cases, since we 
   can set the transition period long enough to cover the on-going 
   sessions, we consider this mechanism is sufficient for avoiding 
   session brokenness issue in IPv6 site renumbering.  

3. Existing Components for IPv6 Renumbering 

   Since renumbering is not a new issue, some protocols/mechanisms have 
   been already utilized for renumbering. And there were also some 
   dedicated protocols/mechanisms developed for renumbering. This 
   section briefly reviews these existing protocols/mechanisms to 
   provide a basis for the gap analysis.     

3.1. Relevant Protocols and Mechanisms 

   o RA messages, defined in [RFC4861], are used to deprecate/announce 
      old/new prefixes and to advertise the availability of an upstream 
      router. In renumbering, it is one of the basic mechanisms for host 
      configuration. 

   o When renumbering a host, SLAAC [RFC4862] may be used for address 
      configuration with the new prefix(es). Hosts receive RA messages 
      which contain routable prefix(es) and the address(es) of the 
      default router(s), then hosts can generate IPv6 address(es) by 
      themselves.  

   o Hosts that are configured through DHCPv6 [RFC3315] can reconfigure 
      addresses by initialing RENEW sessions when the current addresses' 
      lease time are expired or they receive the reconfiguration 
      messages initiated by the DHCPv6 servers. 

   o DHCPv6-PD (Prefix Delegation) [RFC3633] enables automated 
      delegation of IPv6 prefixes using the DHCPv6.  
 
 
Liu, et al.            Expires March 04, 2013                 [Page 5] 

Internet-Draft   IPv6 Site Renumbering Gap Analysis     September 2012 
    

   o [RFC2894] defined standard ICMPv6 messages for router renumbering. 
      This is a dedicated protocol for renumbering, but has not been 
      widely used.  

3.2. Management Tools 

   Some operations of renumbering could be automatically processed by 
   management tools in order to make the renumbering process more 
   efficient and accurate. The tools may be designed dedicated for 
   renumbering or just common tools could be utilized for some of the 
   renumbering operations. 

   Following are samples of the tools. 

   o IPAM (IP address management) tools. There are both commercial and 
      open-source solutions.  
      IPAM is basically used for IP address plan, and integrates the 
      DHCPv6 and DNS services together as a whole solution. Many mature 
      commercial tools can even trace the management operations. But 
      normally they don't have dedicated renumbering functions. However, 
      the integrated DNS/DHCPv6 services and management operation trace 
      function can obviously facility renumbering process. 

   o [LEROY] proposed a mechanism of macros to automatically update the 
      address-relevant entries/configurations inside the DNS, firewall, 
      etc. The macros can be delivered though SOAP protocol from a 
      network management server to the managed devices. 

   o Asset management tools/systems. These tools may provide the 
      ability of managing configuration files in nodes so that it is 
      convenient to update the address-relevant configuration in these 
      nodes. 

3.3. Procedures/Policies 

   o [RFC4192] proposed a procedure for renumbering an IPv6 network 
      without a flag day. The document includes a set of operational 
      suggestions which can be followed step by step by network 
      administrators.  

   o [I-D.ietf-6renum-enterprise] analyzes the enterprise renumbering 
      events and gives the recommendations among the existing 
      renumbering mechanisms. According to the different stages, 
      renumbering considerations are described in three categories: 
      considerations and recommendations during network design, for 
      preparation of enterprise network renumbering, and during 
      renumbering operation 
 
 
Liu, et al.            Expires March 04, 2013                 [Page 6] 

Internet-Draft   IPv6 Site Renumbering Gap Analysis     September 2012 
    

4. Managing Prefixes 

   When renumbering an enterprise site, a short prefix may be divided 
   into longer prefixes for subnets. So we need to carefully manage the 
   prefixes for prefix delivery, delegation, aggregation, 
   synchronization, coordination, etc. 

4.1. Prefix Delegation 

   Usually, the short prefix(es) come down from the operator(s) and 
   received by DHCPv6 servers or routers inside the enterprise networks. 
   The short prefix(es) could be automatically delegated through  
   DHCPv6-PD. Then the downlink DHCPv6 servers or routers can begin 
   advertising the longer prefixes to the subnets. 

   For the delegation routers, they may need to renumber themselves with 
   the delegated prefixes. We need to consider the router renumbering 
   issue which cannot be covered by DHCP-PD only. 

4.2. Prefix Assignment 

   When subnet routers receive the longer prefixes, they can directly 
   assign them to the hosts. The prefix assignment overlaps with the 
   host address configuration, which is described in the following 
   section 5.1. 

5. Address Configuration 

5.1. Host Address Configuration 

   o SLAAC/DHCPv6 co-existence 

        Both of the DHCPv6 and ND protocols have IP address 
        configuration function. They are suitable for different 
        scenarios respectively. During renumbering, the SLAAC-configured 
        hosts can reconfigure IP addresses by receiving ND Router 
        Advertisement (RA) messages containing new prefix information 
        (It should be noted that, the prefix delivery could be achieved 
        through DHCPv6 according to the new IETF DHC WG document 
        [I.D ietf-dhc-host-gen-id]). The DHCPv6-configured hosts can 
        reconfigure addresses by initiating RENEW sessions when the 
        current addresses' lease time are expired or receiving the 
        reconfiguration messages initiated by the DHCPv6 servers. 

        Sometimes the two address configuration modes may be both 
        available in one network. This would add more or less additional 
        complexity for both the hosts and the network management. In ND 
 
 
Liu, et al.            Expires March 04, 2013                 [Page 7] 

Internet-Draft   IPv6 Site Renumbering Gap Analysis     September 2012 
    

        protocol, there is an M (ManagedFlag) flag defined in RA  
        message, which indicates the hosts the DHCPv6 service status in 
        the network. And there is another O "OtherConfigFlag" flag 
        indicates the host to configure information such as DNS/routing 
        other than addresses.  

        So with using the flags, the two separated address configuration 
        modes are somehow correlated. But for some reasons, the ND 
        protocol didn't define the flags as prescriptive but only 
        advisory. This varies the behavior of hosts when interpreting 
        the M flag. Different operating systems had followed different 
        manners [I-D.liu-6renum-dhcpv6-slaac-switching]. 

        The impact of ambiguous M/O flags mainly includes the following 
        aspects:  

        - SLAAC/DHCPv6 preference 

          Ideally, it should be able to choose either SLAAC or DHCPv6 as 
          the default address configuration mechanism when a host gets 
          online. But it is not always available in reality. On some 
          current operating systems, DHCPv6 procedure won't start until 
          they receive RA messages with M=1. This has an implication 
          that RA messages are required for DHCPv6 management. This may 
          cause operational issues since it needs additional complexity 
          of ND/DHCPv6 co-existence unified management in a network. 

        - DHCPv6-configured hosts receiving RA messages 

          It is unclear that whether a DHCPv6 configured host would 
          accept configuration though RA messages, it depends on the 
          policies in the host's operating system. If it ignores the RA 
          messages and there are no DHCPv6 reconfiguration messages 
          received either, the renumbering would fail.  

          [RFC5887] mentioned that, DHCPv6-configured hosts may want to 
          learn about the upstream availability of new prefixes or loss 
          of prior prefixes dynamically by deducing from periodic RA 
          messages. But there is no standard specifying what approach 
          should be taken by a DHCPv6-configured host when it receives 
          RA messages containing new prefix. It depends on the operation 
          system of the host and cannot be predicted or controlled by 
          the network.  

        -  SLAAC-configured hosts finding DHCPv6 in use 


 
 
Liu, et al.            Expires March 04, 2013                 [Page 8] 

Internet-Draft   IPv6 Site Renumbering Gap Analysis     September 2012 
    

          It is unspecified what behavior should be taken when the host 
          receives RA messages with "M" set.  

          The host may start a DHCPv6 session and receives the DHCPv6 
          address configuration, or it just ignores the messages. If the 
          network side wants the hosts to start DHCPv6 configuration, it 
          is just out of control of the network side.  

   o DHCPv6 reconfigure bulk usage 

        [RFC5887] mentioned that "DHCPv6 reconfiguration doesn't appear 
        to be widely used for bulk renumbering purposes".  

        The reconfiguration defined in [RFC3315] needs to establish a 
        session between DHCPv6 server and client. This could be 
        considered as a stateful approach which needs much resource on 
        the server to maintain the renumbering sessions. This is 
        probably one of the reasons that DHCPv6 reconfiguration is not 
        suitable for bulk usage.  

        Another limitation of DHCPv6 reconfiguration is that it only 
        allows the messages to be delivered to unicast addresses. So if 
        we want to use it for bulk renumbering, stateless DHCPv6 
        reconfiguration with multicast may be needed. However, this may 
        involve protocol modification.   
         

5.2. Router Address Configuration 

   o Learning new prefixes 

        As described in [RFC5887], "if a site wanted to be multihomed 
        using multiple provider-aggregated (PA) routing prefixes with 
        one prefix per upstream provider, then the interior routers 
        would need a mechanism to learn which upstream providers and 
        prefixes were currently reachable (and valid).  In this case, 
        their Router Advertisement messages could be updated dynamically 
        to only advertise currently valid routing prefixes to hosts.  
        This would be significantly more complicated if the various 
        provider prefixes were of different lengths or if the site had 
        non-uniform subnet prefix lengths." 

   o Restart after renumbering 

        As [RFC2072] mentioned, some routers cache IP addresses in some 
        situations, so routers might need to be restarted as a result of 
        site renumbering.  
 
 
Liu, et al.            Expires March 04, 2013                 [Page 9] 

Internet-Draft   IPv6 Site Renumbering Gap Analysis     September 2012 
    

   o Router naming 

        In [RFC4192], it is suggested that "To better support 
        renumbering, switches and routers should use domain names for 
        configuration wherever appropriate, and they should resolve 
        those names using the DNS when the lifetime on the name 
        expires."  
        As [RFC5887] described, this capability is not new, and at least 
        it is present in most IPSec VPN implementations. But many 
        administrators do not realize that it could be utilized to avoid 
        manual modification during renumbering.  

        In enterprise scenario, the requirement of router naming is not 
        as strong as that in ISP. So for the administrators, the 
        motivation of using router naming for easing renumbering may be 
        not strong. 

5.3. Static Address Configuration 

   There is another draft dedicated to the static address issue. Please 
   refer to [I-D.ietf-6renum-static-problem]. 

6. Updating Address-relevant Entries  

   When nodes in a site have been renumbered, then all the entries in 
   the site which contain the nodes' addresses must be updated. The 
   entries mainly include DNS records and filters in various entities 
   such as ACLs in firewalls/gateways.  

6.1. DNS Records Update 

   o Dynamic DNS update 

        For DNS records update, the most popular DNS system BIND will 
        achieve it by maintaining a DNS zone file and loading this file 
        into the site's DNS server(s). Synchronization between host 
        renumbering and the updating of its A6 or AAAA record is hard. 
        [RFC5887] mentioned that an alternative is to use Secure Dynamic 
        DNS Update [RFC3007], in which a host informs its own DNS server 
        when it receives a new address.  

        Secure Dynamic DNS Update has been widely supported by the major 
        DNS systems, but it hasn't been widely deployed, especially in 
        the host. Current practices mainly involve the DHCP servers 
        which act as clients to request the DNS server to update 
        relevant records. Normal hosts are not suitable to do this 
        mainly because of the complexity of key management issues 
 
 
Liu, et al.            Expires March 04, 2013                [Page 10] 

Internet-Draft   IPv6 Site Renumbering Gap Analysis     September 2012 
    

        inherited from secure DNS mechanisms. But for some commercial 
        DNS systems, the Secure Dynamic DNS Update issue may be much 
        easier, since it could be integrated with services like DHCP 
        provided by the same vendor so that the dynamic DNS update could 
        be silently enabled. 

6.2. In-host Server Address Update 

   While DNS records addresses of hosts in servers, hosts also record 
   addresses of servers such as DNS server, radius server, etc. While 
   renumbering, the hosts must update the records if the server 
   addresses changed. Addresses of DHCPv6 servers do not need to be 
   updated. They are dynamically discovered using DHCPv6 relevant 
   multicast addresses. 

   o The DNS server addresses for hosts are configured by DHCPv6. But 
      current DHCPv6 messages do not indicate to hosts the lifetimes of 
      DNS. If the DNS lifetime expired and has been renumbered, the 
      hosts may still use the old addresses. DHCPv6 should be extended 
      to indicate to hosts the associated DNS lifetimes when making DNS 
      configuration. How the DHCP server could know about the DNS 
      lifetime is another issue. 

6.3. Filters 

   o Filters Management 

        Filters based on addresses or prefixes are usually spread in 
        various devices. As [RFC5887] described, some address 
        configuration data might be widely dispersed and much harder to 
        find, even will inevitably be found only after the renumbering 
        event. So there's a big gap for filter management. 

        In [LEROY], a server is used for managing filter update in 
        various devices. But identifying where and which of the filters 
        need to be updated during renumbering is still a gap.  

   o Filter Update Automation Operation 

        As mentioned in section 3.2, [LEROY] proposed a mechanism which 
        can automatically update the filters. The mechanism utilizes 
        macros suitable for various devices such as routers, firewalls 
        etc. to update the filter entries based on the new prefix. Such 
        automation tool is valuable for renumbering because it can 
        reduce manual operation which is error-prone and inefficiency. 


 
 
Liu, et al.            Expires March 04, 2013                [Page 11] 

Internet-Draft   IPv6 Site Renumbering Gap Analysis     September 2012 
    

        Besides the macros, [LEROY] also proposed to use SOAP to deliver 
        the macros to the devices. As well as SOAP we may consider 
        whether it is possible and suitable to use other standardized 
        protocols such as NETCONF.  

        Update of filters based on prefixes and filters based on 
        addresses may have different requirements and methods. Address-
        based filters may be mainly with regard to domain names while 
        prefix-based filters are relevant to more abstract entity (mask 
        e.g.). Thus, we may consider different ways to update the two 
        kinds of filters, for example, the prefix-based filters may 
        consider being updated though DHCPv6 servers, which may provide 
        better efficient. 

7. Renumbering Event Management 

   From the perspective of network management, renumbering is a kind of 
   event which may need additional process to make it more easy and 
   manageable.  

7.1. Renumbering Notification 

   If hosts or servers are aware of a renumbering event happening, it 
   may benefit the relevant process. Following are several examples of 
   such additional process that may ease the renumbering.  

   o A notification mechanism may be needed to indicate the hosts that 
      a renumbering event of local recursive DNS happens or is going to 
      take place. 

   o [RFC4192] suggests that "reducing the delay in the transition to 
      new IPv6 addresses applies when the DNS service can be given prior 
      notice about a renumbering event." Reducing delay could improve 
      the efficiency of renumbering. 

   o Router awareness: in a site with multiple border routers, all 
      border routers should be aware of partial renumbering in order to 
      correctly handle inbound packets. Internal forwarding tables need 
      to be updated. 

   o Border filtering: in a multihomed site, an egress router to ISP A 
      could normally filter packets with source addresses from other 
      ISPs. The egress router connecting to ISP A should be notified if 
      the egress router connecting to ISP B initiates a renumbering 
      event in order to properly update its filter function. 


 
 
Liu, et al.            Expires March 04, 2013                [Page 12] 

Internet-Draft   IPv6 Site Renumbering Gap Analysis     September 2012 
    

7.2. Synchronization Management 

   o DNS update synchronization 

        DNS update synchronization focuses on the coordinating between 
        DNS and other entities/mechanisms, for example, as described in 
        [RFC5887], synchronizing the SLAAC and DNS updates, and of 
        reducing the SLAAC lease time and DNS TTL.  

7.3. Renumbering Monitoring 

   While treating renumbering as a network event, mechanisms to monitor 
   the renumbering process may be needed. Considering the address 
   configuration operation may be stateless (if ND is used for 
   renumbering), it is difficult for monitoring. But for the DNS and 
   filter update, it is quite possible to monitor the whole process. 

8. Miscellaneous 

8.1. Multicast 

   Renumbering also has an impact on multicast. Renumbering of unicast 
   addresses affects multicast even if the multicast addresses are not 
   changed. There may also be cases where the multicast addresses need 
   to be renumbered. 

   o Renumbering of multicast sources 

        If a host that is a multicast source is renumbered, the 
        application on the host may need to be restarted for it to 
        successfully send packets with the new source address. 

        For ASM (Any-Source Multicast) the impact on a receiver is that 
        a new source appears to start sending, and it no longer receives 
        from the previous source. Whether this is an issue depends on 
        the application, but we believe it is likely to not be a major 
        issue. 

        For SSM (Source-Specific Multicast) however, there is one 
        significant problem. The receiver needs to learn which source 
        addresses it must join. Some applications may provide their own 
        method for learning sources, where the source application may 
        somehow signal the receiver. 

        Otherwise, the receiver may e.g. need to get new SDP information 
        with the new source address. This is similar to how to learn a 

 
 
Liu, et al.            Expires March 04, 2013                [Page 13] 

Internet-Draft   IPv6 Site Renumbering Gap Analysis     September 2012 
    

        new group address, see the "Renumbering of multicast addresses" 
        topic below. 

   o Renumbering of Rendezvous-Point 

        If the unicast addresses of routers in a network are renumbered, 
        then the RP (Rendezvous-Point) address is also likely to change 
        for at least some groups. An RP address is needed by PIM-SM for 
        providing ASM, and for Bidir PIM. Changing the RP address is not 
        a major issue, except that the multicast service may be impacted 
        while the new RP addresses are configured. If dynamic protocols 
        are used for distributing group-to-RP mappings, the change can 
        be fairly quick, and any impact should be only for a very brief 
        time. However, if routers are statically configured, this 
        depends on how long it takes to update all the configurations. 

        For PIM-SM one typically switches to SPT (Shortest-Path-Tree) 
        when the first packet is received by the last-hop routers. 
        Forwarding on the SPT should not be impacted by change of IP 
        address. Network operator should be careful not deprecate the 
        previous mapping before configuring a new one, because 
        implementations may revert to Dense Mode if no RP is configured. 

        The impact of this is minimal. The main concern is that while 
        the peering is unavailable, one may not receive updates about 
        new sources. 

        It may help to configure a new peering before taking down the 
        existing one. 

   o Renumbering of multicast addresses 

        In general multicast addresses can be chosen independently of 
        the unicast addresses, and the multicast addresses can remain 
        fixed even if the unicast addresses are renumbered. However, for 
        IPv6 there are useful ways of deriving multicast addresses from 
        unicast addresses, such as Unicast-Prefix-based IPv6 Multicast 
        Addresses [RFC3306] and Embedded-RP IPv6 Multicast Addresses 
        [RFC3956]. In that case the multicast addresses used may have to 
        be renumbered. 

        Renumbering group addresses may be complicated. For multicast, 
        it is common to use literal addresses, and not DNS. When 
        multicast addresses are changed, source applications need to be 
        reconfigured and restarted. 


 
 
Liu, et al.            Expires March 04, 2013                [Page 14] 

Internet-Draft   IPv6 Site Renumbering Gap Analysis     September 2012 
    

        Multicast receivers need to learn the new group addresses to 
        join. 

        Note that for SSM, receivers need to learn which multicast 
        channels to join. A channel is a source and group pair. This 
        means that for an SSM application, a change of source address is 
        likely to have the same effect as a change of group address. 

        Some applications may have dynamic methods of learning which 
        groups (and possibly sources) to join. If not, the application 
        may have to be reconfigured and restarted. 

        One common way for receivers to learn the necessary parameters 
        are by use of SDP. SDP information may be distributed via 
        various application protocols, or it may be from a file. An SDP 
        file may be distributed via HTTP, email etc. If a user is using 
        a web browser and clicking on a link to launch the application 
        with the necessary data, it may be a matter of closing the 
        current application, and re-clicking the link. 

8.2. Mobility 

   As [RFC5887] suggested, for Mobile IP, we need a better mechanism to 
   handle change of home agent address while mobile is disconnected. 

9. Gaps considered unsolvable 

   This section lists gaps have been documented but are considered 
   unsolvable or out of the scope of this document. 

9.1. Address Configuration 

   o RA prefix lifetime limitation 

        In section 5.5.3 of [RFC4862], it is defined that "If the 
        received Valid Lifetime is greater than 2 hours or greater than 
        RemainingLifetime, set the valid lifetime of the corresponding 
        address to the advertised Valid Lifetime." So when renumbering, 
        if the previous RemainingLifetime is longer than two hours, it 
        is impossible to reduce a prefix's lifetime less than two hours. 
        This limitation is to prevent denial-of-service attack. 
         

9.2. Address-relevant Entries Update 

   o DNS entries commonly have matching Reverse DNS entries which will 
      also need to be updated during renumbering.  
 
 
Liu, et al.            Expires March 04, 2013                [Page 15] 

Internet-Draft   IPv6 Site Renumbering Gap Analysis     September 2012 
    

   o DNS data structure optimization 

        [RFC2874] proposed a new A6 record type for DNS recording IPv6 
        address/prefix. And several extensions on query and processing 
        were also proposed. With the A6 record and the extensions, an 
        IPv6 address can be defined by using multiple DNS records. This 
        feature increases the complexity of resolver but reduce the cost 
        of zone file maintenance. So renumbering could be easier than 
        AAAA record. But the [RFC2874] has not been widely used, and 
        currently A6 is being discussed to be moved to historic status 
        [RFC6563]. 

   o DNS authority 

        As described in [I-D.chown-v6ops-renumber-thinkabout], "it is 
        often the case in enterprises that host web servers and 
        application servers on behalf of collaborators and customers 
        that DNS zones out of the administrative control of the host 
        maintain resource records concerning addresses for nodes out of 
        their control. When the service host renumbers, they do not have 
        sufficient authority to change the records. " 

        It is an operational and policy issue and this document 
        considers it not suitable to be solved through technical 
        approach or bring additional protocol/mechanism to standardize 
        the interaction between DNS systems for authority negotiations. 

9.3. Miscellaneous 

   o For transport layer, [RFC5887] said that TCP connections and UDP 
      flows are rigidly bound to a given pair of IP addresses. 

   o For application layer, as [RFC5887] said, in general, we can 
      assert that any implementation is at risk from renumbering if it 
      does not check that an address is valid each time it opens a new 
      communications session. 

10. Security Considerations 

   o Prefix Validation 

   Prefixes from the ISP may need authentication to prevent prefix  
   fraud. Announcing changes of site prefix to other sites (for example, 
   those that configure routers or VPNs to point to the site in  
   question) also need validation. 


 
 
Liu, et al.            Expires March 04, 2013                [Page 16] 

Internet-Draft   IPv6 Site Renumbering Gap Analysis     September 2012 
    

   In the LAN, Secure DHCPv6 ([I-D.ietf-dhc-secure-dhcpv6]) or SEND 
   ([RFC3971], SEcure Neighbor Discovery) deployment may need to 
   validate prefixes.                         

   o Influence to Security Controls 

   During renumbering, security controls (e.g. ACLs) blocking access to 
   legitimate resources should not be interrupted. 

11. IANA Considerations 

   This draft does not request any IANA action. 

12. Acknowledgments 

   This work adopts significant amounts of content from [RFC5887] and 
   [I-D.chown-v6ops-renumber-thinkabout], so thank for Randall Atkinson, 
   Hannu Flinck, Tim Chown, Mark Thompson, and Alan Ford. Some useful 
   materials were provided by Oliver Bonaventure and his student Damien 
   Leroy. 

   Many useful comments and contributions were made by Lee Howard, 
   Wesley George, and members of 6renum WG.  

   This document was prepared using 2-Word-v2.0.template.dot. 

    

13. References 

13.1. Normative References 

   [RFC2894] M. Crawford, "Router Renumbering for IPv6", RFC 2894, 
             August 2000. 

   [RFC2874] Crawford, M., and C. Huitema, "DNS Extensions to Support 
             IPv6 Address Aggregation and Renumbering", RFC 2874, July 
             2000. 

   [RFC3007] B. Wellington, "Secure Domain Name System (DNS) Dynamic 
             Update", RFC 3007, November 2000. 

   [RFC3315] R. Droms, Bound, J., Volz, B., Lemon, T., Perkins, C., and 
             M. Carney, "Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol for IPv6 
             (DHCPv6)", RFC 3315, July 2003. 


 
 
Liu, et al.            Expires March 04, 2013                [Page 17] 

Internet-Draft   IPv6 Site Renumbering Gap Analysis     September 2012 
    

   [RFC3633] Troan, O. and R. Droms, "IPv6 Prefix Options for Dynamic 
             Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP) version 6", RFC 3633, 
             December 2003. 

   [RFC3956] P. Savola, and B. Haberman. "Embedding the Rendezvous Point 
             (RP) Address in an IPv6 Multicast Address.", RFC 3956, 
             November 2004. 

   [RFC3971] Arkko, J., Ed., Kempf, J., Zill, B., and P. Nikander 
             "SEcure Neighbor Discovery (SEND)", RFC 3971, March 2005. 

   [RFC4861] Narten, T., Nordmark, E., Simpson, W., and H. Soliman, 
             "Neighbor Discovery for IP version 6 (IPv6)", RFC 
             4861,September 2007. 

   [RFC4862] Thomson, S., Narten, T., and T. Jinmei, "IPv6 Stateless 
             Address Autoconfiguration", RFC 4862, September 2007. 

13.2. Informative References 

   [RFC2072] H. Berkowitz, "Router Renumbering Guide", RFC2072, January 
             1997. 

   [RFC3306] B. Haberman, D. Thaler, "Unicast-Prefix-based IPv6 
             Multicast Addresses", RFC 3306, August 2002. 

   [RFC3956] P. Savola, B. Haberman, "Embedding the Rendezvous Point  
             (RP) Address in an IPv6 Multicast Address", RFC 3965, 
             November 2004. 

   [RFC4192] Baker, F., Lear, E., and R. Droms, "Procedures for 
             Renumbering an IPv6 Network without a Flag Day", RFC 4192, 
             September 2005. 

   [RFC5887] Carpenter, B., Atkinson, R., and H. Flinck, "Renumbering 
             Still Needs Work", RFC 5887, May 2010. 

   [RFC6563] Jiang, S., Conrad, D., and B. Carpenter, "Moving A6 to 
             Historic Status", RFC 6563, May 2012. 

   [I-D.ietf-dhc-secure-dhcpv6] 
             Jiang, S., and Shen S., "Secure DHCPv6 Using CGAs", working 
             in progress, March 2012. 




 
 
Liu, et al.            Expires March 04, 2013                [Page 18] 

Internet-Draft   IPv6 Site Renumbering Gap Analysis     September 2012 
    

   [I-D.ietf-6renum-enterprise] 
             Jiang, S., and B. Liu, "IPv6 Enterprise Network Renumbering 
             Scenarios and Guidelines ", Working in  
             Progress, July 2011. 

   [I-D.chown-v6ops-renumber-thinkabout] 
             Chown, T., "Things to think about when Renumbering an IPv6 
             network", Work in Progress, September 2006. 

   [I-D.ietf-6renum-static-problem] 
             Carpenter, B., and S. Jiang, "Problem Statement for 
             Renumbering IPv6 Hosts with Static Addresses", Working in 
             Progress, August 2012. 

   [I-D.liu-6renum-dhcpv6-slaac-switching] 
             Liu, B., "DHCPv6/SLAAC Address Configuration Switching for 
             Host Renumbering", Working in Progress, July 2012 

   [LEROY]  Leroy, D. and O. Bonaventure, "Preparing network 
             configurations for IPv6 renumbering", International of 
             Network Management, 2009, <http:// 
             inl.info.ucl.ac.be/system/files/dleroy-nem-2009.pdf> 
























 
 
Liu, et al.            Expires March 04, 2013                [Page 19] 

Internet-Draft   IPv6 Site Renumbering Gap Analysis     September 2012 
    

Authors' Addresses 

   Bing Liu 
   Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd 
   Q14, Huawei Campus 
   No.156 Beiqing Rd. 
   Hai-Dian District, Beijing  100095 
   P.R. China 
      
   Email: leo.liubing@huawei.com 
    
   Sheng Jiang 
   Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd 
   Q14, Huawei Campus 
   No.156 Beiqing Rd. 
   Hai-Dian District, Beijing  100095 
   P.R. China 
    
   Email: jiangsheng@huawei.com 
    
   Brian Carpenter 
   Department of Computer Science 
   University of Auckland 
   PB 92019 
   Auckland, 1142 
   New Zealand 
    
   EMail: brian.e.carpenter@gmail.com 
    
   Stig Venaas 
   Cisco Systems 
   Tasman Drive 
   San Jose, CA  95134 
   USA 
    
   Email: stig@cisco.com 










 
 
Liu, et al.            Expires March 04, 2013                [Page 20]