


Network Working Group                                            T. Hain
Internet-Draft                                             Cisco Systems
Intended status:  Standards Track                              R. Hinden
Expires:  April 28, 2010                                           Nokia
                                                               G. Huston
                                                                   APnic
                                                        October 25, 2009


     Centrally Assigned IPv6 Unicast Unique Local Address Prefixes
                        draft-hain-ipv6-ulac-01

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.  This document may contain material
   from IETF Documents or IETF Contributions published or made publicly
   available before November 10, 2008.  The person(s) controlling the
   copyright in some of this material may not have granted the IETF
   Trust the right to allow modifications of such material outside the
   IETF Standards Process.  Without obtaining an adequate license from
   the person(s) controlling the copyright in such materials, this
   document may not be modified outside the IETF Standards Process, and
   derivative works of it may not be created outside the IETF Standards
   Process, except to format it for publication as an RFC or to
   translate it into languages other than English.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 28, 2010.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2009 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the



Hain, et al.             Expires April 28, 2010                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                 IPv6 ULA-C                   October 2009


   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents in effect on the date of
   publication of this document (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info).
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.

Abstract

   This document defines Centrally Allocated IPv6 Unique Local address
   prefixes.  These prefixes are globally unique and are intended for
   local communications, usually within a single network administration.
   They are not intended to be used in place of Provider Independent
   (PI) address prefixes available from the Regional Internet Registries
   (RIR) <ref:  http://www.iana.org/numbers/ > , and should not appear
   in the global routing table for the Internet.

   The draft is being discussed on the ipv6@ietf.org list.

Legal

   This documents and the information contained therein are provided on
   an "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE
   REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE
   IETF TRUST AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL
   WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY
   WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION THEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE
   ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS
   FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.





















Hain, et al.             Expires April 28, 2010                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                 IPv6 ULA-C                   October 2009


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     1.1.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   2.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   3.  Centrally Assigned Local IPv6 Unicast Address prefixes . . . .  6
     3.1.  Format . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.2.  Global ID  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.3.  Sample Code for Pseudo-Random Global ID Algorithm  . . . .  8
   4.  Operational Guidelines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     4.1.  DNS Issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     4.2.  Routing Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
       4.2.1.  From the standpoint of the Internet  . . . . . . . . .  9
       4.2.2.  From the Standpoint of a local network
               administrator  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   5.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   6.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   7.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   8.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     8.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     8.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12





























Hain, et al.             Expires April 28, 2010                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                 IPv6 ULA-C                   October 2009


1.  Introduction

   This document defines the characteristics, technical allocation and
   registration requirements for Centrally Assigned Local IPv6 addresses
   in the framework defined in [ULA].  There are organizations looking
   for address space that is independent of the ranges used for public
   Internet routing, yet they also need the uniqueness of central
   allocation which the locally assigned ULA block cannot provide.  A
   stumbling block in earlier attempts at defining the Centrally
   Allocated portion of the ULA prefix range (ULA-C) was the lack of
   public policy at the RIR's for organizations to acquire PI address
   prefixes, so the ULA-C effort was seen as an end-run around the
   public policy process.  As the ability to acquire PI space is now
   resolved by allocation policy, it is time to resurrect the definition
   for the lower half of the ULA prefix range.  The requirements to
   register a ULA-C prefix should be much less stringent than the
   requirements to acquire a PI prefix, but for the sake of policy
   continuity it makes sense for the RIR's to collectively manage this
   registry under IANA's authority.[NUMBERS]

   In any case, the prefixes defined here are not expected to appear in
   the routing system for the global Internet.  The appropriate use of
   these prefixes is within a single network administration, or between
   privately interconnected networks that want to ensure that private
   communications do not accidentally get routed over the public
   Internet.

   Centrally registered Local IPv6 unicast addresses have the following
   characteristics:

   - Globally unique prefix.
   - Well known designator prefix to allow for easy filtering at
     administrative boundaries.
   - Allows sites to be combined or privately interconnected without
     creating any address conflicts or requiring renumbering of
     interfaces.
   - Internet Service Provider independent and can be used for
     communications inside of a private network where public Internet
     connectivity is intermittent or not available.
   - If accidentally leaked outside of a private network via routing
     or DNS, there is no conflict with any other addresses.
   - In practice, applications may treat these addresses like global
     scoped addresses.

   Topics that are general to all Local IPv6 address can be found in the
   following sections of [ULA]:





Hain, et al.             Expires April 28, 2010                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                 IPv6 ULA-C                   October 2009


         3.3 Scope Definition
         4.0 Operational Guidelines **
         4.1 Routing
         4.2 Renumbering and Site Merging
         4.3 Site Border Router and Firewall Packet Filtering
         4.5 Application and Higher Level Protocol Issues
         4.6 Use of Local IPv6 Addresses for Local Communications
         4.7 Use of Local IPv6 Addresses with VPNs
         6.0 Advantages and Disadvantages
   ** Operational guidelines specific to centrally assigned Local IPv6
   addresses are in Section 4.0 of this document.

   Where the Unique Local Address prefixes defined in [ULA]were
   probabilistically unique, the major difference between those and the
   Centrally Allocated local address prefixes defined in this document
   is that the ULA-C prefixes are registered and verified unique before
   allocation, with the registrations escrowed to resolve any disputes
   regarding duplicate allocations.

   It is expected that network administrators of larger organizations,
   or those with business practice or governmental requirements to avoid
   conflict in future mergers or acquisitions will prefer central
   allocations, while most small or disconnected organizations will
   prefer local allocations.  It is recommended that network
   administrations which are planning to use Local IPv6 address
   prefixes, for extensive inter-site communication over a long period
   of time, use a Centrally Allocated prefix as there is no possibility
   of allocation conflicts when interconnecting or merging networks.
   Individual administrations are free to choose either approach, and in
   fact may choose both, with a Centrally Allocated prefix for their
   production networks while using locally allocated prefixes in their
   experimental or lab networks.

1.1.  Acknowledgements

   Robert Hinden and Brian Haberman attempted a version of this
   specification between 2002 & 2005, followed by another attempt by
   Geoff Huston and Thomas Narten in 2007.  Both of those drafts were
   significant resources for much of the text used in developing this
   document, as those included comments from Alan Beard, Alex Zinin,
   Brian Carpenter, Charlie Perkins, Christian Huitema, Hans Kruse,
   Harald Alvestrand, Keith Moore, Leslie Daigle, Margaret Wasserman,
   Pekka Savola, Shannon Behrens, Steve Bellovin, Tim Chown, and Bill
   Fenner.  Additional comments to this document were provided by ...







Hain, et al.             Expires April 28, 2010                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                 IPv6 ULA-C                   October 2009


2.  Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119] .


3.  Centrally Assigned Local IPv6 Unicast Address prefixes

3.1.  Format

   The Centrally assigned Local IPv6 addresses, based on Unique Local
   Addresses [ULA], have the following format:

   | 7 bits |1|  40 bits   |  16 bits  |          64 bits            |
   +--------+-+------------+-----------+-----------------------------+
   | Prefix |L| Global ID  | Subnet ID |        Interface ID         |
   +--------+-+------------+-----------+-----------------------------+

      Where:

         Prefix         FC00::/7 prefix to identify Local IPv6 unicast
                        addresses.

         L              Set to 1 if the prefix is locally assigned,
                        Set to 0 if it is centrally assigned.

         Global ID      40-bit global identifier used to create a
                        globally unique prefix.

         Subnet ID      16-bit Subnet ID is an identifier of a subnet
                        within the site.

         Interface ID   64-bit Interface ID as defined in [ADDARCH].



   NOTE:  This document defines the allocation and registration
   procedure for creating global- IDs for Centrally Allocated local IPv6
   address prefixes (L=0 ; FC00::/8).  The allocation procedure for
   locally allocated local IPv6 address prefixes (L=1 ; FD00::/8) is
   defined in [ULA].

3.2.  Global ID

   The allocation of Global IDs should be pseudo-random [RANDOM].  They
   MUST NOT be allocated sequentially, or with well known numbers as a
   vanity prefix, or by locality.  This is to ensure that there is not



Hain, et al.             Expires April 28, 2010                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                 IPv6 ULA-C                   October 2009


   any relationship between allocations and to help clarify that these
   prefixes are not intended to be routed globally in the public
   Internet.  Specifically, these prefixes are designed to not aggregate
   between customers of a service provider, but for the sake of internal
   routing management and subnet alignment with PI or PA prefix, a
   single organization may be allocated a single aggregated set (single
   prefix between ::/44 & ::/48), but this ULA-C set is still not
   routable across the public Internet.

   Global IDs should be allocated under a single allocation and
   registration authority because they are pseudo-random and without any
   structure.  This is easiest to accomplish if there is a single
   authority, though there may be multiple organizations handling the
   actual registration of allocations through a common procedure.  It
   also makes sense from a policy consistency perspective for the single
   authority to be the same as the one for managing public IPv6
   prefixes.

   The requirements for ULA-C allocation and registrations are:

   - Available to anyone in an unbiased manner.
   - Globally Unique.
   - When justified, available as a single prefix between /44 - /48.

   The allocation and registration authority should permit allocations
   to be obtained without having any sort of Internet connectivity and
   must include the ability to make an allocation on a permanent basis,
   without any need for renewal.  The registration authority may covers
   its costs through registration fees and may also use registration
   agreements to clearly set forth the terms conditions and liabilities
   associated with registration of such allocations.  The payments and
   conditions associated with this function should not be unreasonably
   onerous to the extent that the availability of allocations is
   impaired.

   The allocation and registration authority should include sufficient
   provisions to mitigate attempts to artificially reduce the number
   pool through hoarding of prefixes.  The actual mechanisms are beyond
   the scope of this document, but can be accomplished in various ways.
   These mechanisms should not include onerous provisions that reduce
   the intent that these allocations should be available to anyone in an
   unbiased manner, and should not attempt to perform rationing or
   impose quotas upon individual allocations, but may restrict the
   allocation of an aggregated set based on demonstrated need to align
   with other PI or PA allocations.

   The registration of centrally assigned ULAs should be available in a
   public database.  This function should support a query of a specific



Hain, et al.             Expires April 28, 2010                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                 IPv6 ULA-C                   October 2009


   ULA prefix and then return the registrant's provided detail.
   Information should be provided in a robust fashion, consistent with
   the current state of similar registration services provided by
   address and domain name registration authorities.

3.3.  Sample Code for Pseudo-Random Global ID Algorithm

   The algorithm described below is essentially the same as that for
   locally assigned [ULA], with the L bit set to 0, and the additional
   step of verifying global uniqueness before allocation.

   1) Obtain the current time of day in 64-bit NTP format [NTP].
   2) Obtain an EUI-64 identifier from the system running this
      algorithm.  If an EUI-64 does not exist, one can be created from
      a 48-bit MAC address as specified in [ADDARCH].  If an EUI-64
      cannot be obtained or created, a suitably unique identifier,
      local to the node, should be used (system serial number).
   3) Concatenate the time of day with the system-specific identifier
      creating a key.
   4) Compute an SHA-1 digest on the key as specified in [FIPS, SHA1];
      the resulting value is 160 bits.
   5) Use the least significant 40 bits as the Global ID.
   6) Concatenate FC00::/7, the L bit set to 0, and the 40 bit
      Global ID to create a centrally assigned Local IPv6 address
      prefix.
   7) Verify that the computed prefix is not in the escrow.  If it is,
      discard the value and rerun the algorithm.

   [note:  in the case where a prefix shorter than /48 is required, at
   step 5 zero the low order bits as needed (up to 4 bits), at step 7
   verify all of the contained Global IDs are available, then register
   all of the contained /48 values to the same administrative
   organization.]

   This algorithm will result in a Global ID that is unique, and after
   verification that it is not already registered it can be used as a
   centrally assigned local IPv6 address prefix.


4.  Operational Guidelines

4.1.  DNS Issues

   Given their inherent uniqueness, AAAA and PTR records for centrally
   assigned local IPv6 addresses may be installed and appear in the
   global DNS.  This may be useful if these addresses are being used for
   site to site or VPN style applications, or for sites that wish to
   avoid separate or split-DNS systems for inside and outside traffic.



Hain, et al.             Expires April 28, 2010                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                 IPv6 ULA-C                   October 2009


   Any operational issues relating to this are beyond the scope of this
   document.

4.2.  Routing Considerations

   Section 4.1 of [ULA]provides operational guidelines that inhibit
   default routing of local addresses between sites.  During the initial
   attempts at defining the ULA-C space, concerns were raised to the
   IPv6 working group and to the IETF as a whole that lacking an
   alternative, sites would attempt to use local address prefixes as
   globally routed, provider-independent (PI) prefixes.  Subsequent
   policy changes have mitigated these concerns by allowing for PI
   allocations.  This section describes why using local addresses in
   place of PI prefixes is unadvisable, and why existing RIR mechanisms
   for acquiring PI prefix blocks should be used instead.

4.2.1.  From the standpoint of the Internet

   IPv6 unicast addresses are designed to be routed hierarchically down
   to physical subnet (link) level and only have to be flat-routed
   within the physical subnet prefix.  Attempting to use IPv6 local
   address prefixes publicly would result in them being flat-routed over
   the wide area Internet, and thus a larger routing table.  This
   contravenes the operational assumption that for global public
   routing, long prefixes will be aggregated into fewer short prefixes
   to limit the table size and convergence time of the routing protocol.

   Collecting all local-use prefixes under one short designator prefix
   (FC00::/7) simplifies the development and maintenance of bogon route
   filters.  Given that everything registered under the procedures
   defined in this document are intended for local, non-public use only,
   it is expected to be common practice for all public service providers
   to filter any prefixes within the entire ULA range (both centrally
   registered and locally defined), and remove them from the public
   global routing table.  The alternative would be to enumerate every
   prefix that should not be publicly routed, and then hope that there
   are no operational errors that inadvertently allow a private prefix
   to be propagated publically.

   Entities wishing to use IPv6 Provider Independent Addresses (PI
   Space) in such larger routing contexts should consult the Regional
   Internet Registries policies relating to the allocation of PI Space
   [RIR-PI].

4.2.2.  From the Standpoint of a local network administrator

   The operational guidelines regarding routing of centrally allocated
   local addresses is that such address prefixes should be readily



Hain, et al.             Expires April 28, 2010                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft                 IPv6 ULA-C                   October 2009


   routed within a site or comparable administrative routing domain.

   By default, such prefixes should not be announced beyond such a local
   scope, due to the non-aggregateability of these prefixes within the
   global routing system and the potential negative impact on the total
   size of the routing space in large scale Internet environments.


5.  IANA Considerations

   The IANA is instructed to designate an allocation authority, based on
   instructions from the IAB, for centrally assigned Unique Local IPv6
   unicast address prefixes.  This allocation authority shall comply
   with the requirements described in Section 3.2 of this document,
   including in particular allocation on a permanent basis and with
   sufficient provisions to avoid hoarding of numbers.  The IAB MAY
   instruct IANA to designate itself as the allocation and registration
   authority, and IANA in turn MAY choose to delegate the day-to-day
   operational functions to the same organizations that handle publicly
   routed prefixes to maintain consistency between allocation policies.

   The designated allocation authority is required to document how they
   will meet the requirements described in Section 3.2 of this document
   in an RFC, which will be shepherd through the IETF by the IAB.


6.  Security Considerations

   Local IPv6 address prefixes do not provide any inherent security to
   the nodes that use them.  They may be used with filters at site
   boundaries to keep Local IPv6 traffic inside of the site, but this is
   no more or less secure than filtering any other type of global IPv6
   unicast address prefixes.

   They should be filtered by public network operators to ensure that
   publicly routed prefixes are publicly documented, but beyond
   accountability there is no security aspect related to propagating the
   route.  On the other hand, the lack of a public routing entry is
   considered by many to be one layer in a defense-in-depth strategy, so
   widespread practice of filtering the entire ULA prefix range would
   automatically provide that layer even for sites that don't implement
   an explicit filter of their own.

   Local IPv6 address prefixes do allow for address-based security
   mechanisms, including IPSEC, across end to end VPN connections or
   other private interconnects.





Hain, et al.             Expires April 28, 2010                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft                 IPv6 ULA-C                   October 2009


7.  IANA Considerations

   The IAB is expected to instruct IANA to designate an allocation
   authority for Centrally Allocated Unique Local IPv6 unicast address
   prefixes.  This allocation authority shall comply with the
   requirements described in Section 3.2 of this document, including in
   particular allocation on a permanent basis and with sufficient
   provisions to avoid hoarding of numbers.  The IAB MAY instruct IANA
   to designate itself as the allocation and registration authority, and
   IANA in turn MAY choose to delegate the day-to-day operational
   functions to the same organizations that handle publicly routed
   prefixes to maintain consistency between allocation policies.

   The designated allocation authority is required to document how they
   will meet the requirements described in Section 3.2 of this document
   in an RFC, which will be shepherd through the IETF by the IAB.


8.  References

8.1.  Normative References

   [ADDARCH]  Hinden, R. and S. Deering, "Internet Protocol Version 6
              (IPv6) Addressing Architecture", RFC 3513, April 2003.

   [FIPS]     National Institute of Standards and Technology, "Secure
              Hash Standard", FIPS PUB 180-1, April 1995,
              <http://www.itl.nist.gov/fipspubs/fip180-1.htm>.

   [GLOBAL]   Hinden, R., Deering, S., and E. Nordmark, "IPv6 Global
              Unicast Address Format", RFC 3587, August 2003.

   [ICMPv6]   Conta, A., Deering, S., and M. Gupta, "Internet Control
              Message Protocol (ICMPv6) for the Internet Protocol
              Version 6 (IPv6) Specification", RFC 4443, March 2006.

   [IPv6]     Deering, S. and R. Hinden, "Internet Protocol, Version 6
              (IPv6) Specification", RFC 2460, December 1998.

   [NTP]      Mills, D., "Network Time Protocol (Version 3)
              Specification, Implementation", RFC 1305, March 1992.

   [RANDOM]   Eastlake, D., Schiller, J., and S. Crocker, "Randomness
              Requirements for Security", BCP 106, RFC 4086, June 2005.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.




Hain, et al.             Expires April 28, 2010                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft                 IPv6 ULA-C                   October 2009


   [SHA1]     Eastlake, D. and P. Jones, "US Secure Hash Algorithm 1
              (SHA1)", RFC 3174, September 2001.

   [ULA]      Hinden, R. and B. Haberman, "Unique Local IPv6 Unicast
              Addresses", RFC 4193, October 2005.

8.2.  Informative References

   [NUMBERS]  "IANA Numbers Authority", <http://www.iana.org/numbers/>.


Authors' Addresses

   Tony Hain
   Cisco Systems
   500 108th Ave NE
   Bellevue, WA  98004
   USA

   Phone:  +1 425 468-1061
   Email:  alh-ietf@tndh.net


   Robert Hinden
   Nokia
   313 Fairchild Drive
   Mountain View, Ca  94043
   USA

   Phone:  +1 650 625 2400
   Email:  bob.hinden@nokia.com


   Geoff Huston
   APnic
   AU

   Phone:
   Email:  gih@apnic.net












Hain, et al.             Expires April 28, 2010                [Page 12]


