



DANE                                                         V. Dukhovni
Internet-Draft                                              Unaffiliated
Intended status: Experimental                               May 18, 2013
Expires: November 19, 2013


                SMTP security via opportunistic DANE TLS
                draft-dukhovni-smtp-opportunistic-tls-00

Abstract

   This memo describes an experimental protocol for opportunistic TLS
   security based on the DANE TLSA PKI.  The design goal is an
   incremental transition of the Internet email backbone (MTA to MTA
   SMTP traffic) from today's unauthenticated and typically unencrypted
   connections to TLS encrypted and authenticated delivery when the
   client is DANE TLSA aware and the server domain publishes DANE TLSA
   records for its MX hosts.  This protocol has been implemented by
   author in the Postfix MTA.  It is hoped that other MTA
   implementations will find this protocol well suited to their needs
   and will adopt interoperable implementations.  This protocol may be
   suited to other use-cases for opportunistic TLS beyond SMTP, but such
   use-cases are not covered here, and will need to be defined in
   separate specifications.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on November 19, 2013.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.





Dukhovni               Expires November 19, 2013                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft  SMTP security via opportunistic DANE TLS        May 2013


   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
     1.1.  Background  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
     1.2.  SMTP Channel Security . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     1.3.  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   2.  Opportunistic TLS discovery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   3.  Locating TLSA records . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   4.  PKIX certificate usages . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     4.1.  Certificate usage 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     4.2.  Certificate usage 0 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   5.  Opportunistic TLS for Submission  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   6.  Hardening opportunistic DANE TLS  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   7.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   8.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   9.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13

1.  Introduction

1.1.  Background

   The Domain Name System Security Extensions (DNSSEC) add data origin
   authentication and data integrity to the Domain Name System.  DNSSEC
   is defined in [RFC4033], [RFC4034] and [RFC4035].

   As described in the introduction of [RFC6698] TLS authentication via
   the existing public CA PKI suffers from an over-abundance of trusted
   certificate authorities capable of issuing certificates for any
   domain of their choice.  DNS-Based Authentication of Named Entities
   (DANE) leverages the DNSSEC infrastructure to publish trusted keys
   and certificates for use with TLS via a new TLSA record type.  DNSSEC
   validated DANE TLSA records yield a new PKI designed to augment or
   replace the trust model of the existing public CA PKI.

   In the context of this memo channel security is assumed to be
   provided by TLS.  The Transport Layer Security (TLS) protocol
   provides communications privacy over the Internet.  Used without



Dukhovni               Expires November 19, 2013                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft  SMTP security via opportunistic DANE TLS        May 2013


   authentication, TLS provides protection only against eavesdropping.
   With authentication, TLS also provides protection against man-in-the-
   middle (MITM) attacks.  Since the publication of the TLS 1.0
   specification in [RFC2246], two updates to the protocol have been
   published: TLS 1.1 [RFC4346] and TLS 1.2 [RFC5246].

1.2.  SMTP Channel Security

   With SMTP neither the recipient address, nor the MX records directly
   imply or preclude delivery via TLS.  The same SMTP TCP endpoint can
   serve both TLS and non-TLS clients, with TLS negotiated via the SMTP
   STARTTLS command ([RFC3207]).

   An MTA may need to forward a message to a particular email recipient
   <user@example.com>.  To deliver the message the MTA needs to retrieve
   the MX hosts of example.com from DNS, and then deliver the message to
   one of these.  Absent DNSSEC the MX lookup is vulnerable to man-in-
   the-middle and cache poisoning attacks.  As a result, securing
   delivery by verifying the authenticity of the MX host is futile as
   the attacker can simply forge DNS replies.

   One might try to harden STARTTLS with SMTP against DNS attacks by
   requiring each MX host to posess an X.509 certificate for the
   recipient domain which is obtained from the message envelope and is
   not subject to DNS reply forgery.  Unfortunately, this is impractical
   as email for many domains is handled by third parties, which are not
   in a position to obtain certificates for all the domains they serve.
   Deployment of SNI (see [RFC3546] Section 3.1) is no panacea, since
   the key management is too difficult unless the email service provider
   is also the domain's registrar and its certificate issuer; this is
   rarely the case for email.

   A man-in-the-middle can also suppress the MX host's STARTTLS EHLO
   response.  Unless the sending MTA is statically configured to use TLS
   for mail sent to example.com, the message will be sent in the clear.
   Sender-side configuration of peer-domains for which TLS must be used,
   can protect an organization and a few of its business partners, but
   is not a viable approach to securing the Internet email backbone.













Dukhovni               Expires November 19, 2013                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft  SMTP security via opportunistic DANE TLS        May 2013


   Since with the existing public CA PKI neither the recipient domain,
   nor the MX hostname are suitable SMTP server authentication
   identities, large scale deployment of authenticated TLS based on this
   PKI is not possible in the context of MTA to MTA SMTP.  SMTP secure
   channels authenticated via the public CA PKI are used by a handful of
   domains that make bilateral arrangements with their business
   partners.  At this time, MTA to MTA traffic between Internet
   connected organizations typically does not use TLS at all, or uses
   TLS opportunistically without authentication, for protection only
   against passive eavesdropping.

   Note, the above is does not apply to submission [RFC6409], where a
   mail user agent is pre-configured to send all email to a fixed
   submission server.  Submission servers typically offer TLS and the
   MUA can be statically configured to use TLS with its submission
   server of choice.  The situation changes with (as yet not widely
   deployed) submission configured dynamically via SRV records (see
   [RFC6186] Section 6).  We'll discuss applications to submission via
   SRV records later in this memo.

   With no incentive to use the existing public CA PKI, MX hosts that
   support STARTTLS often use self-signed or private-CA issued X.509
   certificates, are not configured with a comprehensive list of trusted
   CAs and do not check CRLs or implement OCSP.  In essence they don't
   and can't use the existing public CA PKI.  This is not simply a
   result of complacency on the part SMTP server administrators and MTA
   developers.  Nor is it just a result of the relative maturity of the
   SMTP infrastructure (as compared to the then young HTTP) when TLS was
   introduced.  Rather, as we've explained, the use of DNS MX records in
   SMTP limits the use of public CA PKI with SMTP to a small set of
   sender-configured peer domains.

   This does not mean that the Internet email backbone cannot benefit
   from TLS.  The fact that transport security is not explicitly
   specified in either the recipient address or the MX record means that
   new protocols can furnish out-of-band information to SMTP, making it
   possible to discover both which peer domains support secure delivery
   via TLS and simultaneously how to verify the authenticity of the
   associated MX hosts.  The first such mechanism that can work an
   Internet scale is DANE TLSA, but use of DANE TLSA with MTA to MTA
   SMTP must be cognizant of the lack of any realistic role for the
   existing public CA PKI.









Dukhovni               Expires November 19, 2013                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft  SMTP security via opportunistic DANE TLS        May 2013


1.3.  Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].

2.  Opportunistic TLS discovery

   This section describes opportunistic TLS security, where traffic from
   DANE TLSA aware SMTP clients to domains that implement DANE TLSA
   records in accordance with this memo is secure, while traffic to
   other domains continues to be sent in the same manner as before.  It
   is hoped that over time more domains will implement DNSSEC and
   publish DANE TLSA records for their MX hosts.  This will enable an
   incremental transition of the email backbobe to authenticated TLS
   delivery.

   Since email addresses and MX hostnames (or submission SRV records)
   neither signal nor deny support for TLS by the receiving domain, it
   is possible to use DANE TLSA records to securely signal TLS support
   and simultaneously to provide the means by which SMTP clients can
   successfully authenticate legitimate SMTP servers.

   The following requirements suffice to enable secure opportunistic
   TLS:

   o  When in addition to the TLSA query made by the SMTP client, each
      DNSSEC lookup, (e.g.  MX, SRV or CNAME) used to obtain the TLSA
      base domain is DNSSEC validated, and at least one TLSA record is
      found (even if not usable) the client SHOULD assume the server to
      be TLS capable.

   o  When at least one usable TLSA record is found, the client SHOULD
      use TLSA records to authenticate the server, in which case the
      client MUST send the TLS SNI extension containing the TLSA base
      domain to elicit the correct certificate chain from the server.
      The client MUST NOT expect the server to confirm the extension.

   o  SMTP servers for which DANE TLSA records are published MUST
      support TLS 1.0 or later with any client authorized to use the
      service.

   o  Each SMTP server MUST present a certificate trust chain (see
      [RFC2246] Section 7.4.2) that matches at least one of the TLSA
      records.  The server MAY rely on SNI to determine which
      certificate chain to present to the client.  Clients that don't
      send SNI information may not see the expected certificate chain.




Dukhovni               Expires November 19, 2013                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft  SMTP security via opportunistic DANE TLS        May 2013


   o  If the server's TLSA RRset includes records with a matching type
      other than "0" (that is digest records), the SHA-256 digest of any
      object SHOULD be provided along with any other digest published,
      since clients may not support SHA-512.

   o  If the server's TLSA records match the server's default
      certificate chain, the server need not support SNI, and is need
      not acknowledge the extension, simply returning a matching
      certificate chain is sufficient.  Servers MUST NOT enforce the use
      of SNI by clients, if the client sends no SNI extension, or sends
      an SNI extension for an unsupported domain the server MUST simply
      use its default certificate chain.  The client may be using
      unauthenticated opportunistic TLS and may not expect any
      particular certificate from the server.

   o  The client may even even offer to use anonymous TLS ciphersuites
      and servers SHOULD support these, no security is gained by forcing
      the use of a certificate the client will ignore.  Indeed support
      for anonymous ciphersuites in the server makes audit trails more
      useful if the chosen ciphersuite is logged, as this will in many
      cases record which clients did not care to authenticate the
      server.  (The Postfix SMTP server supports anonymous TLS
      ciphersuites by default, and the Postfix SMTP client offers these
      at its highest preference when server authentication is not
      applicable).

   With other protocols where TLS is negotiated separately from the
   associated PKI (existing public CA vs.  DANE), servers need to be
   compatible with two different PKI systems mechanisms and clients need
   to be prepared for servers that may not fully support the PKI they
   intend to use.  In the protocol defined in this memo both the TLS
   support implied by the presence of DANE TLSA records and the
   verification parameters necessary to authenticate the TLS peer are
   obtained together, therefore authentication via this protocol is
   expected to be robust.

   When a server is assumed to support TLS, but all TLSA records are
   unusable, the client SHOULD either establish an unauthenticated TLS
   session or use any other sufficiently robust authentication mechanism
   at its disposal (possibly the existing public CA PKI).  A DANE-aware
   client SHOULD NOT make unecrypted connections to such a server.

   When usable TLSA records are available, a client SHOULD NOT make use
   of a server connection that fails to match at least one TLSA record.

   We say SHOULD not MUST in the case of the client, since clients may
   incrementally deploy opportunistic DANE TLS only for selected peer
   domains.  At times clients may need to disable opportunistic DANE TLS



Dukhovni               Expires November 19, 2013                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft  SMTP security via opportunistic DANE TLS        May 2013


   for peers that fail to interoperate due to misconfiguration or
   software defects on either end.  For opportunistc DANE TLS to be a
   robust protocol, servers MUST live up to their promises, but it is
   not possible to compel clients to use a security policy chosen by the
   server.  We assume instead that given a robust security protocol,
   clients will over time choose to adopt it.

3.  Locating TLSA records

   The party responsible for creating TLSA records for a given service
   MUST ensure that at least one of these TLSA records will match either
   the server's default certificate chain if SNI is not employed on the
   server, or the server's certificate chain when the client signals the
   base domain of the TLSA RRset via SNI and a name type of "host_name"
   ([RFC3546] Section 3.1).

   When, for example, the TLSA RRset is published at
   _25._tcp.mx1.example.com the base domain is mx1.example.com.  At
   least one of the TLSA records in the RRset MUST match the server
   certificate chain, provided the SMTP client's TLS hanshake included
   the SNI extension with a domain of mx1.example.com.

   Since the server's ability to respond with the right certificate
   chain may be predicated on the TLS client providing the correct SNI
   information, DANE PKI aware clients SHOULD send the SNI extension
   with a host_name value of the base domain of the TLSA RRset
   (otherwise they risk failure to authenticate the server).  Since SNI
   is not available with SSLv2 or SSLv3, the server MUST support at
   least TLS 1.0; ensuring this is the case is the responsibility of the
   creator of the TLSA records.

   Complications arise when TLSA records for a service are created by
   someone other than the server operator.  In this situation the server
   operator and TLSA record creator must cooperate to ensure that TLSA
   records don't fall out of step with the server certificate
   configuration.

   When the server operator is a hosting provider, the customer's MX
   records should contain the primary hostnames of the provider's SMTP
   servers.  This way, any associated TLSA records will be found in the
   hosting provider's DNSSEC zone, thus avoiding the complexity of
   bilateral coordination of server certificate configuration and TLSA
   record management.  If the customer's DNS zone is signed, the
   provider hostnames in customer domain's MX records can be securely
   used as the base names for locating TLSA records managed by the
   hosting provider.





Dukhovni               Expires November 19, 2013                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft  SMTP security via opportunistic DANE TLS        May 2013


   Redirection of SMTP service from one domain to another is usually
   accomplished via MX records (or perhaps SRV records in the case of
   submission).  Alternatively, the domain part of an email address may
   be a CNAME (see [RFC5321] Section 2.3.5).  CNAMEs are a more blunt
   instrument for this purpose, since unlike MX or SRV records they
   remap the origin host to the target host for all protocols.  Also
   Unlike MX or SRV records CNAME records may chain (though clients will
   generally impose implementation dependent maximum nesting depths).

   Though CNAMEs are illegal on the right hand side of MX and SRV
   records, they are supported by some SMTP software.  If the MX or SRV
   host is a CNAME alias from a customer's domain to a server in the
   provider's domain, the client SHOULD follow the CNAME and SHOULD use
   the target hostname as the base domain for TLSA records as well as
   the host_name in SNI.

   When CNAMEs are employed the sensible place to seek DANE TLSA records
   is in the providers domain, as that is the party that best knows
   which certificates are deployed on the server.  Therefore, clients
   implementing opportunistic DANE TLS connecting to a server whose DNS
   name is a CNAME alias SHOULD follow the CNAME hop-by-hop to its
   ultimate target host (noting at each step whether the CNAME is DNSSEC
   validated) and use the resulting target host as the base domain for
   TLSA lookups.

   If CNAMEs were not followed, to support DANE validation the origin
   domain would have to publish TLSA records that match the server
   certificate chain.  Since the origin domain may not be operationally
   responsible for the server this imposes complex operational burdens
   on the provider and customer even with SNI.

   Accordingly, TLSA records SHOULD NOT be published for a base domain
   that is a CNAME.  Such TLSA records are not operationally robust, and
   MUST NOT be used by opportunistic DANE TLS clients.

4.  PKIX certificate usages

   Since opportunistic DANE TLS will be used by non-interactive SMTP
   agents, with no user to "press OK" when authentication fails,
   protocol robustness is paramount.  The most robust choice of TLSA
   record type for opportunistic DANE TLS is "3 1 1", that is a record
   which specifies a SHA-256 digest of the server's public key.  This
   involves no CA signature checks, and no server name checks, and does
   not require SNI when the TLSA record matches the server's default
   certificate.  It uses the required to support SHA-256 digest, and
   works across certificate renewals with the same key.  TLSA records
   for SMTP servers SHOULD be "3 1 1" records.




Dukhovni               Expires November 19, 2013                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft  SMTP security via opportunistic DANE TLS        May 2013


   As noted in the introduction, the existing public CA PKI is not
   viable for the Internet email backbone.  TLSA records for MX hosts or
   submission servers that are to be found via SRV records SHOULD NOT
   include certificate usage "0" or "1", as clients cannot be expected
   to perform [RFC5280] PKIX validation or [RFC6125] identity
   verification.

   Clients employing opportunistic DANE TLS MAY choose to treat any TLSA
   records with certificate usage "0" as unusable.  They may then choose
   to connect via unauthenticated mandatory TLS if no alternative
   authentication mechanisms are available.

   If despite this recommendation servers for non-PKIX protocols do
   publish TLSA records with certificate usage "0" or "1", clients
   SHOULD make use of these to the fullest extent possible.

4.1.  Certificate usage 1

   SMTP clients that implement this specification SHOULD ignore the PKIX
   validation requirement with certificate usage "1", and authenticate
   the server per the content of the TLSA record alone.  Since some
   servers may rely on SNI to select the correct certificate, the client
   SHOULD use the SNI extension to signal the base domain of the TLSA
   RRset.

4.2.  Certificate usage 0

   With certificate usage "0" the usability of the TLSA records depends
   on its matching type.

   If the matching type is "0" the TLSA record contains the full
   certificate or full public key of the trusted certificate authority.
   In this case the client has all the information it needs to match the
   server trust-chain to the TLSA record.  The client SHOULD in this
   case ignore the PKIX validation requirement, and authenticate the
   server via its DANE TLSA records alone (sending SNI with the base
   domain as usual).














Dukhovni               Expires November 19, 2013                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft  SMTP security via opportunistic DANE TLS        May 2013


   If the matching type is not "0", the TLSA record contains only a
   digest of the trust certificate authority certificate or public key.
   The full certificate may not be included in the server's certificate
   chain and the client may not be able to match the server trust chain
   against the TLSA record.  SMTP clients that implement this
   specification SHOULD generally treat such TLSA records as unusable,
   but MAY be explicitly configured to support them when it is believed
   that the client posesses a sufficiently complete set of trusted
   public CA certificates.  This is most likely with an MUA which only
   needs enough CA certificates to authenticate its chosen submission
   service.

5.  Opportunistic TLS for Submission

   Prior to [RFC6409] the SMTP submission protocol was poster child for
   PKIX TLS.  The MUA typically connects to one or sometimes a few
   submission servers explicitly configured by the user.  There is no
   indirection via insecure MX records, and unlike the web brower no
   need to authenticate a large set of TLS servers.  Once TLS is enabled
   for the desired submission server or servers, provided the server
   certificate is correctly maintained, the MUA is able to reliably use
   TLS to authenticate the submission server.

   [RFC6409] aims to simplify the configuration of the MUA submission
   service by dynamically deriving the submission service from the
   user's email address.  This is done via SRV records, but at the cost
   of introducing the same TLS security problems faced by MTA to MTA
   SMTP.  Prompting the user when the SRV record domain is different
   from the email domain is not a robust solution.

   The protocol proposed in this memo can be used to opportunistically
   secure the submission service association.  If the email domain is
   DNSSEC signed, the SRV records are "secure" and the SRV host
   publishes secure TLSA records for submission, the MUA can safely
   auto-configure to authenticate the submission server via DANE.  When
   DANE TLSA records are not available, the client SHOULD fall back to
   legacy behavior.

6.  Hardening opportunistic DANE TLS

   An MTA implementing this protocol for sending email to the internet
   at large may need a greater security assurance when sending email to
   selected destinations to which the sending organization sends
   sensitive email and may have regulatory obligations to protect its
   content.  This protocol is not in conflict with this requirement, in
   fact it can often simplify authenticated delivery to such
   destinations.




Dukhovni               Expires November 19, 2013               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft  SMTP security via opportunistic DANE TLS        May 2013


   Specifically, with domains that publish DANE TLSA records for their
   MX hosts a sending MTA can be configured to use the receiving
   domains's DANE TLSA records to authenticate the corresponding MX
   hosts, thereby obviating a complex manual provisioning process.  In
   anticipation of or in response to failure to obtain the expected TLSA
   records the sending system's administrator may choose from a menu of
   fallback options if supported by the sending MTA:

   o  Defer mail if no usable TLSA records are found.  This is useful
      when the destination is known to publish TLSA records, and lack of
      TLSA records is most likely a transient misconfiguration.

   o  Authenticate the peer via a manually configured certificate
      digest.  The digest may be a saved copy from a previous successful
      TLSA lookup, or may be obtained after a problem is detected and
      confirmed to be valid by some out-of-band mechanism.

   o  Authenticate the peer via the existing public CA PKI, if the peer
      server has usable CA issued certificates.  In many cases the
      sending MTA will need custom certificate name matching rules to
      match the destination's gateways.

   o  Send via unauthenticated mandatory TLS.  If the requirement is
      merely to always encrypt, and the possibility of MITM attacks is
      less of a concern than timely email delivery.

   It should be noted that barring administrator intervention email
   SHOULD be deferred when DNSSEC lookups fail, (as distinct from
   "secure" non-existence of TLSA records, or secure evidence that the
   domain is no longer signed).  In addition to configuring fallback
   strategies when TLSA records are absed administrators may in some
   cases need to disable DNSSEC lookups for a destination to work around
   a DNSSEC outage.

7.  Acknowledgements

   Thanks to Tony Finch who finally prodded me into participating in
   DANE working group discussions.  Thanks to Paul Hoffman who motivated
   me to produce this memo and provided feedback on early drafts.
   Thanks also to Wietse Venema who created Postfix, and patiently
   guided the Postfix DANE implementation to production quality.

8.  Security Considerations

   This protocol leverages DANE TLSA records to implement MITM resistant
   opportunistic channel security for SMTP.  For destination domains
   that sign their MX records and publish signed TLSA records for their
   MX hosts this protocol allows sending MTAs (and perhaps dynamically



Dukhovni               Expires November 19, 2013               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft  SMTP security via opportunistic DANE TLS        May 2013


   configured MUAs) to securely discover both the availability of TLS
   and how to authenticate the destination.

   This protocol does not aim to secure all SMTP traffic, that will not
   be practical until DNSSEC and DANE adoption are universal (universal
   SMTP TLS security via the existing public CA PKI is even less
   realistic).  The fact that it can be deployed incrementally is a
   feature, not a bug.  This protocol coexists and interoperates with
   the existing insecure Internet email backbone, if the protocol proves
   successful, a growing portion of email traffic will be protected over
   time.

   The protocol does not preclude existing non-opportunistic SMTP TLS
   security arrangements, these can continue as before, or may be used
   as fallback strategies when this protocol fails to locate the desired
   security parameters.

9.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC2246]  Dierks, T. and C. Allen, "The TLS Protocol Version 1.0",
              RFC 2246, January 1999.

   [RFC3207]  Hoffman, P., "SMTP Service Extension for Secure SMTP over
              Transport Layer Security", RFC 3207, February 2002.

   [RFC3546]  Blake-Wilson, S., Nystrom, M., Hopwood, D., Mikkelsen, J.,
              and T. Wright, "Transport Layer Security (TLS)
              Extensions", RFC 3546, June 2003.

   [RFC4033]  Arends, R., Austein, R., Larson, M., Massey, D., and S.
              Rose, "DNS Security Introduction and Requirements", RFC
              4033, March 2005.

   [RFC4034]  Arends, R., Austein, R., Larson, M., Massey, D., and S.
              Rose, "Resource Records for the DNS Security Extensions",
              RFC 4034, March 2005.

   [RFC4035]  Arends, R., Austein, R., Larson, M., Massey, D., and S.
              Rose, "Protocol Modifications for the DNS Security
              Extensions", RFC 4035, March 2005.

   [RFC4346]  Dierks, T. and E. Rescorla, "The Transport Layer Security
              (TLS) Protocol Version 1.1", RFC 4346, April 2006.





Dukhovni               Expires November 19, 2013               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft  SMTP security via opportunistic DANE TLS        May 2013


   [RFC5246]  Dierks, T. and E. Rescorla, "The Transport Layer Security
              (TLS) Protocol Version 1.2", RFC 5246, August 2008.

   [RFC5280]  Cooper, D., Santesson, S., Farrell, S., Boeyen, S.,
              Housley, R., and W. Polk, "Internet X.509 Public Key
              Infrastructure Certificate and Certificate Revocation List
              (CRL) Profile", RFC 5280, May 2008.

   [RFC5321]  Klensin, J., "Simple Mail Transfer Protocol", RFC 5321,
              October 2008.

   [RFC6125]  Saint-Andre, P. and J. Hodges, "Representation and
              Verification of Domain-Based Application Service Identity
              within Internet Public Key Infrastructure Using X.509
              (PKIX) Certificates in the Context of Transport Layer
              Security (TLS)", RFC 6125, March 2011.

   [RFC6186]  Daboo, C., "Use of SRV Records for Locating Email
              Submission/Access Services", RFC 6186, March 2011.

   [RFC6409]  Gellens, R. and J. Klensin, "Message Submission for Mail",
              STD 72, RFC 6409, November 2011.

   [RFC6698]  Hoffman, P. and J. Schlyter, "The DNS-Based Authentication
              of Named Entities (DANE) Transport Layer Security (TLS)
              Protocol: TLSA", RFC 6698, August 2012.

Author's Address

   Viktor Dukhovni
   Unaffiliated

   Email: ietf-dane@dukhovni.org

















Dukhovni               Expires November 19, 2013               [Page 13]
