


Internet Engineering Task Force                             J. Livingood
Internet-Draft                                                   N. Mody
Intended status: Informational                              M. O'Reirdan
Expires: August 16, 2010                                         Comcast
                                                       February 12, 2010


      Recommendations for the Remediation of Bots in ISP Networks
                 draft-oreirdan-mody-bot-remediation-07

Abstract

   This document contains recommendations on how Internet Service
   Providers can manage the effects of computers used by their
   subscribers, which have been infected with malicious bots, via
   various remediation techniques.  Internet users with infected
   computers are exposed to risks such as loss of personal data, as well
   as increased susceptibility to online fraud and/or phishing.  Such
   computers can also become an inadvertent participant in or component
   of an online crime network, spam network, and/or phishing network, as
   well as be used as a part of a distributed denial of service attack.
   Mitigating the effects of and remediating the installations of
   malicious bots will make it more difficult for botnets to operate and
   could reduce the level of online crime on the Internet in general
   and/or on a particular Internet Service Provider's network.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 16, 2010.



Livingood, et al.        Expires August 16, 2010                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft     Remediation of Bots in ISP Networks     February 2010


Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the BSD License.

   This document may contain material from IETF Documents or IETF
   Contributions published or made publicly available before November
   10, 2008.  The person(s) controlling the copyright in some of this
   material may not have granted the IETF Trust the right to allow
   modifications of such material outside the IETF Standards Process.
   Without obtaining an adequate license from the person(s) controlling
   the copyright in such materials, this document may not be modified
   outside the IETF Standards Process, and derivative works of it may
   not be created outside the IETF Standards Process, except to format
   it for publication as an RFC or to translate it into languages other
   than English.

























Livingood, et al.        Expires August 16, 2010                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft     Remediation of Bots in ISP Networks     February 2010


Table of Contents

   1.  Requirements Language  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.  Key Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Introduction and Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   4.  Important Notice of Limitations and Scope  . . . . . . . . . .  7
   5.  Detection of Bots  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   6.  Notification to Internet Users . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   7.  Remediation of Computers Infected with a Bot . . . . . . . . . 17
   8.  Guided Remediation Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
   9.  Professionally-Assisted Remediation Process  . . . . . . . . . 20
   10. Sharing of Data from the User to the ISP . . . . . . . . . . . 20
   11. Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
   12. IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
   13. Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
   14. Informative references . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
   Appendix A.  Document Change Log . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
   Appendix B.  Open Issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
































Livingood, et al.        Expires August 16, 2010                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft     Remediation of Bots in ISP Networks     February 2010


1.  Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].


2.  Key Terminology

   This section defines the key terms used in this document.

2.1.  Malicious Bots, or Bots

   A malicious "bot" (derived from the word "robot", hereafter simply
   referred to as a "bot") refers to a program that is surreptitiously
   installed on a system in order to enable that system to automatically
   (or semi-automatically) perform a task or set of tasks typically
   under the command and control of a remote administrator, or "bot
   master."  Bots are also known as "zombies".

   It is important to note that there are 'good', or benign bots.  Such
   benign bots are often found in such environments such as gaming and
   Internet Relay Chat (IRC) [RFC1459], where a continual, interactive
   presence can be a requirement for participating in the games,
   interacting with a computing resource, or other purposes.  Since such
   benign bots are performing useful, lawful, and non-disruptive
   functions, there is no reason for a provider to monitor for their
   presence and/or alert users to their presence.

   Thus, while there may be benign bots, for the purposes of this
   document all mention of bots shall assume that the bots involved are
   malicious in nature.  Such malicious bots shall generally be assumed
   to have been deployed without the permission or conscious
   understanding of a particular Internet user.  Thus, without a user's
   knowledge, bots may transform the user's computing device into a
   platform from which malicious activities can be conducted.  In
   general, installation of a malicious bot without user knowledge and
   consent is considered in most regions to be unlawful, and the
   activities of malicious bots typically involve unlawful or other
   maliciously disruptive activities.

2.2.  Bot Networks, or Botnets

   These are defined as concerted networks of bots capable of acting on
   instructions generated remotely.  The malicious activities are either
   focused on the information on the local machine or acting to provide
   services for remote machines.  Bots are highly customizable so they
   can be programmed to do many things.  The major malicious activities



Livingood, et al.        Expires August 16, 2010                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft     Remediation of Bots in ISP Networks     February 2010


   include: identity theft, spam, distributed denial of service (DDoS)
   attacks, key-logging, fraudulent DNS (pharming), proxy services, fast
   flux hosting and click fraud.

   Infection vectors include un-patched operating systems, software
   vulnerabilities, weak/non-existent passwords, malicious websites, un-
   patched browsers, malware, vulnerable helper applications and social
   engineering techniques to gain access to the user's computer.  The
   detection and destruction of bots is an ongoing issue and also a
   constant battle between the internet security community, network
   security engineers and bot developers.

   Initially, bots used IRC to communicate but were easy to shutdown if
   the command and control server was identified and deactivated.  Newer
   command and control methods have evolved, such that those currently
   employed by bot masters make them much more resistant to
   deactivation.  With the introduction of P2P, HTTP and other resilient
   communication protocols along with the widespread adoption of
   encryption, bots are considerably more difficult to identify and
   isolate from typical network usage.  As a result increased reliance
   is being placed on anomaly detection and behavioral analysis, both
   locally and remotely, to identify bots.

2.3.  Computer

   A computer, as used in the context of this document, is intended to
   refer to a computing device that connects to the Internet.  This
   encompasses devices used by Internet users such as personal
   computers, including laptops, desktops, and netbooks, as well as
   mobile phones, smart phones, home gateway devices, and other end user
   computing devices which are connected or can connect to the public
   Internet and/or private IP networks.

   Increasingly, other household systems and devices contain embedded
   computers which are connected to or can connect to the public
   Internet and/or private IP networks.  However, these devices may not
   be under interactive control of the Internet user, such as may be the
   case with various smart home and smart grid devices.

2.4.  Malware

   This is short for malicious software.  In this case, malicious bots
   are considered a subset of malware.  Other forms of malware could
   include viruses and other similar types of software.  Internet users
   can sometimes cause their computer to be infected with malware, which
   may include a bot or cause a bot to install itself, via inadvertently
   accessing a specific website, downloading a specific file, or other
   activities.



Livingood, et al.        Expires August 16, 2010                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft     Remediation of Bots in ISP Networks     February 2010


   Alternatively, Internet-connected computers may become infected with
   malware through externally initiated malicious activities such as the
   exploitation of vulnerabilities or the brute force guessing of access
   credentials.

2.5.  Fast Flux

   DNS Fast Fluxing occurs when a domain is bound in DNS using A records
   to multiple IP addresses, each of which has a very short Time To Live
   (TTL) value associated with it.  This means that the domain resolves
   to varying IP addresses over a short period of time.

   DNS Fast Flux is typically used in conjunction with proxies which
   then route the web requests to the real host which serves the data
   being sought.  The proxies are normally hosted on compromised user
   computers.  The effect of this is to make the detection of the real
   host for a piece of content much more difficult and to ensure that
   the site remains up for as long as possible.


3.  Introduction and Problem Statement

   Computers used by Internet users, which in this case are customers of
   an Internet Service Provider (ISP), can be infected with malware
   which may contain and/or install one or more bots on a computer.
   This can present a major problem for an ISP for a number of reasons
   (not to mention of course the problems created for users).  First,
   these bots can be used to send spam, in some cases very large volumes
   of spam [Spamalytics: An Empirical Analysis of Spam Marketing
   Conversion].  This spam can result in extra cost for the ISPs in
   terms of wasted network, server, and/or personnel resources, among
   many other potential costs and side effects.  Such spam can also
   negatively affect the reputation of the ISP, their customers, and the
   email reputation of the IP address space used by the ISP (often
   referred to simply as 'IP reputation').

   In addition, these bots can act as platforms for directing,
   participating in, or otherwise conducting attacks on critical
   Internet infrastructure [Emerging Cyber Threats Report for 2009:
   Data, Mobility and Questions of Responsibility will Drive Cyber
   Threats in 2009 and Beyond].  Bots are frequently used as part of
   concerted Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) attacks for criminal,
   political or other motivations [The Gh0st in the Shell: Network
   Security in the Himalayas] [The snooping dragon: social-malware
   surveillance of the Tibetan movement].  For example, bots have been
   used to attack Internet resources and infrastructure ranging from web
   sites, to email servers and DNS servers, as well as the critical
   Internet infrastructure of entire countries [Battling Botnets and



Livingood, et al.        Expires August 16, 2010                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft     Remediation of Bots in ISP Networks     February 2010


   Online Mobs: Estonia's Defense Efforts during the Internet War]
   [Cyberspace as a Combat Zone: The Phenomenon of Electronic Jihad].
   Motivations for such coordinated DDoS attacks can range from criminal
   extortion attempts through to online protesting and nationalistic
   fervor [Case Study: How a Bookmaker and a Whiz Kid Took On a
   DDOS-based Online Extortion Attack].

   While any computing device can be infected with bots, the majority of
   bot infections affect the personal computers used by Internet end
   users.  As a result of the role of ISPs in providing IP connectivity,
   among many other services, to Internet users, these ISPs are in a
   unique position to be able to attempt to detect and observe bot nets
   operating in their networks.  Furthermore, ISPs may also be in a
   unique position to be able to communicate to Internet users which are
   their customers, when customers' computers may have been determined
   to have been or possibly have been infected with one or more bots.

   From an end user perspective, knowing that their computer has been
   infected with one or more bots is very important information.  Once
   they know this, they can take steps to remove the bot, protect
   themselves in the future, and resolve any problems which may stem
   from the bot infection.  Given that bots can drain local computing
   and network resources, enable theft of personal information
   (including personal financial information), enable the computer to be
   used from criminal activities (that may result in the Internet user
   being legally culpable), destroy or leave the PC in an unrecoverable
   state via 'kill switch' bot technologies, it is important to notify
   the user that they may be infected with a bot.

   As a result, the intent of this document is to provide a guide to
   ISPs and other organizations for the remediation of these computers
   infected with bots, so as to reduce the size of bot nets and minimize
   the potential harm that bots can inflict upon Internet infrastructure
   generally, as well as on individual Internet users.  Efforts by ISPs
   and other organizations could therefore, over time, reduce the pool
   of computers infected with bots on the Internet, which in turn could
   result in smaller bot nets with less capability for disruption.

   The potential mitigation of bots is accomplished through a process of
   detection, notification to Internet users, and remediation of that
   bot with a variety of tools, as described later in this document.


4.  Important Notice of Limitations and Scope

   The techniques described in this document in no way guarantee the
   remediation of all bots.  Bot removal is potentially a task requiring
   specialized knowledge, skills and tools, and may be beyond the



Livingood, et al.        Expires August 16, 2010                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft     Remediation of Bots in ISP Networks     February 2010


   ability of average users.  Attempts at bot removal may frequently be
   unsuccessful, or only partially successful, and may leave a user's
   system in an unstable and unsatisfactory state or even in a state
   where it is still infected.  Attempts at bot removal can also result
   in side effects ranging from a loss of data or other files, all the
   way through partial or complete loss of system usability.

   In general, the only way a user can be sure they have removed some of
   today's increasingly sophisticated malware is by 'nuking-and-paving'
   the system: reformatting the drive, reinstalling the operating system
   and applications (including all patches) from scratch, and then
   restoring user files from a clean backup.  However the introduction
   of BIOS-based malware may mean that, in some cases, this will not be
   enough and may prove to be more than any end user can be reasonably
   expected to resolve [Persistent BIOS Infection].  Experienced users
   would have to re-flash BIOS in their machines in order to remove
   BIOS-based malware.  However, in some cases, not even 'nuking-and-
   paving' the system will solve the problem, which calls for hard drive
   and/or complete computer replacement.

   Devices with embedded operating systems, such as video gaming
   consoles and smart home appliances, will most likely be beyond a
   user's capability to remediate by themselves, and will typically
   require the aid of vendor-specific advice, updates and tools.  Care
   must be taken when imparting remediation advice to Internet users
   given the increasingly wide array of computing devices that can be,
   or could be, infected by bots in the future.


5.  Detection of Bots

   An ISP must first identify that an Internet user, in this case a user
   that is assumed to be their customer or otherwise connected to the
   ISP's network, is determined to be infected, or likely to have been
   infected with a bot.  The ISP must attempt to detect the presence of
   bots using methods, processes, and tools which maintain the privacy
   of the personally identifiable information (PII) of their customers.
   The ISP also must not block legitimate traffic in the course of bot
   detection, and must instead employ detection methods, tools, and
   processes which seek to be non-disruptive, as well as being
   transparent to Internet users and end-user applications.

   Detection methods, tools, and processes may include things such as
   analysis of specific network and/or application traffic flows (such
   as traffic to an email server), analysis of aggregate network and/or
   application traffic data, data feeds received from other ISPs and
   organizations (such as lists of the ISP's IP addresses which have
   been reported to have sent spam), feedback from the ISP's customers



Livingood, et al.        Expires August 16, 2010                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft     Remediation of Bots in ISP Networks     February 2010


   or other Internet users, as well as a wide variety of other
   possibilities.  It is likely that a combination of multiple bot
   detection data points will prove to be an effective approach in order
   to corroborate information of varying dependability or consistency,
   as well as to avoid or minimize the possibility of false positive
   identification of computers.  Detection should also, where possible
   and feasible, attempt to classify a bot in order to confirm that it
   is malicious in nature, estimate the variety and severity of threats
   it may pose (such as spam bot, key-logging bot, file distribution
   bot, etc.), and to determine potential methods for eventual
   remediation.  However, given the dynamic nature of botnet management
   and the criminal incentives to seek quick financial rewards, botnets
   frequently update or change their core malicious capabilities.  As a
   consequence, botnets that are initially detected and classified by
   the ISP as one particular type of bot need to be continuously
   monitored and tracked in order to correctly identify the threat they
   pose at any particular point in time.

   Detection is also time-sensitive.  If complex analysis is required
   and multiple confirmations are needed to confirm a bot is indeed
   present, then it is possible that the bot may cause some damage (to
   either the infected computer or a remotely targeted system) before it
   can be stopped.  This may mean that an ISP may need to balance the
   desire or need to definitively classify and/or confirm a bot, which
   may take an extended period of time, with the ability to predict the
   strong likelihood of a bot in a very short period of time.  This
   'definitive-vs-likely' challenge is difficult and, when in doubt,
   ISPs should probably err on the side of caution by communicating when
   a likely bot infection has taken place.  This also means that
   Internet users may benefit from the deployment of client-based
   software protections or other software tools, which can enable rapid
   performance of heuristically-based detection bot activity, such as
   the detection of a bot as it starts to communicate a bot net and
   execute some type of command.  Any bot detection systems should also
   be capable of learning and adapting, either via manual intervention
   or automatically, in order to cope with a rapidly evolving threat.

   As noted above, detection methods, tools, and processes should ensure
   that privacy of customers' PII is maintained.  While bot detection
   methods, tools, and processes are similar to spam and virus defenses
   deployed by the ISP for the benefit of their customers (and may be
   directly related to those defenses), attempts to detect bots should
   take into account the need of an ISP to take care to ensure any PII
   collected or incidentally detected is properly protected.  The
   definition of PII varies from one jurisdiction to the next so proper
   care must be taken to ensure that any actions taken comply with
   legislation and good practice in the jurisdiction in which the PII is
   gathered.  Finally, depending upon the geographic region within which



Livingood, et al.        Expires August 16, 2010                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft     Remediation of Bots in ISP Networks     February 2010


   an ISP operates, certain methods relating to bot detection may need
   to be included in relevant terms of service documents or other
   documents which are available to the customers of a particular ISP.

   There are several bot detection methods, tools, and processes that an
   ISP may choose to utilize, as noted in the list below.  It is
   important to note that the technical solutions available are
   relatively immature, and are likely to change over time, evolving
   rapidly in the coming years.  While these items are described in
   relation to ISPs, they may also be applicable to organizations
   operating other networks, such as campus networks and enterprise
   networks.

   a.  Where legally permissible or otherwise an industry accepted
       practice in a particular market region, an ISP may in some manner
       "scan" their IP space in order to detect un-patched or otherwise
       vulnerable hosts.  This may provide the ISP with the opportunity
       to easily identify Internet users who appear to already be or are
       at great risk of being infected with a bot.  ISP's should note
       that some types of port scanning may leave network services in a
       hung state or render them unusable due to common frailties, and
       that many modern firewall and host-based intrusion detection
       implementations may alert the Internet user to the scan.  As a
       result the scan may be interpreted as a malicious attack against
       the computer.  Vulnerability scanning has a higher probability of
       leaving accessible network services and applications in a damaged
       state and will often result in a higher probability of detection
       by the Internet user and subsequent interpretation as a targeted
       attack.  Depending upon the vulnerability being scanned, some
       automated methods of vulnerability checking may result in data
       being altered or created afresh on the Internet users computer
       which be a problem in many legal environments.

   b.  An ISP may also communicate and share selected data, via feedback
       loops or other mechanisms, with various third parties.  Feedback
       loops are consistently formatted feeds of real-time (or nearly
       real-time) abuse reports offered by threat data clearinghouses,
       security alert organizations, other ISPs, and other
       organizations.  The data may include, but is not limited to,
       lists of the IP addresses computers which have or are likely to
       have a bot running, domain names or fully qualified domain names
       (FQDNs) known to host malware and/or be involved in the command
       and control of botnets, IP addresses know to host malware and/or
       be involved in the command and control of botnets, recently
       tested or discovered techniques or detecting or remediating bot
       infections, new threat vectors, and other relevant information.
       Good examples of this include SNDS from Microsoft, XBL and PBL
       from Spamhaus and the DSHIELD AS tool from the SANS Institute.



Livingood, et al.        Expires August 16, 2010               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft     Remediation of Bots in ISP Networks     February 2010


   c.  An ISP may use Netflow [RFC3954] or other similar passive network
       monitoring to identify network anomalies that may be indicative
       of botnet attacks or bot communications.  For example, an ISP may
       be able to identify compromised hosts by identifying traffic
       destined to IP addresses associated with the command and control
       of botnets.  In addition, bots can be identified when a remote
       host is under a DDoS attack because computers participating in
       the attack will likely be infected by a bot, frequently as
       observed at network borders.

   d.  An ISP may use DNS-based techniques to perform detection.  For
       example, a given classified bot may be known to query a specific
       list of domain names at specific times or on specific dates (in
       the example of the so-called "Conficker" bot), often by matching
       DNS queries to a well known list of domains associated with
       malware.  In many cases such lists are distributed by or shared
       using third parties, such as threat data clearinghouses.

   e.  User complaints: Because hosts infected by bots are frequently
       used to send spam or participate in DDoS attacks, the ISP
       servicing those hosts will normally receive complaints about the
       malicious network traffic.  Those complaints may be sent to
       RFC2142-specified [RFC2142] role accounts, such as abuse@ or
       postmaster@ or to abuse or security addresses specified by the
       site as part of its WHOIS (or other) contact data.

   f.  ISPs may also discover likely bot infected hosts located at other
       sites; when legally permissible or otherwise an industry accepted
       practice in a particular market region, it may be worthwhile for
       ISPs to share evidence relating to those compromised hosts with
       the relevant remote ISP, with security researchers, and with
       blocklist operators.

   g.  ISPs may operate or subscribe to services that provide
       'sinkholing' or 'honeynet' capabilities.  This may enable the ISP
       to obtain near-real-time lists of bot infected computers as they
       attempt to join a larger botnet or propagate to other hosts on a
       network.

   h.  ISP industry associations should examine the possibility of
       collating statistics from ISP members in order to provide good
       statistics about bot infections based on real ISP data.

   i.  An Intrusion Detection System(IDS) can be a useful tool to
       actually identify to help identify the malware.  An IDS tool such
       as SNORT (open source IDS platform) can be placed in a Walled
       Garden and used to analyze end user traffic to confirm malware
       type.  This will help with remediation of the infected device.



Livingood, et al.        Expires August 16, 2010               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft     Remediation of Bots in ISP Networks     February 2010


6.  Notification to Internet Users

   Once an ISP has detected a bot, or the strong likelihood of a bot,
   steps should be undertaken to inform the Internet user that they may
   have a bot-related problem.  Depending upon a range of factors, from
   the technical capabilities of the ISP, to the technical attributes of
   their network, financial considerations, available server resources,
   available organizational resources, the number of likely infected
   computers detected at any given time, and the severity of any
   possible threats, among many other things, an ISP should decide the
   most appropriate method or methods for providing notification to one
   or more of their customers or Internet users.  Such notification
   methods may include one or more of the following, as well as other
   possible methods not described below

   It is important to note that none of these methods are guaranteed to
   be successful, and that each has its own set of limitations.  In
   addition, in some cases, an ISP may determine that a combination of
   two or more methods is most appropriate.  Finally, notification is
   also considered time sensitive; if the user does not receive or view
   the notification or a timely basis, then a particular bot could
   launch an attack, exploit the user, or cause other harm.  If
   possible, an ISP should establish a preferred means of communication
   when the subscriber first signs up for service.  As a part of the
   notification process, ISPs should maintain a record of the allocation
   of IP addresses to subscribers for such a period as allows any bot
   detection technology to be accurately able to link an infected IP
   address to a subscriber.  This record should only be maintained for a
   period of time which is necessary, in order to maintain the
   protection of the privacy of an individual subscriber.

   One important factor to bear in mind is that notification to end
   users needs to be defended against spoofing by third parties.  This
   must be done to protect against the possibility of notifications
   being spoofed and used by bots to deliver additional malware.

6.1.  Email Notification

   This is probably the most common form of notification used by ISPs.
   One drawback of using email is that it is not guaranteed to be viewed
   within a reasonable time frame, if at all.  The user may be using a
   different primary email address than that which they have provided to
   the ISP.  In addition, some ISPs do not provide an email account at
   all, as part of a bundle of Internet services, and/or do not have a
   need for or method in which to request or retain the primary email
   addresses of Internet users of their networks.  Another possibility
   is that the user, their email client, and/or their email servers
   could determine or classify such a notification as spam, which could



Livingood, et al.        Expires August 16, 2010               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft     Remediation of Bots in ISP Networks     February 2010


   delete the message or otherwise file it in an email folder that the
   user may not check on a regular and/or timely basis.  Bot masters
   have also been known to impersonate the ISP or trusted sender and
   send fradulent emails to the users.  This technique of social
   engineering, generally referred to as 'phishing', often leads to new
   bot infestations.  Finally if the user's email credentials are
   compromised, then a hacker and/or a bot could simply login to the
   user's email account and delete the email before it is read by the
   user.

6.2.  Telephone Call Notification

   A telephone call may be an effective means of communication in
   particularly high-risk situations.  However, telephone calls may not
   be feasible due to the cost of making a large number of calls, as
   measured in either time, money, organizational resources, server
   resources, or some other means.  In addition, there is no guarantee
   that the user will answer their phone.  To the extent that the
   telephone number called by the ISP can be answered by the infected
   computing device, the bot on that computer may be able to disconnect,
   divert, or otherwise interfere with an incoming call.  Users may also
   interpret such a telephone notification as a telemarketing call and
   as such not welcome it, or not accept the call at all.  Finally, even
   if a representative of the ISP is able to connect with and speak to a
   user, that user is very likely to lack the necessary technical
   expertise to understand or be able to effectively deal with the
   threat.

6.3.  Postal Mail Notification

   This form of notification is probably the least popular and effective
   means of communication, due to both preparation time, delivery time,
   the cost of printing and paper, and the cost of postage.

6.4.  Walled Garden Notification

   Placing a user in a walled garden is another approach that ISPs may
   take to notify users.  A walled garden refers to an environment that
   controls the information and services that a subscriber is allowed to
   utilize and what network access permissions are granted.  This is an
   effective technique because it could be able to block all
   communication between the bot and the command and control channel,
   which may impair the ability of a bot to disrupt or block attempts to
   notify the user.

   While in many cases the user is almost guaranteed to view the
   notification message and take any appropriate remediation actions,
   this approach poses can pose other challenges.  For example, it is



Livingood, et al.        Expires August 16, 2010               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft     Remediation of Bots in ISP Networks     February 2010


   not always the case that a user is actively using a computer that
   uses a web browser or which has a web browser actively running on it.
   In one example, a user could be playing a game online, via the use of
   a dedicated, Internet-connected game console.  In another example,
   the user may not be using a computer with a web browser when they are
   placed in the walled garden and may instead be in the course of a
   telephone conversation, or may be expecting to receive a call, using
   a Voice Over IP (VoIP) device of some type.  As a result, the ISP may
   feel the need to maintain a potentially lengthy white list of domains
   which are not subject to the typical restrictions of a walled garden,
   which could well prove to be an onerous task, from an operational
   perspective.

   The ISP has several options to determine when to let the user out of
   the walled garden.  One approach may be to let the user determine
   when to exit.  This option is suggested when the purpose of the
   walled garden is to notify users and provide information on
   remediation only, particularly since notification is not a guarantee
   of successful remediation.  It could also be the case that, for
   whatever reason, the user makes the judgment that they cannot then
   take the time to remediate their computer and that other online
   activities which they would like to resume are more important.  Exit
   from the walled garden may also involve a process to verify that it
   is indeed the user who is requesting exit from the walled garden and
   not the bot.

   Once the user acknowledges the notification, then the user decides to
   either remediate and then exit the walled garden, or exit the walled
   garden without addressing the issue.  Another approach may be to
   enforce a stricter policy and require the user to clean the computer
   prior to permitting the user to exit the walled garden, though this
   may not be technically feasible depending upon the type of bot,
   obfuscation techniques employed by a bot, and/or a range of other
   factors.  Thus, the ISP may also need to support tools to scan the
   infected computer and determine whether it is still infected or rely
   on user judgment that the bot has been disabled or removed.  One
   challenge with this approach is that if the user has multiple
   computers sharing a single IP address, such as via a common home
   gateway device which performs Network Address Translation (NAT).  In
   such a case, the ISP may need to determine from user feedback, or
   other means, that all affected computers have been remediated, which
   may or may not be technically feasible.

   Finally, when a walled garden is used, a list of well-known addresses
   for both operating system vendors and security vendors should be
   created and maintained in a white list which permits access to these
   sites.  This can be important for allowing access from the walled
   garden by end users in search of operating system and application



Livingood, et al.        Expires August 16, 2010               [Page 14]

Internet-Draft     Remediation of Bots in ISP Networks     February 2010


   patches.

6.5.  Instant Message Notification

   Instant messaging provides the ISP with a simple means to communicate
   with the user.  There are several advantages to using IM which makes
   it an attractive option.  If the ISP provides IM service and the user
   subscribes to it, then the user can be notified easily.  IM-based
   notification can be a cost effective means to communicate with users
   automatically from an IM alert system or via a manual process, by the
   ISP's support staff.  Ideally, the ISP should allow the user to
   register their IM identity in an ISP account management system and
   grant permission to be contacted via this means.  If the IM service
   provider supports off-line messaging, then the user can be notified
   regardless of whether they are currently logged into the IM system.

   There are several drawbacks with this communications method.  There
   is a high probability that subscriber may interpret the communication
   to be spam, and as such ignore it.  Also, not every user uses IM
   and/or the user may not provide their IM identity to the ISP so some
   alternative means have to be used.  Even in those cases where a user
   does have an IM address, they may not be signed onto that IM system
   when the notification is attempted.  There maybe also be a privacy
   concern on the part of users, when such an IM notification must be
   transmitted over a third-party network and/or IM service.  As such,
   should this method be used, the notification should be discreet and
   not include any PII in the notification itself.

6.6.  Short Message Service (SMS) Notification

   SMS allows the ISP send a brief description of the problem to notify
   the user of the issue, typically to a mobile device such as a mobile
   phone or smart phone.  Ideally, the ISP should allow the user to
   register their mobile number and/or SMS address in an ISP account
   management system and grant permission to be contacted via this
   means.  The primary advantage of SMS is that users are familiar with
   receiving text messages and are likely to read them.  However, users
   may not act on the notification immediately if they are not in front
   of their computer system at the time of the SMS notification.

   One disadvantage is that ISPs may have to follow up with an alternate
   means of notification if not all of the necessary information maybe
   conveyed in one message, given constraints on the number of
   characters in an individual message (typically 140 characters).
   Another disadvantage with SMS is the cost associated with it.  The
   ISP has to either build its own SMS gateway to interface with the
   various wireless network service providers or use a third-party SMS
   clearinghouse (relay) to notify users.  In both cases, an ISP will



Livingood, et al.        Expires August 16, 2010               [Page 15]

Internet-Draft     Remediation of Bots in ISP Networks     February 2010


   typically pay on a per-message basis to send SMS notifications.  An
   additional downside is that SMS messages sent to a user may result in
   a charge to the user by their wireless provider, depending upon the
   plat to which they subscribe.  Another minor disadvantage is that it
   is possible to notify the wrong user if the intended user changes
   their mobile number but forgets to update it with the ISP.

   There are several other drawbacks with this communications method.
   There is a high probability that subscriber may interpret the
   communication to be spam, and as such ignore it.  Also, not every
   user uses SMS and/or the user may not provide their SMS address or
   mobile number to the ISP.  Even in those cases where a user does have
   an SMS address or mobile number, their device may not be powered on
   or otherwise available on a wireless network when the notification is
   attempted.  There maybe also be a privacy concern on the part of
   users, when such an SMS notification must be transmitted over a
   third-party network and/or SMS clearinghouse.  As such, should this
   method be used, the notification should be discreet and not include
   any PII in the notification itself.

6.7.  Web Browser Notification

   Near real-time notification to the user's web browser is another
   technique that may be utilized for notifying the user, though how
   such a system might operate is outside the scope of this document.
   Such a notification could have a comparative advantage over a walled
   garden notification, in that it does not restrict traffic to a
   specified list of destinations in the same way that a walled garden
   by definition would.  However, as with a walled garden notification,
   there is no guarantee that a user is at any given time making use of
   a web browser, though such a system could certainly provide a
   notification when such a browser is eventually used.  Compared to a
   walled garden, a web browser notification is probably preferred from
   the perspective of Internet users, as it does not have the risk of
   disrupting non-web sessions, such as online games, VoIP calls, etc.
   (as noted in Section 6.4).

6.8.  Considerations for Notification to Public Network Locations

   Delivering a notification to a location that provides a shared public
   network, such as a train station, public square, coffee shop, or
   similar location may be of low value since the users connecting to
   such networks are typically highly transient and generally not know
   to site or network administrators.  For example, a system may detect
   that a computer on such a network has a bot, but by the time a
   notification is generated that user has departed from the network and
   moved elsewhere.




Livingood, et al.        Expires August 16, 2010               [Page 16]

Internet-Draft     Remediation of Bots in ISP Networks     February 2010


6.9.  Considerations for Notification to Network Locations Using a
      Shared IP Address

   Delivering a notification to a location that Internet access routed
   through one or more shared public IP addresses may be of low value
   since it may be quite difficult to differentiate between users when
   providing a notification.  For example, on a business network of 500
   users, all sharing one public IP address, it may be sub-optimal to
   provide a notification to all 500 users if you only need one specific
   user to be notified and take action.  As a result, such networks may
   find value in establishing a localized bot detection and notification
   system, just as they are likely to also establish other localized
   systems for security, file sharing, email, and so on.


7.  Remediation of Computers Infected with a Bot

   This section covers the different options available to remediate a
   computer, which means to remove, disable, or otherwise render a bot
   harmless.  Prior to this step, an ISP has detected the bot, notified
   the user that one of their computers is infected with a bot, and now
   may provide some recommended means to clean the computer.  The
   generally recommended approach is to provide the necessary tools and
   education to the user so that they may perform bot remediation
   themselves, particularly given the risks and difficulties inherent in
   attempting to remove a bot.

   For example, this may include the creation of a special web site with
   security-oriented content that is dedicated for this purpose.  This
   should be a well-publicized security web site to which a user with a
   bot infection can be directed to for remediation.  This security web
   site should clearly explain why the user was notified and may include
   an explanation of what bots are, and the threats that they pose.
   There should be a clear explanation of the steps that the user should
   take in order to attempt to clean their computer and provide
   information on how users can keep the computer free of future
   infections.  The security web site should also have a guided process
   that takes non-technical users through the remediation process, on an
   easily understood, step-by-step basis.

   In terms of the text used to explain what bots are and the threats
   that they pose, something simple such as this may suffice:

         "What is a bot?  A bot is a piece of software, generally
         installed on your machine without your knowledge, which either
         sends spam or tries to steal your personal information.  They
         can be very difficult to spot, though you may have noticed that
         your computer is running much more slowly than usual or you



Livingood, et al.        Expires August 16, 2010               [Page 17]

Internet-Draft     Remediation of Bots in ISP Networks     February 2010


         notice regular disk activity even when you are not doing
         anything.  Ignoring this problem is not really an option since
         your personal information is currently at risk.  Thus, bots
         need to be removed to protect your data and your personal
         information."

   It is also important to note that it may not be immediately apparent
   to the Internet user precisely which devices have been infected with
   a particular bot.  This may be due to the user's home network
   configuration, which may encompass several computers, where a home
   gateway which performs Network Address Translation (NAT) to share a
   single public IP address has been used.  Therefore, any of these
   devices can be infected with a bot.  The consequence of this for an
   ISP is that remediation advice may not ultimately be immediately
   actionable by the Internet user, as that user may need to perform
   additional investigation within their own home network.

   An added complication is that the user may have a bot infection on a
   device such as a video console, multimedia system, appliance, or
   other end-user computing device which does not have a typical Windows
   or Macintosh user interface.  As a result, diligence needs to be
   taken by the ISP where possible such that they can identify and
   communicate the specific nature of the device that has been infected
   with a bot, and further providing appropriate remediation advice.

   There are a number of forums that exist online to provide security
   related support to end users.  These forums are staffed by volunteers
   and often are focussed around the use of a common tool set to help
   end users to remediate computers infected with malware.  It may be
   advantageous to ISPs to foster a relationship with one or more
   forums, perhaps by offering free hosting or other forms of
   sponsorship.


8.  Guided Remediation Process

   Minimally the Guided Remediation Process should include options
   and/or recommendations on how a user should:

   1.  Backup personal Documents, for example: "Before you start, make
       sure to back up all of your important data.  (You should do this
       on a regular basis anyway.)  You can back up your files manually
       or using a system back-up software utility, which may be part of
       your Operating System (OS).  You can back your files up to a USB
       Thumb Drive (aka USB Key), a writeable CD/DVD-ROM, an external
       hard drive, or a network file server."





Livingood, et al.        Expires August 16, 2010               [Page 18]

Internet-Draft     Remediation of Bots in ISP Networks     February 2010


   2.  Download OS patches and Anti-Virus (A/V) software updates.  For
       example, links could be provided to Microsoft Windows updates at
       http://update.microsoft.com/microsoftupdate/v6/
       default.aspx?ln=en-us as well as to Apple MacOS updates at
       http://support.apple.com/kb/HT1338?viewlocale=en_US.

   3.  Explain how to configure the computer to automatically install
       updates for the OS, A/V and other common Web Browsers such as
       Microsoft Internet Explorer, Mozilla Firefox, Apple Safari,
       Opera, and Google Chrome.

   4.  The flow should also have the option for users to get
       professional assistance if they are unable to remove the bots
       themselves.  If purchasing third party assistance, then the user
       should be encouraged to pre-determine how much they are willing
       to pay for that help.  If the computer that is being remediated
       is old and can easily be replaced with a new, faster, larger and
       more reliable system for three or four hundred dollars, the it
       makes no sense to spend five or six hundred dollars to fix the
       old computer, for example.  On the other hand, if the customer
       has a brand new computer that cost several thousand dollars, it
       might make perfect sense to spend the money in attempting to
       remediate it.

   5.  To continue, regardless of whether the user or a knowledgeable
       technical assistant is working on remediating the computer, their
       first task should be to determine which of multiple potentially-
       infected machines may be the one that needs attention (in the
       common case of multiple computers in a home network).  Sometimes,
       as in cases where there is only a single directly-attached
       computer, or the user has been noticing problems with one of
       their computers, this can be easy.  Other times, it may be more
       difficult.  If the user is behind a home gateway/router, then the
       first task may be to ascertain which of the machines is infected.
       In some cases the user may have to check all machines to identify
       the infected one.

   6.  User surveys to solicit feedback on whether the notification and
       remediation process is effective and what recommended changes
       could be made in order to improve the ease, understandability,
       and effectiveness the remediation process.

   7.  If the user is interested in reporting his or her computer's bot
       infection to an applicable law enforcement authority, then the
       computer effectively becomes a cyber "crime scene" and should not
       be mitigated unless or until law enforcement has collected the
       necessary evidence.  For individuals in this situation, the ISP
       should refer them to local, state, federal, or other relevant



Livingood, et al.        Expires August 16, 2010               [Page 19]

Internet-Draft     Remediation of Bots in ISP Networks     February 2010


       computer crime offices.  (Note: Some "minor" incidents, even if
       highly traumatic to the user, may not be sufficiently serious for
       law enforcement to commit some of their limited resources to an
       investigation.)  In addition, individual regions may have other,
       specialized computer crime organizations to which these incidents
       can be reported.  For example, in the United States, that
       organization is the Internet Crime Complaint Center, at
       http://www.ic3.gov.

   8.  Users may also be interested in links to security expert forums,
       where other users can assist them.


9.  Professionally-Assisted Remediation Process

   It should be acknowledged that, based on the current state of
   remediation tools and the technical abilities of end users, that many
   users may be unable to remediate on their own.  As a result, it is
   recommended that users have the option to avail themselves of
   professional assistance.  This may entail online or telephone
   assistance for remediation, as well as working face to face with a
   professional who has training and expertise in the removal of
   malware.


10.  Sharing of Data from the User to the ISP

   As an additional consideration, it may be useful to create a process
   by which users could choose, at their option and with their express
   consent, to share data regarding their bot infection with their ISP
   and/or another authorized third party.  Such third parties may
   include governmental entities that aggregate threat data, such as the
   Internet Crime Complaint Center referred to earlier in this document,
   to academic institutions, and/or security researchers.  While in many
   cases the information shared with the user's ISP or designated third
   parties will only be used for aggregated statistical analysis, it is
   also possible that certain research needs may be best met with more
   detailed data.  Thus, any such data sharing from a user to the ISP or
   authorized third party may contain some type of personally
   identifiable information, either by design or inadvertently.  As a
   result, any such data sharing must be enabled on an opt-in based,
   where users review and approve of the data being shared and the
   parties with which it is to be shared.


11.  Security Considerations

   This document describes in detail the numerous security risks and



Livingood, et al.        Expires August 16, 2010               [Page 20]

Internet-Draft     Remediation of Bots in ISP Networks     February 2010


   concerns relating to bot nets.  As such, it has been appropriate to
   include specific information about security in each section above.
   This document describes the security risks related to malicious bot
   infections themselves, such as enabling identity theft, theft of
   authentication credentials, and the use of a computer to unwittingly
   participate in a DDoS attack, among many other risks.  This document
   also describes at a high level the activities that ISPs should be
   sensitive to, where the collection or communication of PII may be
   possible.  Finally, the document also describes security risks which
   may relate to the particular methods of communicating a notification
   to Internet users.  Bot networks and bot infections pose extremely
   serious security risks and any reader should review this document
   carefully.

   In addition, regarding notifications, as described in the Section 6,
   care should be taken to assure users that notifications have been
   provided by a trustworthy site and/or party, so that the notification
   is more difficult for phishers to mimic, or that the user has some
   level of trust that the notification is valid, and/or that the user
   has some way to verify via some other mechanism or step that the
   notification is valid.

   Lastly, as noted in Section 10, any sharing of data from the User to
   the ISP and/or authorized third parties must be done on an opt-in
   basis and with a clear by the user of the data to be shared and with
   whom it is to be shared.


12.  IANA Considerations

   There are no IANA considerations in this document.


13.  Acknowledgements

   The authors wish to acknowledge the following individuals for
   performing a detailed review of this document and/or providing
   comments and feedback with had helped to improve and evolve this
   document:

   Mark Baugher

   Richard Bennett

   James Butler

   Vint Cerf




Livingood, et al.        Expires August 16, 2010               [Page 21]

Internet-Draft     Remediation of Bots in ISP Networks     February 2010


   Alissa Cooper

   Jonathan Curtis

   Jeff Chan

   Roland Dobbins

   Dave Farber

   Eliot Gillum

   Joel Halpern

   Scott Keoseyan

   The Messaging Anti-Abuse Working Group (MAAWG)

   Jose Nazario

   Gunter Ollmann

   David Reed

   Joe Stewart

   Forrest Swick

   Robb Topolski

   Eric Ziegast


14.  Informative references

   [Battling Botnets and Online Mobs: Estonia's Defense Efforts during
   the Internet War]
              Evron, G., "Battling Botnets and Online Mobs: Estonia's
              Defense Efforts during the Internet War", May 2005, <http:
              //docs.google.com/
              gview?a=v&
              q=cache%3AbyUMj6Djlb8J%3Awww.ciaonet.org%2Fjournals%
              2Fgjia%2Fv9i1%2F0000699.pdf>.

   [Case Study: How a Bookmaker and a Whiz Kid Took On a DDOS-based
   Online Extortion Attack]
              Berinato, S., "Case Study: How a Bookmaker and a Whiz Kid
              Took On a DDOS-based Online Extortion Attack", May 2005, <



Livingood, et al.        Expires August 16, 2010               [Page 22]

Internet-Draft     Remediation of Bots in ISP Networks     February 2010


              http://www.csoonline.com/article/220336/
              How_a_Bookmaker_and_a_Whiz_Kid_Took_On_a_DDOS_based_Online
              _Extortion_Attack>.

   [Cyberspace as a Combat Zone: The Phenomenon of Electronic Jihad]
              Alshech, E., "Cyberspace as a Combat Zone: The Phenomenon
              of Electronic Jihad", February 2007, <http://
              www.memrijttm.org/content/en/report.htm?report=1822>.

   [Emerging Cyber Threats Report for 2009: Data, Mobility and Questions
   of Responsibility will Drive Cyber Threats in 2009 and Beyond]
              Ahamad, M., Amster, D., Barret, M., Cross, T., Heron, G.,
              Jackson, D., King, J., Lee, W., Naraine, R., Ollman, G.,
              Ramsey, J., Schmidt, H., and P. Traynor, "Emerging Cyber
              Threats Report for 2009: Data, Mobility and Questions of
              Responsibility will Drive Cyber Threats in 2009 and
              Beyond", October 2008, <http://smartech.gatech.edu/
              bitstream/1853/26301/1/CyberThreatsReport2009.pdf>.

   [Persistent BIOS Infection]
              Sacco, A. and A. Ortega, "Persistent BIOS Infection",
              March 2009, <http://www.coresecurity.com/files/
              attachments/Persistent_BIOS_Infection_CanSecWest09.pdf>.

   [RFC1459]  Oikarinen, J. and D. Reed, "Internet Relay Chat Protocol",
              RFC 1459, May 1993.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC2142]  Crocker, D., "MAILBOX NAMES FOR COMMON SERVICES, ROLES AND
              FUNCTIONS", RFC 2142, May 1997.

   [RFC3954]  Claise, B., "Cisco Systems NetFlow Services Export Version
              9", RFC 3954, October 2004.

   [Spamalytics: An Empirical Analysis of Spam Marketing Conversion]
              Kanich, C., Kreibich, C., Levchenko, K., Enright, B.,
              Voelker, G., Paxson, V., and S. Savage, "Spamalytics: An
              Empirical Analysis of Spam Marketing Conversion",
              October 2008, <http://www.icir.org/christian/publications/
              2008-ccs-spamalytics.pdf>.

   [The Gh0st in the Shell: Network Security in the Himalayas]
              Vallentin, M., Whiteaker, J., and Y. Ben-David, "The Gh0st
              in the Shell: Network Security in the Himalayas",
              February 2010, <http://www.infowar-monitor.net/wp-content/
              uploads/2010/02/cs294-28-paper.pdf>.



Livingood, et al.        Expires August 16, 2010               [Page 23]

Internet-Draft     Remediation of Bots in ISP Networks     February 2010


   [The snooping dragon: social-malware surveillance of the Tibetan
   movement]
              Nagaraja, S. and R. Anderson, "The snooping dragon:
              social-malware surveillance of the Tibetan movement",
              March 2009,
              <http://www.cl.cam.ac.uk/techreports/UCAM-CL-TR-746.pdf>.


Appendix A.  Document Change Log

   [RFC Editor: This section is to be removed before publication]

   -07 version:

   o  Corrected various spelling and grammatical errors, pointed out by
      additional reviewers.  Also added a section on information flowing
      from the user.  Lastly, updated the reviewer list to include all
      those who either were kind enough to review for us or who provided
      interesting, insightful, and/or helpful feedback.

   -06 version:

   o  Corrected an error in the version change log, and added some extra
      information on user remediation.  Also added an informational
      reference to BIOS infection.

   -05 version:

   o  Minor tweaks made by Jason - ready for wider review and next
      steps.  Also cleared open issues.  Lastly, added 2nd paragraph to
      security section and added sections on limitations relating to
      public and other shared network sites.  Added a new section on
      professional remediation.

   -04 version:

   o  Updated reference to BIOS based malware, added wording on PII and
      local jurisdictions, added suggestion that industry body produce
      bot stats, added suggestion that ISPs use volunteer forums

   -03 version:

   o  all updates from Jason - now ready for wider external review

   -02 version:

   o  all updates from Jason - still some open issues but we're now at a
      place where we can solicit more external feedback



Livingood, et al.        Expires August 16, 2010               [Page 24]

Internet-Draft     Remediation of Bots in ISP Networks     February 2010


   -01 version:

   o  -01 version published


Appendix B.  Open Issues

   [RFC Editor: This section is to be removed before publication]

   A question has been raised about whether this should change from
   Informational to BCP.


Authors' Addresses

   Jason Livingood
   Comcast Cable Communications
   One Comcast Center
   1701 John F. Kennedy Boulevard
   Philadelphia, PA  19103
   US

   Email: jason_livingood@cable.comcast.com
   URI:   http://www.comcast.com


   Nirmal Mody
   Comcast Cable Communications
   One Comcast Center
   1701 John F. Kennedy Boulevard
   Philadelphia, PA  19103
   US

   Email: nirmal_mody@cable.comcast.com
   URI:   http://www.comcast.com


   Mike O'Reirdan
   Comcast Cable Communications
   One Comcast Center
   1701 John F. Kennedy Boulevard
   Philadelphia, PA  19103
   US

   Email: michael_oreirdan@cable.comcast.com
   URI:   http://www.comcast.com





Livingood, et al.        Expires August 16, 2010               [Page 25]


