






     L2VPN Working Group                            
     Internet Draft                                
     Intended status: Informational        
     Expires: April 2013                           
                                                   Nabil Bitar
                                                   Verizon

                                                   Florin Balus 
                                                   Marc Lasserre 
                                                   Wim Henderickx 
     John Drake                                    Alcatel-Lucent 
     Juniper Networks 
                                                   Ali Sajassi 
                                                   Luyuan Fang 
                                                   Cisco 
     Lucy Yong                                                    
     Susan Hares                                   Yuichi Ikejiri               
     Huawei                                        NTT Communications        
                                           
                                                   Mircea Pisica 
                                                   BT 
      
                                                   October 22, 2012 
                                        
          Cloud Networking: VPN Applicability and NVo3 Gap Analysis 
                  draft-bitar-nvo3-vpn-applicability-01.txt 


     Abstract 

        Multi-tenant data centers and clouds provide computing, 
        storage and network resources dedicated per tenant. The 
        current focus in the evolution of multi-tenant data-center and 
        cloud networks is to (1) support a large number of tenants 
        with a large number of communicating systems, (2) provide 
        isolation among tenant virtual networks, (3) provide for 
        efficient network utilization, and (4) support virtual machine 
        mobility and network elasticity that match compute and storage 
        elasticity.  

        
        The NVo3 work effort is initially targeted to identify the 
        requirements for large multi-tenant data centers, and develop 
        a framework architecture that addresses those requirements. In 
        addition, it is targeted to identify existing or evolving 
        solutions used in cloud networking, their applicability to 
        NVo3, and any gaps that they may have in addressing the NVo3 
        requirements. This document describes the applicability of 
        existing work in various IETF Working Groups (e.g., RFCs and 
        drafts developed or evolving in IETF L2VPN and L3VPN Working 
        Groups) to cloud networking and NVo3, as well as the gaps and 
        problems that need to be further addressed. 



      
      
      
     Bitar, et al.           Expires April 22, 2013           [Page 1] 
      






     Internet-Draft  Cloud Networking VPN Applicability   October 2012 
         

      

     Status of this Memo 

        This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the 
        provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.  

        Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet 
        Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working 
        groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute working 
        documents as Internet-Drafts. 

        Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
        months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other 
        documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-
        Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than as 
        "work in progress." 

        The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
        http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 

        The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed 
        at http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html 

        This Internet-Draft will expire on April 22, 2012. 

     Copyright Notice 

        Copyright (c) 2012 IETF Trust and the persons identified as 
        the document authors. All rights reserved. 

        This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal 
        Provisions Relating to IETF Documents 
        (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date 
        of publication of this document. Please review these documents 
        carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with 
        respect to this document.  

         

         

         




      
      
     Bitar, et al.            Expires April 22, 2013         [Page 2] 
         






     Internet-Draft  Cloud Networking VPN Applicability   October 2012 
         

     Table of Contents 

        1. Introduction.............................................. 4 
        2. General terminology....................................... 6 
           2.1. Conventions used in this document.................... 7 
        3. Brief overview of Ethernet, L2VPN and L3VPN deployments... 7 
        4. Generic Cloud Networking Architecture..................... 9 
        5. Challenges in Existing Deployments....................... 13 
           5.1. VLAN Space Limitation............................... 14 
           5.2. MAC, IP, and ARP Issues............................. 14 
           5.3. Per VLAN flood containment.......................... 17 
           5.4. Convergence and multipath support................... 17 
           5.5. Optimal traffic forwarding.......................... 18 
           5.6. Efficient multicast................................. 20 
           5.7. L3 virtualization................................... 21 
           5.8. Connectivity to existing tenant VPN sites........... 21 
           5.9. DC Inter-connect requirements....................... 22 
           5.10. VM Mobility........................................ 22 
        6. L2VPN Applicability to Cloud Networking.................. 24 
           6.1. VLANs and L2VPN toolset............................. 24 
           6.2. E-VPN............................................... 27 
           6.3. PBB and L2VPN toolset............................... 30 
              6.3.1. Addressing VLAN space exhaustion and MAC 
              explosion............................................. 32 
              6.3.2. Fast convergence and L2 multi-pathing.......... 32 
              6.3.3. Per ISID flood containment..................... 34 
              6.3.4. Efficient multicast support.................... 34 
              6.3.5. Tunneling options for PBB ELAN: Ethernet, IP and 
              MPLS.................................................. 34 
              6.3.6. Use Case examples.............................. 35 
              6.3.7. NVo3 applicability............................. 38 
              6.3.8. Connectivity to existing VPN sites and Internet 40 
              6.3.9. DC Interconnect................................ 43 
              6.3.10. Interoperating with existing DC VLANs......... 44 
           6.4. TRILL and L2VPN toolset............................. 46 
        7. L3VPN applicability to Cloud Networking.................. 47 
        8. VM Mobility with E-VPN................................... 50 
           8.1. Layer 2 Extension Solution.......................... 50 
           8.2. VM Default Gateway Solutions........................ 53 
              8.2.1. VM Default Gateway Solution 1.................. 53 
              8.2.2. VM Default Gateway Solution 2.................. 54 
        9. Solutions and Considerations for other DC challenges..... 55 
           9.1. Addressing IP/ARP explosion......................... 55 
           9.2. Optimal traffic forwarding.......................... 55 
           9.3. VM Mobility......................................... 55 
           9.4. Dynamic provisioning of network services............ 56 

      
      
     Bitar, et al.            Expires April 22, 2013         [Page 3] 
         






     Internet-Draft  Cloud Networking VPN Applicability   October 2012 
         

           9.5. Considerations for Layer2 and Layer3 VPNS on End-
           systems.................................................. 57 
        10. Operator Considerations................................. 57 
        11. Security Considerations................................. 58 
        12. IANA Considerations..................................... 58 
        13. References.............................................. 58 
           13.1. Normative References............................... 58 
           13.2. Informative References............................. 59 
        14. Acknowledgments......................................... 61 
         
     1. Introduction 

      

     The initial Data Center (DC) networks were built to address the 
     needs of individual enterprises and/or individual applications. 
     Ethernet VLANs and regular IP routing were used to provide 
     connectivity between compute, storage resources and the related 
     customer sites.  

      

     The virtualization of compute resources in a Data Center (DC) 
     environment provides the foundation for providing compute and 
     storage resources to multiple tenants (customers), and/or for 
     providing application services to multiple tenants. For example, 
     a tenant may be provided a group of Virtual Machines (VMs) that 
     may reside on server blades distributed throughout a DC or across 
     DCs. In this latter case, the DCs may be owned and operated by a 
     cloud service provider connected to one or more network service 
     providers, two or more cloud service providers each connected to 
     one or more network service providers, or a hybrid of DCs 
     operated by the customer and the cloud service provider(s). In 
     addition, multiple tenants may be assigned resources on the same 
     compute and storage hardware.  

      

     In order to provide access for multiple tenants to the 
     virtualized compute and storage resources, the DC network and DC 
     interconnect have to evolve from the basic VLAN and IP routing 
     architecture to provide equivalent connectivity virtualization at 
     a large scale.  

      


      
      
     Bitar, et al.            Expires April 22, 2013         [Page 4] 
         






     Internet-Draft  Cloud Networking VPN Applicability   October 2012 
         

     [NVo3-problem-statement] describes the problems faced in large 
     multi-tenant data centers, and motivates the need for overlays to 
     address these problems. The main problems highlighted are: (1) 
     support for a large number of tenants, (2) network infrastructure 
     scale, (3) isolation among tenant virtual networks with 
     overlapping address spaces across tenants, and (4) support for 
     virtual machine mobility, network elasticity, and accompanying 
     dynamic network provisioning. [NVo3-fmwk] describes a framework 
     architecture for NVo3, while [NVo3-dp-reqts] and [NVo3-cp-reqts] 
     describe NVo3 data plane and control plane requirements, 
     respectively. Prior to the NVo3 effort initiation, a number of 
     technologies had been used to address network virtualization. 
     Some had also been deployed in data centers and cloud networks, 
     and/or had been further evolved to address requirements of large 
     multi-tenant data centers and cloud networks. The natural 
     question is how these technologies address multi-tenant cloud 
     networking problems as described in [NVo3-problem-statement], 
     what challenges or gaps they need to still further address, and 
     how they compare to the NVo3 architecture framework [NVo3-frmwk]. 
     This document addresses that question. Further evolution of this 
     document may target a more detailed comparison of these 
     technologies to the evolving NVo3 data plane and control plane 
     requirements. 

      

     Virtual LAN bridging and Virtual Private Network (VPN) 
     technologies had been developed and deployed to support virtual 
     networks with overlapping address spaces over a common 
     infrastructure. Some of these technologies also use various 
     overlay technologies to enable the sharing and scale of an 
     undelay network infrastructure. Those technologies have been used 
     in data-center and cloud networks. However, these technologies 
     originally developed for relatively static environments in terms 
     of communicating endpoints, do not address all the requirements 
     arising in cloud-computing environments, and specifically multi-
     tenant environments. 

      

     This document starts with a brief overview of Ethernet, Layer2 
     and Layer3 VPN deployments. It then describes generic data center 
     architecture. This architecture is used in subsequent sections as 
     basis for describing how different VPN technologies apply in DCs 
     and cloud networks, and what problems described in [Nvo3-problem-
     statement] they address. In addition, it provides a comparison 

      
      
     Bitar, et al.            Expires April 22, 2013         [Page 5] 
         






     Internet-Draft  Cloud Networking VPN Applicability   October 2012 
         

     among these technologies and the NVo3 architecture framework at 
     the functional level.  

      

     2. General terminology  

         

        Some general terminology is defined here; most of the 
        terminology used is from [802.1ah], [RFC4026] and [NVo3-fmwk]. 
        Terminology specific to this memo is introduced as needed in 
        later sections. 

         

        DC: Data Center 

         

        ELAN: MEF ELAN, multipoint-to-multipoint Ethernet service  

         

        EVPN: Ethernet VPN as defined in [EVPN] 

         

        PBB: Provider Backbone Bridging, new Ethernet encapsulation 
        designed to address VLAN exhaustion and MAC explosion issues; 
        specified in IEEE 802.1ah [802.1ah] 

         

        PBB-EVPN: defines how EVPN can be used to transport PBB frames 

         

        BMAC: Backbone MACs, the backbone source or destination MAC 
        address fields defined in the 802.1ah provider MAC 
        encapsulation header.    

         




      
      
     Bitar, et al.            Expires April 22, 2013         [Page 6] 
         






     Internet-Draft  Cloud Networking VPN Applicability   October 2012 
         

        CMAC: Customer MACs, the customer source or destination MAC 
        address fields defined in the 802.1ah customer MAC 
        encapsulation header. 

         

        BEB: A backbone edge bridge positioned at the edge of a 
        provider backbone bridged network. It is usually the point in 
        the network where PBB encapsulation is added or removed from 
        the frame.  

         

        BCB: A backbone core bridge positioned in the core of a 
        provider backbone bridged network. It performs regular 
        Ethernet switching using the outer Ethernet header. 

         

     2.1. Conventions used in this document  

         

        The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL 
        NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and 
        "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described 
        in RFC-2119 [RFC2119].  

         

        In this document, these words will appear with that 
        interpretation only when in ALL CAPS. Lower case uses of 
        these words are not to be interpreted as carrying RFC-2119 
        significance. 

         

     3. Brief overview of Ethernet, L2VPN and L3VPN deployments 

         

        Initial Ethernet networks have been deployed in LAN 
        environments, where the total number of hosts (hence MAC 
        addresses) to manage was limited. Physical Ethernet topologies 
        in LANs were pretty simple. Hence, a simple loop resolution 
        protocol such as the Spanning Tree Protocol (STP) was 

      
      
     Bitar, et al.            Expires April 22, 2013         [Page 7] 
         






     Internet-Draft  Cloud Networking VPN Applicability   October 2012 
         

        sufficient in the early days. Efficient utilisation of 
        physical links was not a major concern in LANs, while at the 
        same time leveraging existing and mature technologies.  

         

        As more hosts got connected to a LAN, or the need arose to 
        create multiple LANs on the same physical infrastructure, it 
        became necessary to partition the physical topology into 
        multiple Virtual LANs (VLANs) [802.1q]. A VLAN is identified 
        by a VLAN ID in the 802.1q VLAN tag inserted in the Ethernet 
        header. STP evolved to cope with multiple VLANs with Multiple-
        STP (MSTP). Bridges/Switches evolved to learn behind which 
        VLAN specific MACs resided, a process known as qualified 
        learning, requiring MACs to be unique only in the VLAN 
        context. As Ethernet LANs moved into the provider space, the 
        12-bit VLAN space limitation (i.e. a total of 4094 VLANs, 
        VLANs 0 and 4095 reserved) led to VLAN stacking (Q-in-Q) and 
        later to Provider backbone Bridging (PBB). 

         

        With PBB, not only can over 16M virtual LAN instances (24-bit 
        Service I-SID) be supported, but also a clean separation 
        between customer and provider domains has been defined with 
        separate MAC address spaces (Customer-MACs (CMACs) versus 
        Provider Backbone-MACs (BMACs)). CMACs are only learned at the 
        edge of the PBB network on PBB Backbone Edge Bridges (BEBs) in 
        the context of an I-component while only B-MACs are learnt by 
        PBB Backbone Core Bridges (BCBs). This results in BEB switches 
        creating MAC-in-MAC tunnels to carry customer traffic, thereby 
        hiding C-MACs in the core. 

         

        In the meantime, interconnecting L2 domains across 
        geographical areas has become a necessity. VPN technologies 
        have been defined to carry both L2 and L3 traffic across 
        IP/MPLS core networks. The same technologies could also be 
        used within the same data center to provide for scale or for 
        interconnecting services across L3 domains, as needed. Virtual 
        Private LAN Service (VPLS) has been used to provide 
        transparent LAN services over IP/MPLS WANs while IP VPNs, 
        including BGP/MPLS IP VPNs and IPsec VPNs, have been used to 
        provide virtual IP routing instances over a common IP/MPLS 
        core network. 

      
      
     Bitar, et al.            Expires April 22, 2013         [Page 8] 
         






     Internet-Draft  Cloud Networking VPN Applicability   October 2012 
         

         

        All these technologies have been combined to maximize their 
        respective benefits. At the edge of the network, such as in 
        access networks, VLAN and PBB are commonly used technologies. 
        Aggregation networks typically use VPLS or BGP/MPLS IP VPNs to 
        groom traffic on a common IP/MPLS core.  

         

        It should be noted that Ethernet has kept evolving because of 
        its attractive features, specifically its auto-discovery 
        capabilities and the ability of hosts to physically relocate 
        on the same LAN without requiring renumbering. In addition, 
        Ethernet switches have become commodity, creating a financial 
        incentive for interconnecting hosts in the same community with 
        Ethernet switches. The network layer (layer3), on the other 
        hand, has become pre-dominantly IP. Thus, communication across 
        LANs uses IP routing. 

         

     4. Generic Cloud Networking Architecture  

         

        A generic architecture for Cloud Networking is depicted in 
        Figure 1.  



















      
      
     Bitar, et al.            Expires April 22, 2013         [Page 9] 
         






     Internet-Draft  Cloud Networking VPN Applicability   October 2012 
         

                                 ,---------. 
                               ,'           `. 
                              (    IP/MPLS    ) 
                               `.           ,' 
                                 `-+------+' 
                              +--+--+   +-+---+ 
                              | GW  |+-+| GW  | 
                              +-+---+   +-----+ 
                                 /         \ 
                           +----+---+   +---+-----+ 
                           | Core   |   |  Core   | 
                           | SW/Rtr |   | SW/Rtr  | 
                           +-+----`.+   +-+---+---+ 
                             /      \   .'     \ 
                        +---+--+   +-`.+--+  +--+----+ 
                        | ToR  |   | ToR  |  |  ToR  | 
                        +-+--`.+   +-+-`.-+  +-+--+--+ 
                        .'     \   .'    \   .'    `. 
                     __/_      _i./       i./_      _\__ 
                    :VSw :    :VSw :     :VSw :    :VSw : 
                    '----'    '----'     '----'    '----' 
                                        
            Figure 1 : A Generic Architecture for Cloud Networking 

         

        A cloud network is composed of intra-Data Center (DC) networks 
        and network services, and inter-DC network connectivity. DCs 
        may belong to a cloud service provider connected to one or 
        more network service providers, different cloud service 
        providers each connected to one or more network service 
        providers, or a hybrid of DCs operated by the enterprise 
        customers and the cloud service provider(s). It may also 
        provide access to the public and/or enterprise customers. 

         

        The following network components are present in a DC: 

         

           - VSw or virtual switch: software based Ethernet switch 
             running inside the server blades. VSw may be single or 
             dual-homed to the Top of Rack switches (ToRs). The 
             individual VMs appear to a VSw as IP hosts connected via 


      
      
     Bitar, et al.            Expires April 22, 2013         [Page 10] 
         






     Internet-Draft  Cloud Networking VPN Applicability   October 2012 
         

             logical Ethernet interfaces. The VSw may evolve to 
             support IP routing functionality.  

           - ToR or Top of Rack: hardware-based Ethernet switch 
             aggregating all Ethernet links from the server blades in 
             a rack representing the entry point in the physical DC 
             network for the hosts. ToRs may also perform routing 
             functionality. ToRs are usually dual-homed to the Core 
             SW. Other deployment scenarios may use an EoR (End of 
             Row) switch to provide a similar function as a ToR.  

              

           - Core SW (switch): high capacity core node aggregating 
             multiple ToRs. This is usually a cost effective Ethernet 
             switch. Core switches can also support IP routing 
             capabilities. 

      

           - DC GW: gateway to the outside world providing DC 
             Interconnect and connectivity to Internet and VPN 
             customers. In the current DC network model, this may be a 
             Router with Virtual Routing capabilities and/or an IPVPN 
             [RFC4364]/L2VPN [RFC7461][RFC[4762] Provider Edge [PE].  

         

        A DC network also contains other network services, such as 
        firewalls, load-balancers, IPsec gateways, and SSL 
        acceleration gateways. These network services are not 
        currently discussed in this document as the focus is on the 
        routing and switching services. The traditional DC deployment 
        employs VLANs to isolate different VM groups throughout the 
        Ethernet switching network within a DC. The VM Groups are 
        mapped to VLANs in the vSws. The ToRs and Core SWs may employ 
        VLAN trunking to eliminate provisioning touches in the DC 
        network. In some scenarios, IP routing is extended down to the 
        ToRs, and may be further extended to the hypervisor as 
        discussed earlier. However, this routing unless it provides 
        for virtual forwarding function, it would require it to be 
        limited to one IP domain addressed from the same address 
        realm. 

         


      
      
     Bitar, et al.            Expires April 22, 2013         [Page 11] 
         






     Internet-Draft  Cloud Networking VPN Applicability   October 2012 
         

        Any new DC and cloud networking technology should to be able 
        to fit as seamlessly as possible with this existing DC model, 
        at least in a non-greenfield environment. In particular, it 
        should be possible to introduce enhancements to various tiers 
        in this model in a phased approach without disrupting the 
        other elements.  

         

        Depending upon the scale, DC distribution, operations model, 
        Capex and Opex aspects, DC switching elements can act as 
        strict L2 switches and/or provide IP routing capabilities, 
        including VPN routing and/or MPLS support if the operation 
        environment allows. In smaller DCs, it is likely that some 
        tier layers get collapsed, and that Internet connectivity, 
        inter-DC connectivity and VPN support will be handled by Core 
        Nodes that perform the DC GW role as well.  

         

        The DC network architecture described in this section can be 
        used to provide generic L2-L3 service connectivity to each 
        tenant as depicted in Figure 2: 

         

                           ---+--.                      ---+--- 
                  ....( VRF1 )......               (  VRF2 ) 
                      |    '-----'      |               '-----' 
                      |     Tenant1     |ELAN12     Tenant1| 
                  |ELAN11       ....|........          |ELAN13 
                  '':'''''''':'       |        |     '':'''''''':' 
               ,'.      ,'.      ,+.      ,+.     ,'.      ,'. 
              (VM )....(VM )    (VM )... (VM )   (VM )....(VM ) 
               `-'      `-'      `-'      `-'     `-'      `-' 
                                        
            Figure 2 : Logical Service connectivity for one tenant 

         

        In this example one or more virtual routing contexts 
        distributed on multiple DC GWs and one or more ELANs (e.g., 
        one per Application) running on DC switches are assigned for 
        DC tenant 1. ELAN is a generic term for Ethernet multipoint 
        service, which in the current DC environment is implemented 


      
      
     Bitar, et al.            Expires April 22, 2013         [Page 12] 
         






     Internet-Draft  Cloud Networking VPN Applicability   October 2012 
         

        using 12-bit VLAN tags. Other possible ELAN technologies are 
        discussed in section 6. 

         

        For a multi-tenant DC, this type of service connectivity or a 
        variation could be used for each tenant. In some cases only L2 
        connectivity is required, i.e., only an ELAN may be used to 
        interconnect VMs and customer sites. 

         

     5. Challenges in Existing Deployments 

         

        This section summarizes the challenges faced with the present 
        mode of operation described in the previous section and the 
        issues arising for next generation DC networks as described in 
        [NVo3-problem-statement].  

         

        With the introduction of multi-tenant DCs, providing each 
        tenant dedicated virtual compute and storage resources and/or 
        application services, the DC network must also provide each 
        tenant access to these resources and services. In addition, 
        some tenants may require some aspect of their services 
        available to other businesses in a B-to-B model or to the 
        public. Every tenant requires service connectivity to its own 
        resources with secure separation from other tenant domains. 
        Connectivity needs to support various deployment models, 
        including interconnecting customer-hosted data center 
        resources to Cloud Service Provider (CSP) hosted resources 
        (Virtualized DC for the tenant). This connectivity may be at 
        layer2 or layer3.  

         

        Currently, large DCs are often built on a service architecture 
        where each tenant is assigned two or more VLANs. VLANs 
        configured in Ethernet edge and core switches are 
        interconnected by IP routing running in a few centralized 
        routers. There may be some cases though where IP routing might 
        be used in the DC core nodes or even in the TORs inside a DC.  


      
      
     Bitar, et al.            Expires April 22, 2013         [Page 13] 
         






     Internet-Draft  Cloud Networking VPN Applicability   October 2012 
         

         

     5.1. VLAN Space Limitation 

         

        Existing DC deployments provide customer separation and flood 
        containment, including support for DC infrastructure 
        interconnectivity, using Ethernet VLANs [802.1q]. A 12-bit 
        VLAN tag provides support for a maximum of 4094 VLANs.  

         

        4094 VLANs are inadequate for a CSP looking to expand its 
        customer base. For example, there are a number of VPN 
        deployments (VPLS and IP VPN) that serve more than 20K 
        customers. If a VPN service provider with 20K VPN customers 
        wants to provide cloud services to these customers or teams up 
        with an independent CSP that does, and If 50% (10k) of these 
        customers are likely to become cloud customers each requiring 
        multiple VLANs in a multi-tenant DC, 4094 VLANs will not be 
        able to support the demand. In general, 4094 VLANs will 
        support less than 4K tenants in a multi-tenant DC unless 
        constraints are imposed on the VM placement so that the DC is 
        subdivided into multiple non-congruent domains, each with 4K 
        VLANs.  

         

        The cloud networking infrastructure needs to provide support 
        for a much bigger number of virtual Layer2 (L2) domains than 
        4K, as discussed in [NVo3-problem-statement] Section 2.7, 
        allowing for resource placement flexibility and efficient 
        resource utilization as discussed in [NVo3-problem-statement] 
        Section 2.2. 

         

     5.2. MAC, IP, and ARP Issues 

         

        Virtual Machines are the basic compute blocks provided to 
        cloud tenants. Every server blade typically supports 16-40 VMs 
        today with 100 or more VMs per server blade possibly becoming 
        common in the near future. Every VM may have multiple 

      
      
     Bitar, et al.            Expires April 22, 2013         [Page 14] 
         






     Internet-Draft  Cloud Networking VPN Applicability   October 2012 
         

        interfaces for provider and enterprise management, VM mobility 
        and tenant access, each with its own MAC and IP addresses. For 
        a sizable DC, this may translate into millions of VM IP and 
        MAC addresses. From a cloud network viewpoint, this scale 
        number will be an order of magnitude higher. 

         

        Supporting this amount of IP and MAC addresses, including the 
        associated dynamic behavior (e.g., ARP), throughout the DC 
        Ethernet switches and routers is very challenging in an 
        Ethernet VLAN and regular routing environment. 

         

        A Core Ethernet switch supporting VLAN bridging domains 
        [802.1q] learns the MAC addresses for every single VM 
        interface that sends traffic through the switch albeit in the 
        context of VLANs to which these MACs belong. VLANs, as 
        discussed earlier, provide for MAC address separation across 
        tenants and therefore address the problem in [NVo3-problem-
        statement] Section 2.5 for L2 bridged domains.  Throwing 
        memory to increase the MAC Forwarding DataBase (FDB) size 
        affects the cost of these switches, and there could still be a 
        scale constraint. MAC address table scale is highlighted in 
        [NVo3-problem-statemnt] Section 2.3. In addition, as the 
        number of MACs that switches need to learn increases, 
        convergence time could increase, and flooding activity will 
        increase upon a topology change as the core switches flush and 
        re-learn the MAC addresses. Simple operational mistakes may 
        lead to duplicate MAC entries within the same VLAN domain and 
        security issues due to administrative MAC assignment used 
        today for VM interfaces. Similar concerns about memory 
        requirements and related cost apply to DC Edge switches 
        (ToRs/EoRs) and DC GWs.  

         

        From a router perspective, it is important to maximize the 
        utilization of available resources in both control and data 
        planes through flexible mapping of VMs and related VLANs to 
        routing interfaces. This is not easily done in the current 
        VLAN based deployment environment where the use of VLAN 
        trunking limits the allocation of VMs to only local routers.  

         

      
      
     Bitar, et al.            Expires April 22, 2013         [Page 15] 
         






     Internet-Draft  Cloud Networking VPN Applicability   October 2012 
         

        The amount of ARP traffic grows linearly with the number of 
        hosts on a LAN. For 1 million VM hosts, it can be expected 
        that the amount of ARP traffic will be in the range of half 
        million ARPs per second at the peak, which corresponds to over 
        200 Mbps of ARP traffic [MYERS]. Similarly, on a server, the 
        amount of ARP traffic grows linearly with the number of 
        virtual L2 domains/ELANs instantiated on that server and the 
        number of VMs in that domain. Besides the link capacity 
        wasted, which may be small compared to the link capacities 
        deployed in DCs, the computational burden may be prohibitive. 
        In a large-DC environment, the large number of hosts and the 
        distribution of ARP traffic may lead to a number of 
        challenges: 

         

           - Processing overload and overload of ARP entries on the 
             Server/Hypervisor. This is caused by the increased number 
             of VMs per server blade and the size of related ELAN 
             domains. For example, a server blade with 100 VMs, each 
             in a separate L2 domain with 100 VMs each would need to 
             support 10K ARP entries and the associated ARP processing 
             while performing the other compute tasks.  
           - Processing overload and exhaustion of ARP entries on the 
             Routers/PEs and any other L3 Service Appliances (Firewall 
             (FW), Load-Balancer (LB) etc.). This issue is magnified 
             by the L3 virtualization at the service gateways. For 
             example, a gateway PE handling 10K ELANs each with 10 VMs 
             will result in 100K hosts sending/receiving traffic 
             to/from the PE, thus requiring the PE to learn 100K ARP 
             entries. It should be noted that if the PE supports 
             Integrated Routing and Bridging (IRB), it must support 
             the associated virtual IP RIBs/FIBs and MAC FDBs for 
             these hosts in addition to the ARP entries. 
           - Flood explosion throughout Ethernet switching network. 
             This is caused by the use of VLAN trunking and implicitly 
             by the lack of per VPN flood containment. 

           

          DC and DC-interconnect technologies, including control 
          plane, that minimize the negative impact of ARP, MAC and IP 
          entry explosion on individual network elements in a DC or 
          cloud network hierarchy are needed.  

           

      
      
     Bitar, et al.            Expires April 22, 2013         [Page 16] 
         






     Internet-Draft  Cloud Networking VPN Applicability   October 2012 
         

      

     5.3. Per VLAN flood containment 

         

        From an operational perspective, DC operators try to minimize 
        the provisioning touches required for configuring a VLAN 
        domain by employing VLAN trunks on the L2 switches. This comes 
        at the cost of flooding broadcast, multicast and unknown 
        unicast frames outside of the boundaries of the actual VLAN 
        domain. Containment of a broadcast domain identified by a VLAN 
        ID to a POD, and connecting a broadcast domain to a local 
        router limits the L2 broadcast domain span but also limits the 
        flexibility of placing VMs across PODs in a DC or a cloud. 
        This is the problem identified in [NVo3-problem-statement] 
        Section 3.4. 

         

        The cloud-networking infrastructure needs to prevent 
        unnecessary traffic from being sent/leaked to undesired 
        locations. 

         

     5.4. Convergence and multipath support 

         

        Spanning Tree is used in the current DC environment for loop 
        avoidance in the Ethernet switching domain.  

         

        STP can take 30 to 50 seconds to repair a topology. Practical 
        experience shows that Rapid STP (RSTP) can also take multiple 
        seconds to converge, such as when the root bridge fails. 

         

        STP eliminates loops by disabling ports. The result is that 
        only one path is used to carry traffic. The capacity of 
        disabled links cannot be utilized, leading to inefficient use 
        of resources.  


      
      
     Bitar, et al.            Expires April 22, 2013         [Page 17] 
         






     Internet-Draft  Cloud Networking VPN Applicability   October 2012 
         

         

        In a small DC deployment, multi-chassis LAG (MC-LAG) support 
        may be sufficient initially to provide for loop-free 
        redundancy as an STP alternative. However, in medium or large 
        DCs it is challenging to use MC-LAGs solely across the network 
        to provide for resiliency and loop-free paths without 
        introducing a layer2 routing protocol: i.e. for multi-homing 
        of server blades to ToRs, ToRs to Core SWs, Core SWs to DC 
        GWs. MC-LAG may work as a local mechanism but it has no 
        knowledge of the end-to-end paths so it does not provide any 
        degree of traffic steering across the network.  

         

        Efficient and mature link-state protocols, such as IS-IS, 
        provide rapid failover times, can compute optimal paths and 
        can fully utilize multiple parallel paths to forward traffic 
        between 2 nodes in the network. 

         

        Unlike OSPF, IS-IS runs directly at L2 (i.e. no reliance on 
        IP) and does not require any configuration. Therefore, IS-IS 
        based DC networks are to be favored over STP-based networks. 
        IEEE Shortest Path Bridging (SPB), based on IEEE 802.1aq and 
        IEEE 802.1Qbp, and IETF TRILL [RFC6325] are technologies that 
        enable Layer2 networks using IS-IS for Layer2 routing. 

         

     5.5. Optimal traffic forwarding 

         

        Optimal traffic forwarding requires (1) efficient utilization 
        of all available link capacity in a DC and DC-interconnect, 
        and (2) traffic forwarding on the shortest path between any 
        two communicating VMs within the DC or across DCs.  

         

        Optimizing traffic forwarding between any VM pair in the same 
        virtual domain is dependent on (1) the placement of these VMs 
        and their relative proximity from a network viewpoint, and (2) 
        the technology used for computing the routing/switching path 

      
      
     Bitar, et al.            Expires April 22, 2013         [Page 18] 
         






     Internet-Draft  Cloud Networking VPN Applicability   October 2012 
         

        between these VMs. The latter is especially important in the 
        context of VM Mobility, moving a VM from one network location 
        to another, while maintaining its layer2 and Layer3 (IP) 
        addresses.  

         

        Ethernet-based forwarding between two VMs in traditional DCs 
        relies on the MAC-destination Address that is unique per VM 
        interface in the context of a virtual domain (e.g., VLAN). In 
        traditional IEEE technologies (e.g., 802.1q, 802.1ad, 802.1ah) 
        and IETF L2VPN (i.e., VPLS), Ethernet MAC reachability is 
        always learnt in the data plane. Other IEEE and IETF 
        technologies allow MAC reachability to be learnt in the 
        control plane as discussed further in Section 6. . In all 
        these cases, it is important that as a VM is moved from one 
        location to another: (1) VM MAC reachability convergence 
        happens fast to minimize traffic black-holing, and (2) 
        forwarding takes the shortest path. 

         

        IP-based forwarding relies on the destination IP address. ECMP 
        load balancing relies on flow-based criteria. An IP host 
        address is unique per VM interface. However, hosts on a LAN 
        share a subnet mask, and IP routing entries are based on that 
        subnet address. Thus, when VMs are on the same LAN and 
        traditional forwarding takes place, these VMs forward traffic 
        to each other by relying on ARP or IPv6 Neighbor discovery to 
        identify the MAC address of the destination and on the 
        underlying layer2 network to deliver the resulting MAC frame 
        to is destination. However, when VMs, as IP hosts across 
        layer2 virtual domains, need to communicate they rely on the 
        underlying IP routing infrastructure.  

         

        In addition, when a DC is an all-IP DC, VMs are assigned a 
        host address with /32 subnet in the IPv4 case, or /64 or /128 
        host address in the IPv6 case, and rely on the IP routing 
        infrastructure to route the IP packets among VMs. In this 
        latter case, there is really no need for layer2 awareness 
        potentially beyond the hypervisor switch at the server hosting 
        the VM. In either case, when a VM moves location from one 
        physical router to another while maintaining its IP identity 
        (address), the underlying IP network must be able to route the 

      
      
     Bitar, et al.            Expires April 22, 2013         [Page 19] 
         






     Internet-Draft  Cloud Networking VPN Applicability   October 2012 
         

        traffic to the destination and must be able to do that on the 
        shortest path.  

         

        Thus, in the case of IP address aggregation as in a subnet, 
        optimality in traffic forwarding to a VM will require 
        reachability to the VM host address rather than only the 
        subnet. That is what is often referred to as punching a hole 
        in the aggregate at the expense of routing and forwarding 
        table size increase.  

         

        As in layer2, layer3 may capitalize on hierarchical tunneling 
        to optimize the routing/FIB resource utilization at different 
        places in the network. If a hybrid of subnet-based routing and 
        host-based routing (host-based routing here is used to refer 
        to hole-punching in the aggregate) is used, then during VM 
        mobility, routing transition can take place, and traffic may 
        be routed to a location based on subnet reachability or to a 
        location where the VM used to be attached. In either of these 
        cases, traffic must not be black-holed. It must be directed 
        potentially via tunneling to the location where the VM is. 
        This requires that the old routing gateway knows where the VM 
        is currently attached. How to obtain that information can be 
        based on different techniques with tradeoffs. However, this 
        traffic triangulation is not optimal and must only exist in 
        the transition until the network converges to a shortest path 
        to the destination. 

         

     5.6. Efficient multicast 

         

        STP bridges typically perform IGMP and/or PIM snooping in 
        order to optimize multicast data delivery. However, this 
        snooping is performed locally by each bridge following the STP 
        topology where all the traffic goes through the root bridge. 
        This may result in sub-optimal multicast traffic delivery. In 
        addition, each customer multicast group is associated with a 
        forwarding tree throughout the Ethernet switching network. 
        Solutions must provide for efficient Layer2 multicast. In an 
        all-IP network, explicit multicast trees in the DC network can 

      
      
     Bitar, et al.            Expires April 22, 2013         [Page 20] 
         






     Internet-Draft  Cloud Networking VPN Applicability   October 2012 
         

        be built via multicast signaling protocols (e.g., PIM-SSM) 
        that follows the shortest path between the destinations and 
        source(s). In an IPVPN context, Multicast IPVPN based on 
        [MVPN] can be used to build multicast trees shared among 
        IPVPNs, specific to VPNs, and/or shared among multicast groups 
        across IPVPNs. 

         

     5.7. L3 virtualization  

         

        In order to provide tenant L3 separation while supporting 
        overlapping IP addressing and privacy across tenants, as 
        discussed in [NV03-roblem-statement] Section 2.5, a number of 
        schemes were implemented in the DC environment. Some of these 
        schemes, such as double NATing are operationally complex and 
        prone to operator errors. Virtual Routing contexts, Virtual 
        Device contexts, or dedicated hardware-routers are positioned 
        in the DC environment as an alternative to these mechanisms. 
        Every customer is assigned a dedicated routing context with 
        associated control plane protocols. For instance, every 
        customer gets an IP routing instance controlled by its own 
        routing. Assigning virtual or hardware routers to each 
        customer, while supporting thousands of customers in a DC,   
        is neither scalable nor cost-efficient. Section 6 further 
        discusses the applicability of BGP/MPLS IP VPNs to 
        L3vitualization. 

         

     5.8. Connectivity to existing tenant VPN sites 

         

        It is expected that cloud services will have to span larger 
        geographical areas in the near future and that existing VPN 
        customers will require access to VM and storage facilities   
        for virtualized data center applications. Hence, the DC 
        network virtualization must interoperate with deployed and 
        evolving VPN solutions (e.g., IP VPN, VPLS, VPWS, PBB-VPLS, 
        E-VPN and PBB-EVPN). 

         


      
      
     Bitar, et al.            Expires April 22, 2013         [Page 21] 
         






     Internet-Draft  Cloud Networking VPN Applicability   October 2012 
         

        Section 6 discusses this type of connectivity. 

         

     5.9. DC Inter-connect requirements 

         

        Cloud computing requirements such as VM Mobility across DCs, 
        Management connectivity, and support for East-West traffic 
        between customer applications located in different DCs imply 
        that inter-DC connectivity must be supported. These DCs can be 
        part of a hybrid cloud operated by the cloud service 
        provider(s) and/or the end-customers.  

         

        Mature VPN technologies can be used to provide L2/L3 DC 
        interconnect among VLANs/virtual domains located in different 
        DCs. DC-interconnect using existing VPN technologies is 
        described in Section 6. 

          

     5.10. VM Mobility 

         

        The ability to move VMs within a resource pool, whether it is 
        a local move within the same DC to another server or to a 
        distant DC, offers multiple advantages for a number of 
        scenarios, for example: 

         

        - In the event of a possible natural disaster, moving VMs to a 
          safe DC location decreases downtime and allows for meeting 
          Service Level Agreement (SLA) requirements. 
        -  
        - Optimized resource location: VMs can be moved to locations 
          that offer significant cost reduction (e.g. power savings), 
          or locations close to the application users. They can also 
          be moved to simply load-balance across different locations. 

         

      
      
     Bitar, et al.            Expires April 22, 2013         [Page 22] 
         






     Internet-Draft  Cloud Networking VPN Applicability   October 2012 
         

        When VMs change location, it is often important to maintain 
        the existing client sessions. The VM MAC and IP addresses must 
        be preserved, and the state of the VM sessions must be copied 
        to the new location.  

         

        Current VM mobility tools like VMware VMotion require L2 
        connectivity among the hypervisors on the servers 
        participating in a VMotion pool. This is in addition to 
        "tenant ELAN" connectivity that provides for communication 
        between the VM and the client(s).  

         

        A VMotion ELAN might need to cross multiple DC networks to 
        provide the required protection or load-balancing. In 
        addition, in the current VMotion procedure, the new VM 
        location must be part of the tenant ELAN domain. When the new 
        VM is activated, a Gratuitous ARP is sent so that the MAC FIB 
        entries in the tenant ELAN are updated to direct traffic 
        destined to that VM to the new VM location. In addition, if a 
        portion of the path requires IP forwarding, the VM 
        reachability information must be updated to direct the traffic 
        on the shortest path to the VM. 

         

        VM mobility requirements may be addressed through the use of 
        Inter-DC VLANs to address VMotion and "tenant ELANs". However, 
        expanding "tenant ELANs" across two or more DCs will 
        accelerate VLAN exhaustion and MAC explosion issues. In 
        addition, STP needs to run across DCs leading to increased 
        convergence times and the blocking of expensive WAN bandwidth. 
        VLAN trunking used throughout the network creates 
        indiscriminate flooding across DCs. 

         

        L2 VPN solutions over IP/MPLS are designed to interconnect 
        sites located across the WAN as described in Section 6. 

         


      
      
     Bitar, et al.            Expires April 22, 2013         [Page 23] 
         






     Internet-Draft  Cloud Networking VPN Applicability   October 2012 
         

     6. L2VPN Applicability to Cloud Networking 

         

        The following sections will discuss different solution 
        alternatives, re-using IEEE and IETF technologies that can 
        provide a gradual migration path from the current Ethernet 
        switching VLAN-based model to more advanced Ethernet switching 
        and IP/MPLS based models. In addition, they discuss how these 
        solutions compare to the NVo3 framework [NVo3-fmwk] and the 
        problems in [Nvo3-problem-statement] that they would still 
        need to address. This evolution is targeted to address inter-
        DC requirements, cost considerations, and the efficient use of 
        processing/memory resources on DC networking components. 

         

     6.1. VLANs and L2VPN toolset 

         

        One approach to address some of the DC challenges discussed in 
        the previous section is to gradually deploy additional 
        technologies within existing DC networks. For example, an 
        operator may start by breaking its DC VLAN domains into 
        different VLAN islands so that each island can support up to 
        4K VLANs. VLAN Domains can then be interconnected via VPLS 
        using the DC GW as a VPLS PE [RFC4761][RFC4762]. An ELAN 
        service can be identified with one VLAN ID in one island and 
        another VLAN ID in another island with the appropriate VLAN ID 
        processed at the GW.  

         

        As the number of tenants in individual VLAN islands surpasses 
        4K and no further sub-division of VLAN domains is feasible or 
        desired, the operator could push VPLS deployment deeper in the 
        DC network closer to tenant systems as defined in [NVo3-fmwk], 
        it is possible in the end to retain existing VLAN-based 
        solution only in VSw and to provide L2VPN support starting at 
        the ToRs. The ToR and DC core elements need to be MPLS enabled 
        with existing VPLS solutions.  

         



      
      
     Bitar, et al.            Expires April 22, 2013         [Page 24] 
         






     Internet-Draft  Cloud Networking VPN Applicability   October 2012 
         

        VPLS represents a mature virtualization and overlay technology 
        for private LAN services. This is the way it has been deployed 
        in service provider networks. It also addresses many of the 
        problems described in Section 5 and in [NVo3-problem-
        statement] but still lacks some capabilities to address 
        others.  

         

        Table 1 provides a comparison between the VPLS functional 
        elements and the NVo3 framework functional elements [NVo3-
        fmwk]. 

        Table 1: Functional comparison between VPLS and NVo3 framework  

        
        Nvo3 Function                      Matching VPLS Function 

       -----------------------------------------------------------
       Virtual Access Point (VAP)         Attachment Circuit (AC) 

        
       Network Virtual Edge (NVE)          Provider Edge (PE) 

        
       Virtual Network Instance (VNI)     Virtual Switching Instance 
                                           (VSI) 

       
        Virtual Network Context (VN        A 20-bit MPLS label 
        Context) identifier 

        Overlay Module and tunneling       -PWE3 over IP/GRE in an IP 
                                           network 

                                           -PWE3 and MPLS in an MPLS 
                                           network 

      
         Control Plane: TBD                 Control plane:  

                                           Service signaling 

                                         - PWE3 T-LDP or MP-BGP 
                                           Core Routing:  

                                           - IGP: OSPF/ISIS -(TE) 

                                           Core Signaling: 

                                         - RSVP or LDP for MPLS 
                                           LSPs  
      
      
     Bitar, et al.            Expires April 22, 2013         [Page 25] 
         






     Internet-Draft  Cloud Networking VPN Applicability   October 2012 
         

         

        Depending on the implementation model, VPLS can address some 
        of the issues described in Section 5 and in [NVo3-problem-
        statement], but not all: 

         

             -Dynamic Provisioning as described in [NVo3-problem-
             statement] Section 2.1: This is not addressed today in 
             VPLS solutions, as it has not been in scope of that work. 
             VPLS provisioning today requires management of both VLAN 
             and L2VPN addressing, and mapping of service profiles. 
             Per VLAN, per port and per VPLS configurations are 
             required at the ToR, increasing the time it takes to 
             bring up service connectivity and complicating the 
             operational model. However, a mechanism may be developed 
             to perform such provisioning dynamically as compute 
             resources are configured. It should be noted that VPLS 
             currently supports auto-discovery of PEs with instances 
             of the same VPLS service, as a component of the dynamic 
             provision of a VPLS service.  
              
              
             -VM Mobility as also defined in [NVo3-problem-statement] 
             section 2.2: VPLS supports MAC discovery as in any LAN 
             switch based on MAC learning in the data plane. Thus, as 
             a VM moves, a VPLS may lean the location of a new MAC 
             from an ARP message initiated by the VM or by seeing 
             Ethernet frames from that VM. 
              
             -MAC table sizes in Switches as also described in [NVo3-
             problem-statement] Section 2.3: As opposed to an 802.1q 
             based core Ethernet network, tenant VM addresses are only 
             learned at a VPLS PE with a corresponding service 
             instance.  This is because VPLS is built as an overlay on 
             a core IP/MPLS network and the core interconnecting the 
             PEs will have no knowledge of the tenant MACs. 
              
             -VLAN limitation as also described in [NV03-proble-
             statement] Section 2.7: VPLS enables service instance 
             scale in a DC as it connects VLAN domains as described 
             earlier and as the service identifier for a VPLS instance 
             at a PE is based on a 20-bit MPLS label. 

      

      
      
     Bitar, et al.            Expires April 22, 2013         [Page 26] 
         






     Internet-Draft  Cloud Networking VPN Applicability   October 2012 
         

      

     This model does not solve the potential MAC explosion on VPLS 
     PEs, depending on how close to the tenant systems the PE 
     functionality is deployed.  The closer to the systems, the 
     smaller the number of VPLS instances that need to be supported on 
     a VPLS PE, and the lower should be the MAC scale need. 

       

     6.2. E-VPN 

      

     Ethernet VPN (E-VPN) [E-VPN] is evolving work in IETF L2VPN WG. 
     Ethernet VPN provides private LAN service over an IP/MPLS core. 
     E-VPN was driven by some gaps in the existing VPLS solution, and 
     by large multi-tenant DC requirements. E-VPN, similar to VPLS, is 
     provided on a PE where an E-VPN instance (EVI) provides the 
     virtual LAN bridging service. E-VPN defines types of EVIs 
     depending on the bridging domains supported in an EVI. As opposed 
     to VPLS, E-VPN provides for active-active multi-homing of CEs to 
     different PEs while eliminating loops and traffic duplications. 
     In addition, it provides for effective load-balancing across the 
     IP/MPLS core to PEs with access to the same MAC address on 
     connected CEs. In addition, as opposed to IEEE 802.1q/ad/ah 
     standards and VPLS where MAC reachability is learned in the data 
     plane, E-VPNS distributes MAC reachability across the IP/MPLS 
     core using MP-BGP extensions. Along with MAC address 
     distribution, E-VPN also distributes the IP address(es) 
     associated with the MAC, equivalent in IPv4 to ARP entries. In 
     addition, as opposed to VPLS, and more in synergy with BGP/MPLS 
     VPNs [RFC4364], E-VPN uses (MP)-BGP extensions to discover and 
     signal the service MPLS label(s) among PEs across the IP/MPLS 
     core and does not require a Pseudowire (PW) mesh among PEs per E-
     VPN. E-VPN also allows an option for flooding suppression of BUM 
     traffic.  

      

     E-VPN, can be implemented at the same network elements as VPLS 
     discussed in the previous section. However, with reduced set of 
     protocols needed, namely PW signaling via T-LDP, and in synergy 
     with [endsystem], E-VPN could more likely be implemented at an 
     end-system than VPLS.   


      
      
     Bitar, et al.            Expires April 22, 2013         [Page 27] 
         






     Internet-Draft  Cloud Networking VPN Applicability   October 2012 
         

      

     E-VPN represents an evolving virtualization and overlay 
     technology for private LAN services, albeit capitalizing on the 
     synergy with mature BGP/MPLS IPVPNs. It also addresses many of 
     the problems described in Section 5 and in [NVo3-problem-
     statement] and some of the VPLS problems, but still lacks some 
     capabilities to address others.  

      

     Table 2 provides a comparison between the E-VPN functional 
     elements and the NVo3 framework functional elements [NVo3-fmwk]. 

      

        Table 2: Functional comparison between E-VPN and NVo3 
        framework  

      
        Nvo3 Function                      Matching E-VPN Function 
        -----------------------------------------------------------

        Virtual Access Point (VAP)         Attachment Circuit (AC) 
                                           based on VLAN ID 

   
        Network Virtual Edge (NVE)         PE  

    
        Virtual Network Instance (VNI)     EVPN Instance (EVI) 

    
        Virtual Network Context (VN        A 20-bit MPLS label 
        Context) identifier 

        Overlay Module and tunneling       -MPLS over MPLS tunnels  

                                           -MPLS over IP/GRE in an 
                                           IP network 

    
        Control Plane: TBD                 Control plane:  

                                           - MP-BGP for E-VPN 

                                           Core Routing:  

                                           - IGP: OSPF/ISIS -(TE) 

                                           Core Signaling: 

      
      
     Bitar, et al.            Expires April 22, 2013         [Page 28] 
         






     Internet-Draft  Cloud Networking VPN Applicability   October 2012 
         

                                         - RSVP or LDP for MPLS LSPs  
      

      

        Depending on the implementation model, E-VPN can address some 
        of the issues described in Section 5 and in [NVo3-problem-
        statement], but not all: 

         

       -Dynamic Provisioning as described in [NVo3-problem-statement] 
       Section 2.1: This is not addressed today in E-VPN solutions, 
       as it has not been in scope of that work. E-VPN provisioning 
       today requires management of VLAN and service profiles. Per 
       VLAN, per port and per E-VPN configurations are required, 
       increasing the time it takes to bring up service connectivity 
       and complicating the operational model. However, a mechanism 
       may be developed to perform such provisioning dynamically as 
       compute resources are configured. It should be noted that E-
       VPN currently supports auto-discovery of PEs with instances of 
       the same E-VPN service, as a component of the dynamic 
       provisioning of an E-VPN service.  
        
       -VM Mobility as also defined in [NVo3-problem-statement] 
       section 2.2: E-VPN supports VM mobility as described in 
       Section 8. 
        
       -MAC-table sizes in Switches as also described in [NVo3-
       problem-statement] Section 2.3: As opposed to an 802.1q based 
       core Ethernet network, tenant VM addresses are only learned at 
       a E-VPN PE with a corresponding service instance.  This is 
       because E-VPN is built as an overlay on a core IP/MPLS network 
       and the core interconnecting the PEs will have no knowledge of 
       the tenant MACs. 
        
       -VLAN limitation as also described in [NV03-proble-statement] 
       Section 2.7: E-VPN enables service instance scale in a DC as 
       it connects VLAN domains similarly to VPLS and as the service 
       identifier for an E-VPN instance at a PE is based on a 20-bit 
       MPLS label. 

      

     This model does not solve the potential MAC explosion on E-VPN 
     PEs, depending on how close to the tenant systems the PE 
      
      
     Bitar, et al.            Expires April 22, 2013         [Page 29] 
         






     Internet-Draft  Cloud Networking VPN Applicability   October 2012 
         

     functionality is deployed.  The closer to the systems, the 
     smaller the number of VPLS instances that need to be supported on 
     a VPLS PE, and the lower should be the MAC scale need. E-VPN 
     could be potentially implemented at an end-system hosting the VMs 
     to which the E-VPN services are provided. 

      

     6.3. PBB and L2VPN toolset 

         

        As highlighted in Section 5, the expected large number of VM 
        MAC addresses in the DC calls out for a VM MAC hiding solution 
        so that the ToRs and the Core Switches only need to handle a 
        limited number of MAC addresses.  

         

        PBB IEEE 802.1ah encapsulation is a standard L2 technique 
        developed by IEEE to achieve this goal. It was designed also 
        to address other limitations of VLAN-based encapsulations 
        while maintaining the native Ethernet operational model 
        deployed in the DC network.  

         

        A conceptual PBB encapsulation is described in Figure 3 (for 
        detailed encapsulation see [802.1ah]): 

         

                                  +-------------+ 
                         Backbone | BMAC DA,SA  |12B 
                         Ethernet |-------------| 
                          Header  |BVID optional| 4B 
                                  |-------------| 
                        Service ID|  PBB I-tag  | 6B 
                                  |-------------| 
                          Regular |VM MAC DA,SA | 
                          Payload |-------------| 
                                  |             | 
                                  |VM IP Payload| 
                                  |             | 
                                  +-------------+ 
                        
                          Figure 3 PBB encapsulation 

         
      
      
     Bitar, et al.            Expires April 22, 2013         [Page 30] 
         






     Internet-Draft  Cloud Networking VPN Applicability   October 2012 
         

         

        The original Ethernet packet used in this example for Inter-VM 
        communication is encapsulated in the following PBB header: 

         

           - I-tag field - organized similarly with the 802.1q VLAN 
             tag; it includes the Ethertype, PCP and DEI bits and a 24 
             bit ISID tag which replaces the 12 bit VLAN tag, 
             extending the number of virtual L2 domain support to 16 
             Million. It should be noted that the PBB I-Tag includes 
             also some reserved bits, and most importantly the C-MAC 
             DA and SA. What is designated as 6 bytes in the figure is 
             the I-tag information excluding the C-MAC DA and SA. 

              

           - An optional Backbone VLAN field (BVLAN) may be used if 
             grouping of tenant domains is desired.  

           

           - An outer Backbone MAC header contains the source and 
             destination MAC addresses for the related server blades, 
             assuming the PBB encapsulation is done at the hypervisor 
             virtual switch on the server blade. 

      

           - The total resulting PBB overhead added to the VM-
             originated Ethernet frame is 18 or 22 Bytes (depending on 
             whether the BVID is excluded or not). 

      

           - Note that the original PBB encapsulation allows the use 
             of CVLAN and SVLAN in between the VM MACs and IP Payload. 
             These fields were removed from Figure 3 since in a VM 
             environment these fields do not need to be used on the 
             VSw, their function is relegated to the I-SID tag. 

           

              


      
      
     Bitar, et al.            Expires April 22, 2013         [Page 31] 
         






     Internet-Draft  Cloud Networking VPN Applicability   October 2012 
         

     6.3.1. Addressing VLAN space exhaustion and MAC explosion 

         

        In a DC environment, PBB maintains traditional Ethernet 
        forwarding plane and operational model. For example, a vSw 
        implementation of PBB can make use of the 24 bit ISID tag 
        instead of the 12 bit VLAN tag to identify the virtual 
        bridging domains associated with different VM groups. The vSw 
        uplink towards the ToR in Figure 1 can still be treated as an 
        Ethernet backbone interface. A frame originated by a VM can be 
        encapsulated with the ISID assigned to the VM vSw interface 
        and with the outer DA and SA MACs associated with the 
        respective destination and source server blades, and then sent 
        to the ToR switch. Performing this encapsulation at the vSw 
        distributes the VM MAC learning to server blades with 
        instances in the corresponding layer2 domain, and therefore 
        alleviates this load from ToRs that aggregate multiple server 
        blades. Alternatively, the PBB encapsulation can be done at 
        the ToR. 

         

        With PBB encapsulation, ToRs and Core SWs do not have to 
        handle VM MAC addresses so the size of their MAC FDB tables 
        may decrease by two or more orders of magnitude, depending on 
        the number of VMs configured in each server blade and the 
        number of VM virtual interfaces and associated MACs.  

         

        The original PBB specification [802.1ah] did not introduce any 
        new control plane or new forwarding concepts for the PBB core. 
        Spanning Tree and regular Ethernet switching based on MAC 
        learning and flooding were maintained to provide a smooth 
        technology introduction in existing Ethernet networks. 

          

     6.3.2. Fast convergence and L2 multi-pathing 

         

        Additional specification work for PBB control plane has been 
        done since then in both IEEE and IETF L2VPN.  


      
      
     Bitar, et al.            Expires April 22, 2013         [Page 32] 
         






     Internet-Draft  Cloud Networking VPN Applicability   October 2012 
         

         

        As stated earlier, STP-based layer2 networks underutilize the 
        available network capacity as links are put in an idle state 
        to prevent loops. Similarly, existing VPLS technology for 
        interconnecting Layer2 network-islands over an IP/MPLS core 
        does not support active-active dual homing scenarios.  

         

        IS-IS controlled layer2 networks allow traffic to flow on 
        multiple parallel paths between any two servers, spreading 
        traffic among available links on the path. IEEE 802.1aq 
        Shortest Path Bridging (SPB) [802.1aq] and emerging IEEE 
        802.1Qbp [802.1Qbp] are PBB control plane technologies that 
        utilize different methods to compute parallel paths and 
        forward traffic in order to maximize the utilization of 
        available links in a DC. In addition, a BGP based solution 
        [PBB-EVPN] is progressing in the IETF L2VPN WG.  

         

        One or both mechanisms may be employed as required. IS-IS 
        could be used inside the same administrative domain (e.g., a 
        DC), while BGP may be employed to provide reachability among 
        interconnected Autonomous Systems. Similar architectural 
        models have been widely deployed in the Internet and for large 
        VPN deployments. 

         

        IS-IS and/or BGP are also used to advertise Backbone MAC 
        addresses and to eliminate B-MAC learning and unknown unicast 
        flooding in the forwarding plane, albeit with tradeoffs. The 
        B-MAC FIB entries are populated as required from the resulting 
        IS-IS or BGP RIBs.  

         

        Legacy loop avoidance schemes using Spanning Tree and local 
        Active/Active MC-LAG are no longer required as their function 
        (layer2 routing) is replaced by the indicated routing 
        protocols (IS-IS and BGP). 

          


      
      
     Bitar, et al.            Expires April 22, 2013         [Page 33] 
         






     Internet-Draft  Cloud Networking VPN Applicability   October 2012 
         

     6.3.3. Per ISID flood containment 

         

        Service auto-discovery provided by 802.1aq SPB [802.1aq] and 
        BGP [PBB-EVPN] is used to distribute ISID related information 
        among DC nodes, eliminating any provisioning touches 
        throughout the PBB infrastructure. This implicitly creates 
        backbone distribution trees that provide per ISID automatic 
        flood and multicast containment. 

          

     6.3.4. Efficient multicast support 

         

        IS-IS [802.1aq] and BGP [PBB-EVPN] could be used to build 
        optimal multicast distribution trees. In addition, PBB and 
        IP/MPLS tunnel hierarchy may be used to aggregate multiple 
        customer multicast trees sharing the same nodes by associating 
        them with the same backbone forwarding tree that may be 
        represented by a common Group BMAC and optionally a P2MP LSP. 
        More details will be discussed in a further version of the 
        draft. 

         

     6.3.5. Tunneling options for PBB ELAN: Ethernet, IP and MPLS 

         

        A solution for DC ELAN domains based on PBB ISIDs, PBB 
        encapsulation and IS-IS and/or BGP control plane was 
        introduced.  

        IETF L2 VPN specifications [PBB-VPLS] or [PBB-EVPN] enable the 
        transport of PBB frames using PW over MPLS or simply MPLS, and 
        implicitly allow the use of MPLS Traffic Engineering and 
        resiliency toolset to provide for advanced traffic steering 
        and faster convergence.  

         

        Transport over IP/L2TPv3 [RFC 4719] or IP/GRE [RFC 4797] is 
        also possible as an alternative to MPLS tunneling. Additional 

      
      
     Bitar, et al.            Expires April 22, 2013         [Page 34] 
         






     Internet-Draft  Cloud Networking VPN Applicability   October 2012 
         

        header optimization for PBB over IP/GRE encapsulated packets 
        may be feasible. These specifications would allow for ISID 
        based L2 overlay using a regular IP backbone. 

         

     6.3.6. Use Case examples 

     6.3.6.1. PBBN in DC, L2VPN in DC GW 

         

        DC environments based on VLANs and native Ethernet operational 
        model may want to consider using the native PBB option to 
        provide L2 multi-tenancy, in effect the DC ELAN from Figure 2. 
        An example of a network architecture that addresses this 
        scenario is depicted in Figure 4: 

                                 ,---------. 
                               ,'  Inter-DC  `. 
                              (L2VPN (PBB-VPLS) 
                               `.or PBB-EVPN),' 
                                 `|-------|-' 
                              +--+--+   +-+---+ 
                              |PE GW|+-+|PE GW| 
                             .+-----+   +-----+. 
                          .'                    `-. 
                        .-'                         `\ 
                      ,'                              `. 
                     +          Intra-DC PBBN          \ 
                     |                                  + 
                     :                                  ; 
                      `\+------+   +------+  +--+----+-' 
                        | ToR  |.. | ToR  |..|  ToR  | 
                        +-+--+-+   +-+--+-+  +-+--+--+ 
                        .'PBB `.   .'PBB `.  .'PBB `. 
                    +--+-+    +-+-++     +-++-+    +-+--+ 
                    |VSw |    :VSw :     :VSw :    :VSw : 
                    +----+    +----+     +----+    +----+ 
                                        
         Figure 4 PBB in DC, PBB-VPLS or PBB-EVPN for DC Interconnect 

         

        PBB inside the DC core interoperates seamlessly with VPLS used 
        for L2 DC-Interconnect to extend ELAN domains across DCs. This 

      
      
     Bitar, et al.            Expires April 22, 2013         [Page 35] 
         






     Internet-Draft  Cloud Networking VPN Applicability   October 2012 
         

        expansion may be required to address VM Mobility requirements 
        or to balance the load on DC PE gateways. Note than in PBB-
        VPLS case, just one or a handful of infrastructure B-VPLS 
        instances are required, providing Backbone VLAN equivalent 
        function. 

         

        PBB encapsulation addresses the expansion of the ELAN service 
        identification space with 16M ISIDs and solves MAC explosion 
        through VM MAC hiding from the Ethernet core.  

         

        PBB SPB [802.1aq] is used for core routing in the ToRs, Core 
        SWs and PEs. If the DCs that need to be interconnected at L2 
        are part of the same administrative domain, and scaling is not 
        an issue, SPB/IS-IS may be extended across the VPLS 
        infrastructure. If different AS domains are present, better 
        load balancing is required between the DCs and the WAN, or IS-
        IS extension across DCs causes scaling issues, then BGP 
        extensions described in [PBB-EVPN] must be employed. 

         

        The forwarding plane, MAC FIB requirements and the Layer2 
        operational model in the ToR and Core SW are maintained. The 
        VSw sends PBB encapsulated frames to the ToR as described in 
        the previous section. ToRs and Core SWs still perform standard 
        Ethernet switching using the outer Ethernet header.  

         

        From a control plane perspective, VSw uses a default gateway 
        configuration to send traffic to the ToR, as in regular IP 
        routing case. VSw BMAC learning on the ToR is done through 
        either LLDP or VM Discovery Protocol (VDP) described in 
        [802.1Qbg]. Identical mechanisms may be used for the ISID. 
        Once this information is learned on the ToR it is 
        automatically advertised through SPB. If PBB-EVPN is used in 
        the DC GWs, MultiProtcol (MP)-BGP will be used to advertise 
        the ISID and BMAC over the WAN as described in [PBB-EVPN]. 

         



      
      
     Bitar, et al.            Expires April 22, 2013         [Page 36] 
         






     Internet-Draft  Cloud Networking VPN Applicability   October 2012 
         

     6.3.6.2. PBBN in vSw, L2VPN in the ToR 

         

        A variation of the use case example from the previous section 
        is depicted in Figure 5: 

                                 ,---------. 
                               ,'  Inter-DC  `. 
                              (L2VPN (PBB-VPLS) 
                               `.or PBB-EVPN),' 
                                 `|-------|-' 
                              +--+--+   +-+---+ 
                              |PE GW|+-+|PE GW| 
                             .+-----+   +-----+. 
                          .'                    `-. 
                        .-'                         `\ 
                      ,'                              `. 
                     +        Intra-DC L2VPN over       \ 
                    |        IP or MPLS tunneling       + 
                     :                                  ; 
                      `\+------+   +------+  +--+----+-' 
                        | ToR  |.. | ToR  |..|  ToR  | 
                        +-+--+-+   +-+--+-+  +-+--+--+ 
                        .'PBB `.   .'PBB `.  .'PBB `. 
                    +--+-+    +-+-++     +-++-+    +-+--+ 
                    |VSw |    :VSw :     :VSw :    :VSw : 
                    +----+    +----+     +----+    +----+ 
                                        
                    Figure 5 PBB in VSw, L2VPN at the ToR 

         

        The procedures from the previous section are used at the VSw: 
        PBB encapsulation and Ethernet BVLANs can be used on the VSw 
        uplink. L2VPN infrastructure is replacing the BVLAN at the ToR 
        enabling the use of IP (GRE or L2TP) or MPLS tunneling. 

         

        L2 networking still has the same control plane choices: IS-IS 
        [802.1aq] and/or BGP [PBB-EVPN], independently from the 
        tunneling choice. 

         


      
      
     Bitar, et al.            Expires April 22, 2013         [Page 37] 
         






     Internet-Draft  Cloud Networking VPN Applicability   October 2012 
         

     6.3.7. NVo3 applicability 

      

     Table 3 provides a comparison between the PBB-VPLS VPN functional 
     elements and the NVo3 framework functional elements [NVo3-fmwk]. 

      

        Table 3: Functional comparison between PBB-VPLS and NVo3 
        framework  


        Nvo3 Function                      Matching PBB-VPLS 
                                           Function 

       ----------------------------------------------------------  
       Virtual Access Point (VAP)         Attachment Circuit (AC) 
                                           based on I-SID 


        Network Virtual Edge (NVE)         PE  


        Virtual Network Instance (VNI)     VSI  


        Virtual Network Context (VN        MPLS-label for PBB-VSI 
        Context) identifier                and I-SID if the PE is 
                                           PBB edge 


        Overlay Module and tunneling       -MPLS over MPLS tunnels  

                                           -MPLS over IP/GRE in an 
                                           IP network 


        Control Plane: TBD                 Control plane:  

                                              - MP-BGP for auto-
                                                 discovery 
                                              - PWE3 T-LDP for PW 
                                                 signaling 

                                           Core Routing:  

                                           - IGP: OSPF/ISIS -(TE) 

                                           Core Signaling: 

                                         - RSVP or LDP for MPLS LSPs  
      
      
      
     Bitar, et al.            Expires April 22, 2013         [Page 38] 
         






     Internet-Draft  Cloud Networking VPN Applicability   October 2012 
         

      

     Table 4 provides a comparison between the PBB-EVPN functional 
     elements and the NVo3 framework functional elements [NVo3-fmwk]. 

      

        Table 4: Functional comparison between E-VPN and NVo3 
        framework  


        Nvo3 Function                      Matching PBB-EVPN 
                                           Function 

        ----------------------------------------------------------
        Virtual Access Point (VAP)         Attachment Circuit (AC) 
                                           based on I-SID 



        Network Virtual Edge (NVE)         PE 


        Virtual Network Instance (VNI)     EVPN Instance (EVI) 


        Virtual Network Context (VN        MPLS label for PBB-EVI 
        Context) identifier                and I-SID if the PE is 
                                           PBB edge 


        Overlay Module and tunneling       -MPLS over MPLS tunnels  

                                           -MPLS over IP/GRE in an 
                                           IP network 

  
        Control Plane: TBD                 Control plane:  

                                           - MP-BGP for E-VPN 

                                           Core Routing:  

                                           - IGP: OSPF/ISIS -(TE) 

                                           Core Signaling: 

                                         - RSVP or LDP for MPLS LSPs  
      

      



      
      
     Bitar, et al.            Expires April 22, 2013         [Page 39] 
         






     Internet-Draft  Cloud Networking VPN Applicability   October 2012 
         

        Depending on the implementation model, PBB-EVPN and PBB-VPLS 
        can address some of the issues described in Section 5 and in 
        [NVo3-problem-statement], but not all: 

         

             -Dynamic Provisioning as described in [NVo3-problem-
             statement] Section 2.1: This is not addressed today in 
             PBB and PBB-VPN solutions, as it has not been in scope of 
             the work for either. However, a mechanism may be 
             developed to perform such provisioning dynamically as 
             compute resources are configured. It should be noted that 
             PBB-VPLS and PBB-EVPN currently support auto-discovery of 
             PEs with instances of the same VPLS or E-VPN service, as 
             a component of the dynamic provisioning of a VPLS/E-VPN 
             service.  
              
             -VM Mobility as also defined in [NVo3-problem-statement] 
             section 2.2: PBB-EVPN and PBB-VPLS support VM MAC 
             mobility as the 802.1q and VPLS solution do based on MAC 
             learning in the data plane. 
              
             -MAC table sizes in Switches as also described in [NVo3-
             problem-statement] Section 2.3: As opposed to an 802.1q-
             based core Ethernet network, tenant VM addresses are only 
             learned at a PBB edge. If the VsW implements PBB edge 
             functionality and the ToR implements PBB-EVPN or PBB-
             VPLS, then the vsW will learn the MAC addresses of other 
             VMs and devices in the same LAN, but the ToR will also 
             learn the MAC addresses of Backbone bridges that will be 
             on the order of number of servers not VMs, conserving MAC 
             FDB entries on the ToR. This is because there are two 
             layers of overlay, one at the VsW for PBB, and one at the 
             ToR for VPLS or E-VPN, on a core IP/MPLS network. 
              
             -VLAN limitation as also described in [NV03-proble-
             statement] Section 2.7: The number of service instances 
             that can supported is 16 Millions. 

      

     6.3.8. Connectivity to existing VPN sites and Internet  

         



      
      
     Bitar, et al.            Expires April 22, 2013         [Page 40] 
         






     Internet-Draft  Cloud Networking VPN Applicability   October 2012 
         

        The main reason for extending the ELAN space beyond the 4K 
        VLANs is to be able to serve multiple DC tenants whereby the 
        total number of service domains needed exceeds 4K. Figure 6 
        represents the logical service view where PBB ELANs are used 
        inside one or multiple DCs to connect to existing IP VPN 
        sites. It should be noted that the PE GW should be able to 
        perform integrated routing in a VPN context and bridging in 
        VSI context: 

          

                     Tenant 1 sites connected over IP VPN 

                           ,--+-'.              ;-`.--. 
                           (  PE  ) VRFs on PEs .  PE  ) 
                               '-----'              '-----' 
                              |                    | 
                      ,-------------------------------. 
                     (     IP VPN over IP/MPLS WAN     ) 
                      `---.'-----------------------`.-' 
                       +--+--+ IP VPN VRF on PE GWs +-+---+ 
                  .....|PE GW|......                |PE GW| 
        DC with PBB   |    +-----+      |               +--+--+ 
        Tenant 1      |                 |PBB ELAN12        | 
        view       PBB|ELAN11     ......|......         PBB|ELAN13  
                  '':'''''''':'       |        |     '':'''''''':' 
               ,'.      ,'.      ,+.      ,+.     ,'.      ,'. 
              (VM )....(VM )    (VM )... (VM )   (VM )....(VM ) 
               `-'      `-'      `-'      `-'     `-'      `-' 
                         Compute Resources inside DC 
                                        
                  Figure 6 Logical Service View with IP VPN 

         

        DC ELANs are identified with 24-bit ISIDs instead of VLANs. At 
        the PE GWs, an IP VPN VRF is configured for every DC tenant. 
        Each "ISID ELAN" for Tenant 1 is seen as a logical Ethernet 
        endpoint and is assigned an IP interface on the Tenant 1 VRF. 
        Tenant 1 enterprise sites are connected to IP VPN PEs 
        distributed across the WAN. IP VPN instances on PE GWs can be 
        automatically discovered and connected to the WAN IP VPN using 
        standard procedures [RFC4364]. 

         


      
      
     Bitar, et al.            Expires April 22, 2013         [Page 41] 
         






     Internet-Draft  Cloud Networking VPN Applicability   October 2012 
         

        In certain cases, the DC GW PEs are part of the IPVPN service 
        provider network providing IPVPN services to the enterprise 
        customers. In other cases, DC PEs are operated and managed by 
        the DC/cloud provider and interconnect to multiple IPVPN 
        service providers using inter-AS BGP/MPLS models A, B, or C 
        [RFC4364]. The same discussion applies to the case of IPSec 
        VPNs from a PBB ELAN termination perspective.  

         

        If tenant sites are connected to the DC using WAN VPLS, the PE 
        GWs need to implement the BEB function described in the PBB-
        VPLS PE model [PBB-VPLS] and the procedures from [PBB-Interop] 
        to perform the required translation. Figure 7 describes the 
        VPLS WAN scenario: 

                      Customer sites connected over VPLS 

                           ,--+-'.              ;-`.--. 
                           (  PE  ) VPLS on PEs .  PE  ) 
                               '-----'              '-----' 
                              |                    | 
                      ,-------------------------------. 
                      (      VPLS over IP/MPLS WAN     ) 
                      `---.'-----------------------`.-' 
                       +--+--+                      +-+---+ 
                       |PE GW| <-- PBB-VPLS/BEB --> |PE GW| 
             DC with PBB   +--+--+                      +--+--+ 
                Tenant 1      |                            | 
                  view     PBB|ELAN11                   PBB|ELAN13  
                         '':'''''''':'               '':'''''''':' 
                      ,'.      ,'.                ,'.      ,'. 
                     (VM ) .. (VM )              (VM ) .. (VM ) 
                      `-'      `-'                `-'      `-' 
                         Compute Resources inside DC 
                                        
                 Figure 7 Logical Service View with VPLS WAN 

         

        One VSI is required at the PE GW for every DC ELAN domain. 
        Same as in the IP VPN case, DC PE GWs may be fully integrated 
        as part of the WAN provider network or using Inter-AS/Inter-
        provider models A,B or C.  

         

      
      
     Bitar, et al.            Expires April 22, 2013         [Page 42] 
         






     Internet-Draft  Cloud Networking VPN Applicability   October 2012 
         

        The VPN connectivity may be provided by one or multiple PE 
        GWs, depending on capacity need and/or the operational model 
        used by the DC/cloud operator. 

         

        If a VM group is serving Internet connected customers, the 
        related ISID ELAN will be terminated into a routing context 
        (global public instance or another VRF) connected to the 
        Internet. Same as in the IP VPN case, the 24bit ISID will be 
        represented as a logical Ethernet endpoint on the Internet 
        routing context and an IP interface will be allocated to it. 
        Same PE GW may be used to provide both VPN and Internet 
        connectivity with the routing contexts separated internally 
        using the IP VPN models.  

          

     6.3.9. DC Interconnect 

         

        L2 DC interconnect may be required to expand the ELAN domains 
        for Management, VM Mobility or when a VM Group needs to be 
        distributed across DCs. 

         

        PBB may be used to provide ELAN extension across multiple DCs 
        as depicted in Figure 8: 

                      ,-------------------------------. 
                      (           IP/MPLS WAN          ) 
                      `---.'------------------------`.' 
                       +--+--+                      +-+---+ 
                       |PE GW| <----- PBB BCB ----> |PE GW| 
             DC with PBB   +--+--+                      +--+--+ 
                Tenant 1      |                            | 
                  view     PBB|ELAN11                   PBB|ELAN11  
                         '':'''''''':'               '':'''''''':' 
                      ,'.      ,'.                ,'.      ,'. 
                     (Hvz) .. (Hvz)              (Hvz) .. (Hvz) 
                      `-'      `-'                `-'      `-' 
                         Compute Resources inside DC 
                                        
                   Figure 8 PBB BCB providing VMotion ELAN 

      
      
     Bitar, et al.            Expires April 22, 2013         [Page 43] 
         






     Internet-Draft  Cloud Networking VPN Applicability   October 2012 
         

         

        ELAN11 is expanded across DC to provide interconnect for the 
        pool of server blades assigned to the same VMotion domain. 
        This time Hypervisors are connected directly to ELAN11. The PE 
        GW operates in this case as a PBB Backbone Core Bridge (BCB) 
        combined with PBB-EVPN capabilities [PBB-EVPN]. The I-SID 
        ELANs do not require any additional provisioning touches and 
        do not consume additional MPLS resources on the PE GWs. Per I-
        SID auto-discovery and flood containment is provided by IS-
        IS/SPB [802.1aq] and BGP [PBB-EVPN]. 

         

     6.3.10. Interoperating with existing DC VLANs 

         

        While green field deployments will definitely benefit from all 
        the advantages described in the previous sections, in many 
        other scenarios, existing DC VLAN environments will have to be 
        gradually migrated to the new architecture. Figure 9 depicts 
        an example of a possible migration scenario where both PBB and 
        VLAN technologies are present: 

                                 ,---------. 
                               ,'  Inter-DC  `. 
                              (L2VPN (PBB-VPLS) 
                               `.or PBB-EVPN),' 
                                 `-/------\-' 
                              +---+-+   +-+---+ 
                              |PE GW|+-+|PE GW| 
                            .-+-----+   +-----+:-. 
                         .-'                      `-. 
                       ,'                            `-:. 
                     +          PBBN/SPB DC             \ 
                     |                                  + 
                     :                                  ; 
                       `-+------+   +------+  +--+----+-' 
                         | ToR  |.. | ToR  |..|  ToR  | 
                         +-+--+-+   +-+--+-+  +-+--+--+ 
                         .'PBB `.   .'    `.  .'VLAN`. 
                    +--+-+    +-+-++     +-++-+    +-+--+ 
                    |VSw |    :VSw :     :VSw :    :VSw : 
                    +----+    +----+     +----+    +----+ 
                        Figure 9 DC with PBB and VLANs 

      
      
     Bitar, et al.            Expires April 22, 2013         [Page 44] 
         






     Internet-Draft  Cloud Networking VPN Applicability   October 2012 
         

         

        This example assumes that the two VSWs on the right do not 
        support PBB but the ToRs do. The VSw on the left side are 
        running PBB while the ones on the right side are still using 
        VLANs. The left ToR is performing only Ethernet switching 
        whereas the one on the right is translating from VLANs to 
        ISIDs and performing PBB encapsulation using the BEB function 
        [802.1ah] and [PBB-VPLS]. The ToR in the middle is performing 
        both functions: core Ethernet tunneling for the PBB VSw and 
        BEB function for the VLAN VSw.  

         

        The SPB control plane is still used between the ToRs, 
        providing the benefits described in the previous section. The 
        VLAN VSw must use regular multi-homing functions to the ToRs: 
        for example STP or Multi-chassis-LAG.  

         

        DC VLANs may be also present initially on some of the legacy 
        ToRs or Core SWs. PBB interoperability will be performed as 
        follows:  

         

             -If VLANs are used in the ToRs, PBB BEB function may be 
             performed by the Core SW(s) where the ToR uplink is 
             connected. 

              

             -If VLANs are used in the Core SW, PBB BEB function may 
             be performed by the PE GWs where the Core SW uplink is 
             connected. 

              

        It is possible that some DCs may run PBB or PBB-VLAN 
        combination while others may still be running VLANs. An 
        example of this interoperability scenario is described in 
        Figure 10: 

                                        
                      ,-------------------------------. 

      
      
     Bitar, et al.            Expires April 22, 2013         [Page 45] 
         






     Internet-Draft  Cloud Networking VPN Applicability   October 2012 
         

                     (          IP/MPLS WAN            ) 
                      `------/-----------------\-------' 
                         +--/--+             +--\--+ 
                         |PE GW|PBB-VPLS     |PE GW|VPLS 
                       .'+-----+-'         .'+------+. 
                      /           \       /           \ 
                      |            |      |            | 
                      |   PBB DC   |      |  VLAN DC   | 
                      \           /       \           / 
                       +---+ +---+         +---+ +---+ 
                       |VSw|.|VSw|         |VSw|.|VSw| 
                       +---+ +---+         +---+ +---+ 
               Figure 10    Interoperability to a VLAN-based DC  

         

        Interoperability with existing VLAN DC is required for DC 
        interconnect. The PE-GW in the PBB DC or the PE GW in the VLAN 
        DC must implement PBB-VPLS PE model described in [PBB-VPLS]. 
        This interoperability scenario is addressed in detail in [PBB-
        Interop]. 

         

        Connectivity to existing VPN customer sites (IP VPN, VPLS, 
        IPSec) or Internet does not require any additional procedures 
        beyond the ones described in the VPN connectivity section. The 
        PE GW in the DC VLAN will aggregate DC ELANs through IP 
        interfaces assigned to VLAN logical endpoints whereas the PE 
        GW in the PBB DC will assign IP interfaces to ISID logical 
        endpoints. 

         

        If EVPN is used to interconnect the two DCs, PBB-EVPN 
        functions described in [PBB-EVPN] must be implemented in one 
        of the PE-GWs. 

         

     6.4. TRILL and L2VPN toolset 

         

        TRILL and SPB control planes provide similar functions. IS-IS 
        is the base protocol used in both specifications to provide 

      
      
     Bitar, et al.            Expires April 22, 2013         [Page 46] 
         






     Internet-Draft  Cloud Networking VPN Applicability   October 2012 
         

        multi-pathing and fast convergence for core networking. [PBB-
        EVPN] describes how seamless Inter-DC connectivity can be 
        provided over an MPLS/IP network for both TRILL [RFC6325] and 
        SPB [802.1aq]/[802.1Qbp] networks. 

         

        The main differences exist in the encapsulation and data plane 
        forwarding. TRILL encapsulation [RFC6325] was designed 
        initially for large enterprise and campus networks where 4k 
        VLANs are sufficient. As a consequence the ELAN space in 
        [RFC6325] is limited to 4K VLANs; however, this VLAN scale 
        issue is being addressed in [Fine-Grained].  

         

     7. L3VPN applicability to Cloud Networking  

         

        This section discusses the role of IP VPN technology in 
        addressing the L3 Virtualization challenges described in 
        section 5. 

         

        IP VPN technology defined in L3VPN working group may be used 
        to provide L3 virtualization in support of multi-tenancy in 
        the DC network as depicted in Figure 11. 

                      ,-------------------------------. 
                     (     IP VPNs over IP/MPLS WAN    ) 
                      `----.'------------------------`.' 
                        ,--+-'.                      ;-`.--. 
                   .....  VRF1 )......              .  VRF2 ) 
                      |    '-----'      |               '-----' 
                      |     Tenant1     |ELAN12     Tenant1| 
                  |ELAN11       ....|........          |ELAN13 
                  '':'''''''':'       |        |     '':'''''''':' 
               ,'.      ,'.      ,+.      ,+.     ,'.      ,'. 
              (VM )....(VM )    (VM )... (VM )   (VM )....(VM ) 
               `-'      `-'      `-'      `-'     `-'      `-' 
                Figure 11    Logical Service View with IP VPN 

         


      
      
     Bitar, et al.            Expires April 22, 2013         [Page 47] 
         






     Internet-Draft  Cloud Networking VPN Applicability   October 2012 
         

        Tenant 1 might buy Cloud Services in different DC locations 
        and choose to associate the VMs in 3 different groups, each 
        mapped to a different ELAN: ELAN11, ELAN12 and ELAN13. L3 
        interconnect between the ELANs belonging to tenant1 is 
        provided using a BGP/MPLS IPVPN and associated VRF1 and VRF2, 
        possibly located in different DCs. Each tenant that requires 
        L3 virtualization will be allocated a different IP VPN 
        instance. Using full fledge IP VPN for L3 Virtualization 
        inside a DC presents the following advantages compared with 
        existing DC technologies like Virtual Routing: 

           - Interoperates with existing WAN VPN technology 

           - Deployment tested, provides a full networking toolset 

           - Scalable core routing: only one MP-BGP routing instance 
             is required compared with one per customer/tenant in the 
             Virtual Routing case 

           - Service Auto-discovery: automatic discovery and route 
             distribution between related service instances 

           - Well defined and deployed Inter-Provider/Inter-AS models 

           - Supports a variety of VRF-to-VRF tunneling options 
             accommodating different operational models: MPLS 
             [RFC4364], IP or GRE [RFC4797] 

         

        To provide Cloud services to related customer IP VPN instances 
        located in the WAN the following connectivity models may be 
        employed: 

           - DC IP VPN instance may participate directly in the WAN IP 
             VPN 

           - Inter-AS Options A, B or C models may be employed with 
             applicability to both Intra and Inter-Provider use cases 
             [RFC4364] 

         

        VRF implementation could be done in the endsystem [endsystem]   
     to facilitate endsystem to endsystem direct communication.  


      
      
     Bitar, et al.            Expires April 22, 2013         [Page 48] 
         






     Internet-Draft  Cloud Networking VPN Applicability   October 2012 
         

        Table 5 summarizes the comparison between BGP/MPLS IPVPN 
        functional elements and those of NVo3 [NV03-fmwk]. 

         

        Table 5: Functional comparison between BGP/MPLS IPVPN and NV03 
        functional elements 

      
        
         Nvo3 Function                  Matching BGP/MPLS-IPVPN Fun  
        -------------------------------------------------------------
  
      Virtual Access Point (VAP)     Attachment Circuit (AC)   
       
  
      Network Virtual Edge (NVE)         Provider Edge (PE)  

       
        Virtual Network Instance (VNI)     Virtual Routing and 
                                           Forwarding (VRF)  

       
        Virtual Network Context (VN        A 20-bit MPLS label 
        Context) identifier 

        Overlay Module and tunneling       -MPLS over MPLS tunnels 

                                           -MPLS over IP/GRE in an 
                                           IP network 

       
        Control Plane: TBD                 Control plane:  

                                           - MP-BGP for VPN 
                                           signaling /routing 

                                           Core Routing:  

                                           - IGP: OSPF/ISIS -(TE) 

                                           Core Signaling: 

                                         - RSVP or LDP for MPLS LSPs 
         

         

        Depending on the implementation model, BGP/MPLS IPVPN can 
        address some of the issues described in Section 5 and in 
        [NVo3-problem-statement], but not all: 

         
      
      
     Bitar, et al.            Expires April 22, 2013         [Page 49] 
         






     Internet-Draft  Cloud Networking VPN Applicability   October 2012 
         

             -Dynamic Provisioning as described in [NVo3-problem-
             statement] Section 2.1: This is not addressed today in 
             the BGP/MPLS IPVPN solution, as it was not a requirement 
             for that solution. However, a mechanism may be developed 
             to perform such provisioning dynamically as compute 
             resources are configured. Considerations must be given to 
             the cases where VMs and the VRF, providing connectivity 
             to these VMs, are co-located on the same end-system vs. 
             being on different physical devices. It should be noted 
             that BGP/MPLS IPVPN currently supports auto-discovery of 
             PEs with instances of the same IPVPN, as a component of 
             the dynamic provisioning of and IPVPN service.  
              
             -VM Mobility as also defined in [NVo3-problem-statement] 
             section 2.2: VM mobility is supported in [endsystem] when 
             the NVE, being a VRF, is co-located with the VM(s) to 
             which the VRF provides connectivity. However, further 
             enhancements must provide support for VM mobility in 
             other cases.  
              
             -IP table sizes in edge routers as also described in 
             [NVo3-problem-statement] Section 2.3: As opposed to an 
             802.1q based core Ethernet network, tenant VM addresses 
             are only learned at a PBB edge. If the VsW implements PBB 
             edge functionality and the ToR implements PBB-EVPN or 
             PBB-VPLS, then the vsW will learn the MAC addresses of 
             other VMs and devices in the same LAN, but the ToR will 
             also learn the MAC addresses of Backbone bridges that 
             will be on the order of number of servers not VMs, 
             conserving MAC FDB entries on the ToR. This is because 
             there are two layers of overlay, one at the VsW for PBB, 
             and one at the ToR for VPLS or E-VPN, on a core IP/MPLS 
             network. 
              
             -VLAN limitation as also described in [NV03-proble-
             statement] Section 2.7: The number of service instances 
             that can supported is 16 Millions. 

         

     8. VM Mobility with E-VPN 

     8.1. Layer 2 Extension Solution 

      
     This document illustrates a solution for the layer 2 extension 
      
      
     Bitar, et al.            Expires April 22, 2013         [Page 50] 
         






     Internet-Draft  Cloud Networking VPN Applicability   October 2012 
         

     based on E-VPNs [E-VPN]. That is, the L2 sites that contain VMs 
     of a given L2-based Community User Group (CUG) or Virtual Network 
     (VN) are interconnected together using E-VPN. Thus, a given E-VPN 
     corresponds/associated with a single L2-based VN. An L2-based VN 
     is associated with a single E-VPN Ethernet Tag Identifier. 
      
      
     This section provides a brief overview of how E-VPN is used as 
     the solution for the "layer 2 extension problem". Details of E-
     VPN operations can be found in [E-VPN]. 
      
      
     A single L2 site could be as large as the whole network within a 
     single data center, in which case the Data Center Border Routers 
     (DCBRs) of that data center, in addition to acting as IP routers 
     for the L2-based VNs present in the data center, also act as PEs. 
     In this scenario, E-VPN is used to handle VM migration between 
     servers in different data centers. 
      
      
     A single L2 site could be as small as a single ToR with the 
     server connected to it, in which case the ToR acts as a PE. In 
     this scenario, E-VPN is used to handle VM migration between 
     servers that are either in the same or in different data centers. 
     Note that in this scenario this document assumes that DCBRs, in 
     addition to acting as IP routers for the L2-based VNs present in 
     their data center, also participate in the E-VPN procedures, 
     acting as BGP Route Reflectors for the E-VPN routes originated by 
     the ToRs acting as PEs. 
      
      
     In the case where E-VPN is used to interconnect L2 sites in 
     different data centers, the network that interconnects DCBRs of 
     these data centers could provide either (a) only Ethernet or 
     IP/MPLS connectivity service among these DCBRs, or (b) may offer 
     the E-VPN service. In the former case DCBRs exchange E-VPN routes 
     among themselves relying only on the Ethernet or IP/MPLS 
     connectivity service provided by the network that interconnects 
     these DCBRs. The network does not directly participate in the 
     exchange of these E-VPN routes. In the latter case the routers at 
     the edge of the network maybe either co-located with DCBRs, or 
      
      
     Bitar, et al.            Expires April 22, 2013         [Page 51] 
         






     Internet-Draft  Cloud Networking VPN Applicability   October 2012 
         

     may establish E-VPN peering with DCBRs.  Either way, in this case 
     the network facilitates exchange of E-VPN routes among DCBRs (as 
     in this case DCBRs would not need to exchange E-VPN routes 
     directly with each other). 
      
      
     Please note that for the purpose of solving the layer 2 extension 
     problem the propagation scope of E-VPN routes for a given L2-
     based VN is constrained by the scope of the PEs connected to the 
     L2 sites that presently contain VMs of that VN. This scope is 
     controlled by the Route Target of the E-VPN routes. Controlling 
     propagation scope could be further facilitated by using Route 
     Target Constrain [RFC4684]. 
      
      
     Use of E-VPN ensures that traffic among members of the same L2-
     based VN is optimally forwarded, irrespective of whether members 
     of that VN are within the same or in different data centers. This 
     follows from the observation that E-VPN inherently enables 
     (disaggregated) forwarding at the granularity of the MAC address 
     of the VM.       
      
     Optimal forwarding among VMs of a given L2-based VN that are 
     within the same data center requires propagating VM MAC 
     addresses, and comes at the cost of disaggregated forwarding 
     within a given data center. However, such disaggregated 
     forwarding is not necessary between data centers if a given L2-
     based VN spans multiple data centers. For example, when a given 
     ToR acts as a PE, this ToR has to maintain MAC advertisement 
     routes only to the VMs within its own data center (and 
     furthermore, only to the VMs that belong to the L2-based VNs 
     whose site(s) are connected to that ToR), and then point a 
     "default" MAC route to one of the DCBRs of that data center.  In 
     this scenario a DCBR of a given data center, when it receives MAC 
     advertisement routes from DCBR(s) in other data centers, does not 
     re-advertise these routes to the PEs within its own data center, 
     but just advertises a single "default" MAC advertisement route to 
     these PEs. 
      
     When a given VM moves to a new L2 site, if in the new site this 

      
      
     Bitar, et al.            Expires April 22, 2013         [Page 52] 
         






     Internet-Draft  Cloud Networking VPN Applicability   October 2012 
         

     VM is the only VM from its L2-based VN, then the PEs connected to 
     the new site need to be provisioned with the E-VPN Instances 
     (EVI) of the E-VPN associated with this L2-based VN. Likewise, if 
     after the move the old site no longer has any VMs that are in the 
     same L2 bas the VM that moved, the PEs connected to the old site 
     need be de-provisioned with the EVI of the E-VPN.  Procedures to 
     accomplish this are outside the scope of this document. 
      
     8.2. VM Default Gateway Solutions 

      
     Once a VM moves to a new L2 site, solving the VM Default Gateway 
     problem would require PEs connected to that L2 site to apply IP 
     forwarding to the inter-L2VN/inter-subnet traffic originated from 
     that VM. That implies that (a) PEs should be capable of 
     performing both MAC-based and IP-based forwarding (although IP-
     based forwarding functionality could be limited to just 
     forwarding either based on IP host routes, or based on the IP 
     default route), and (b) PEs should be able to distinguish between 
     intra-L2VN/intra-subnet and inter-L2VN/inter-subnet traffic 
     originated by that VM (in order to apply MAC-based forwarding to 
     the former and IP-based forwarding to the latter). 
      
     As a VM moves to a new L2 site, the default gateway IP address of 
     the VM may not change. Further, the ARP cache of the VM may not 
     time out. Thus, the destination MAC address in the inter-
     L2VN/inter-subnet traffic originated by that VM would not change 
     as the VM moves to the new site. Given that, how would PEs 
     connected to the new L2 site be able to recognize inter-
     L2VN/inter-subnet traffic originated by that VM? The following 
     describes two possible solutions. 
      
     Both of the solutions assume that for inter-L2VN/inter-subnet 
     traffic between a VM and its peers outside of VM's own data 
     center, one or more DCBRs of that data center act as fully 
     functional default gateways for that traffic.       
     8.2.1. VM Default Gateway Solution 1 

      
     The first solution relies on the use of an anycast default 
     gateway IP address and an anycast default gateway MAC address. 
      
      
     Bitar, et al.            Expires April 22, 2013         [Page 53] 
         






     Internet-Draft  Cloud Networking VPN Applicability   October 2012 
         

      
     If DCBRs act as PEs for an E-VPN corresponding to a given L2-
     based VN, then these anycast addresses are configured on these 
     DCBRs. Likewise, if ToRs act as PEs, then these anycast addresses 
     are configured on these ToRs. All VMs of that L2-based VN are 
     (auto)configured with the (anycast) IP address of the default 
     gateway. This ensures that a particular DCBR (or ToR), acting as 
     a PE, can always apply IP forwarding to the packets sent by a VM 
     to the (anycast) default gateway MAC address. It also ensures 
     that such DCBR (or ToR) can respond to the ARP Request generated 
     by a VM for the default gateway (anycast) IP address. 
      
     Note that with this approach when originating E-VPN MAC 
     advertisement routes for the MAC address of the default gateways 
     of a given L2-based VN, all these routes MUST indicate that this 
     MAC address belongs to the same Ethernet Segment Identifier 
     (ESI).       
     8.2.2. VM Default Gateway Solution 2 

      
     The second solution does not require configuration of the anycast 
     default gateway IP and MAC address on the PEs. 
      
     Each DCBR (or each ToR) that acts as a default gateway for a 
     given L2-based VN advertises in the E-VPN control plane its 
     default gateway IP and MAC address using the MAC advertisement 
     route, and indicates that such route is associated with the 
     default gateway. The MAC advertisement route MUST be advertised 
     as per procedures in [E-VPN]. The MAC address in such an 
     advertisement MUST be set to the default gateway MAC address of 
     the DCBR (or ToR). The IP address in such an advertisement MUST 
     be set to the default gateway IP address of the DCBR (or ToR). To 
     indicate that such a route is associated with a default gateway, 
     the route MUST carry the "Default Gateway" community.       
     Each PE that receives this route and imports it as per procedures 
     of[E-VPN] MUST create MAC forwarding state that enables it to 
     apply IP forwarding to the packets destined to the MAC address 
     carried in the route. The MES that receives this E-VPN route 
     follows procedures in Section 12 of [E-VPN] when replying to ARP 
     Requests that it receives if such Requests are for the IP address 
      
      
     Bitar, et al.            Expires April 22, 2013         [Page 54] 
         






     Internet-Draft  Cloud Networking VPN Applicability   October 2012 
         

     in the received E-VPN route.                   
     9. Solutions and Considerations for other DC challenges 

         

     9.1. Addressing IP/ARP explosion 

         

        This section will be updated in the next revision. 

         

     9.2. Optimal traffic forwarding 

         

        IP networks, built using links-state protocols such as OSPF or 
        ISIS and BGP provide optimal traffic forwarding through the 
        use of equal cost multiple path (ECMP) and ECMP traffic load-
        balancing, and the use of traffic engineering tools based on 
        BGP and/or MPLS-TE as applicable. In the Layer2 case, SPB or 
        TRILL based protocols provide for load-balancing across 
        parallel paths or equal cost paths between two nodes. Traffic 
        follows the shortest path. For multicast, data plane 
        replication at layer2 or layer3 happens in the data plane 
        albeit with different attributes after multicast trees are 
        built via a control plane and/or snooping. In the presence of 
        VM mobility, optimal forwarding relates to avoiding 
        triangulation and providing for optimum forwarding between any 
        two VMs. Solutions that provide for routing in presence of VM 
        mobility are described in [VM-Mobility]. 

         

     9.3. VM Mobility 

         

        IP VPN technology may be used to support DC Interconnect for 
        different functions like VM Mobility and Cloud Management. A 
        description of VM Mobility between server blades located in 
        different IP subnets using extensions to existing MP-BGP and 
        IP VPN procedure is described in [VM-Mobility]. Support for VM 
      
      
     Bitar, et al.            Expires April 22, 2013         [Page 55] 
         






     Internet-Draft  Cloud Networking VPN Applicability   October 2012 
         

        mobility is also described in [endystems]. Other solutions can 
        exist as well. What is needed is a solution that provides for 
        fast convergence toward the steady state whereby communication 
        among any two VMs can take place on the shortest path or most 
        optimum path, transit triangulation time is minimized, traffic 
        black-holing is avoided, and impact on routing scale for both 
        IPv4 and IPv6 is controllable or minimized. 

         

     9.4. Dynamic provisioning of network services 

         

        The need for fast dynamic provisioning of virtual network 
        services is described in [NVo3-problem-statement] to match the 
        elasticity and mobility in compute and storage resource 
        allocation. Such dynamic provisioning was not part of initial 
        L2VPN or L3VPN work except for some work to provide for 
        dynamic bandwidth access [VPN-RSVP-TE]. In current L2VPN and 
        L3VPN targeted deployments, the customer equipment connected 
        to a VPN PE is static in location. Thus, the logical 
        forwarding instance on the connected PE (e.g., IPVPN VRF, VSI 
        or EVI) and the attachment circuit to that instance as well 
        any routing and forwarding policies within that instance are 
        provisioned via network management systems upon a service 
        order at a much larger time scale than needed in this case. In 
        dynamic data centers, services (e.g., VRF, attachment circuit) 
        need to be established and torn down at a much smaller time 
        scale to match the dynamicity of compute resources connected 
        via these services. Mechanisms to provide for such timely 
        dynamic provisioning at a scale are needed. 

         

        In addition, CEs in traditional L3VPN deployments are routers 
        able to exchange signaling and routing protocol information 
        with the PE, providing for the dynamic exchange of routing 
        information and liveliness check between the CEs and the PEs. 
        In NVo3, the CE equivalent is a TS that may be a virtualized 
        or a physical CE with the same capabilities as the traditional 
        CE in L3VPN deployments. However, in some other cases, VMs 
        providing compute rather than network services may connect 
        directly to the NVE providing Lyaer3 forwarding service 
        (equivalent to a PE). In that case, control plane mechanisms 
        that enable fast and dynamic connectivity of a VM to an NVE 

      
      
     Bitar, et al.            Expires April 22, 2013         [Page 56] 
         






     Internet-Draft  Cloud Networking VPN Applicability   October 2012 
         

        and reachability exchange among NVEs providing connectivity 
        among VMs in the same NV must be provided. 

         

     9.5. Considerations for Layer2 and Layer3 VPNS on End-systems 

         

        With the advent of computing power on end-systems providing VM 
        services, and to provide for more efficient communication 
        among VMs minimizing middle boxes in the path, there is a 
        strong requirement for enabling Layer2 and Layer3 VN 
        forwarding on these servers. Layer2 VN forwarding today is 
        supported via vSW implementations and is often limited to 
        intra data centers. Evolving proprietary technologies such as 
        vxlan and provide for L2 service transport over an IP network. 
        If Layer2 and Layer3 VN forwarding solutions on end-systems 
        are to leverage existing L2VPN and L3VPN solutions, 
        considerations should be given to new PE models and 
        specifically to decoupling of forwarding from control plane 
        functions across different systems to best utilize compute 
        resources of end-systems and provide for scale. [endystems] is 
        one of the solutions being adopted for implementation of 
        BGP/MPLS VPNs in a DC end-system environment. In that case, 
        the end-system uses XMPP to exchange labeled IP VPN routes 
        with a route server that supports MP-BGP labeled IPVPN route 
        exchange with tradition VPN Route Reflectors and PEs. [sdn-
        control] proposes a more generic model for PE functionality 
        decomposed across forwarding end-systems and control plane 
        systems that control the forwarding function on these end-
        systems and interact with other systems such as other similar 
        control systems, PEs and Route reflectors. These efforts 
        targeting new PE models that best fit a scalable multi-tenant 
        environment may also require extensions of existing protocols 
        or definition of new ones. 

      

     10. Operator Considerations 

        To be filled in a later version of this document. 





      
      
     Bitar, et al.            Expires April 22, 2013         [Page 57] 
         






     Internet-Draft  Cloud Networking VPN Applicability   October 2012 
         

     11. Security Considerations 

        No new security issues are introduced beyond those described 
        already in the related L2VPN and L3VPN solutions drafts and 
        RFCs in relation to the VPN technologies themselves when the 
        deployment model and PE model remain the same. Allowing for 
        dynamic provisioning of VPN services within a DC must ensure 
        that tenant network privacy is preserved. In addition, when 
        provisioning, dynamically or statically, VPN services for a 
        tenant across domain boundaries, the tenant privacy must be 
        preserved. Dynamic provisioning must include communication of 
        a secure channel and ensure that the service is provided to an 
        authorized tenant and connected to the right tenant service. 
        In addition, changing the PE model by separating the 
        forwarding plane and control plane must consider and address 
        security implications. 

         

     12. IANA Considerations 

         

        IANA does not need to take any action for this draft. 

         

     13. References 

     13.1. Normative References 

        [RFC2119] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate 
                  Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997. 

        [RFC4761] Kompella, K. and Rekhter, Y. (Editors), "Virtual 
                  Private LAN Service (VPLS) Using BGP for Auto-
                  Discovery and Signaling", RFC 4761, January 2007.  

        [RFC4762] Lasserre, M. and Kompella, V. (Editors), "Virtual 
                  Private LAN Service (VPLS) Using Label Distribution 
                  Protocol (LDP) Signaling", RFC 4762, January 2007.  

        [PBB-VPLS] Balus, F. et al. "Extensions to VPLS PE model for 
                  Provider Backbone Bridging", draft-ietf-l2vpn-pbb-
                  vpls-pe-model-04.txt (work in progress), October 
                  2011. 

      
      
     Bitar, et al.            Expires April 22, 2013         [Page 58] 
         






     Internet-Draft  Cloud Networking VPN Applicability   October 2012 
         

        [PBB-Interop] Sajassi, A. et al. "VPLS Interoperability with 
                  Provider Backbone Bridging", draft-ietf-l2vpn-pbb-
                  vpls-interop-02.txt (work in progress), July 2011. 

        [802.1ah] IEEE 802.1ah "Virtual Bridged Local Area Networks, 
                  Amendment 6: Provider Backbone Bridges", Approved 
                  Standard June 12th, 2008   

        [802.1aq] IEEE Draft P802.1aq/D4.3 "Virtual Bridged Local Area 
                  Networks, Amendment: Shortest Path Bridging", Work 
                  in Progress, September 21, 2011 

        [RFC6325] Perlman, et al., "Routing Bridges (Rbridges): Base 
                  Protocol Specification", RFC 6325, July 2011. 

        [RFC4364] Rosen, E. and Y. Rekhter, "BGP/MPLS IP Virtual 
                  Private Networks (VPNs)", RFC 4364, February 2006. 

        [RFC4797] Rosen, E. and Y. Rekhter, "Use of Provider Edge to 
                  Provider Edge (PE-PE) Generic Routing encapsulation 
                  (GRE) or IP in BGP/MPLS IP Virtual Private 
                  Networks", RFC 4797, January 2007. 

     13.2. Informative References 

        [RFC4026] Andersson, L. et Al., "Provider Provisioned Virtual 
                  Private Network (VPN) Terminology", RFC 4026, May 
                  2005. 

        [802.1Qbp] IEEE Draft P802.1Qbp/D0.1 "Virtual Bridged Local 
                  Area Networks, Amendment: Equal Cost Multiple Paths 
                  (ECMP)", Work in Progress, October 13, 2011  

        [802.1Qbg] IEEE Draft P802.1Qbg/D1.8 "Virtual Bridged Local 
                  Area Networks, Amendment: Edge Virtual Bridging", 
                  Work in Progress, October 17, 2011 

        [EVPN] Raggarwa, R. et al. "BGP MPLS based Ethernet VPN", 
                  draft-raggarwa-sajassi-l2vpn-evpn-04.txt (work in 
                  progress), September 2011. 

        [PBB-EVPN] Sajassi, A. et al. "PBB-EVPN", draft-sajassi-l2vpn-
                  pbb-evpn-02.txt (work in progress), July 2011. 




      
      
     Bitar, et al.            Expires April 22, 2013         [Page 59] 
         






     Internet-Draft  Cloud Networking VPN Applicability   October 2012 
         

        [VM-Mobility] Raggarwa, R. et al. "Data Center Mobility based 
                  on BGP/MPLS, IP Routing and NHRP", draft-raggarwa-
                  data-center-mobility-03.txt (work in progress), June 
                  2012. 

        [RFC4719] Aggarwal, R. et al., "Transport of Ethernet over 
                  Layer 2 Tunneling Protocol Version 3 (L2TPv3)", RFC 
                  4719, November 2006. 

        [MVPN] Rosen, E. and Raggarwa, R. "Multicast in MPLS/BGP IP 
                  VPN", draft-ietf-l3vpn-2547bis-mcast-10.txt (work in 
                  progress), January 2010. 

        [ARPproxy] Carl-Mitchell, S. and Quarterman, S., "Using ARP to 
                  implement transparent subnet gateways", RFC 1027, 
                  October 1987. 

        [MYERS] Myers, A., Ng, E. and Zhang, H., "Rethinking the 
                  Service Model: Scaling Ethernet to a Million Nodes", 
                  http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~acm/papers/myers-
                  hotnetsIII.pdf 

        [Fine-Grained] Eastlake, D. et Al., "RBridges: Fine-Grained 
                  Labeling", draft-eastlake-trill-rbridge-fine-
                  labeling-01.txt (work in progress), October 2011. 

        [Nvo3-problem-statement] Narten, T., et al., "Problem 
                  Statement: Overlays for Network Virtualization", 
                  draft-ietf-nvo3-overlay-problem-statement-00.txt 
                  (work in progress), September 2012. 

        [Nvo3-fmwk] Lasserre, M., et al., "Framework for DC Network 
                  Virtualization", draft-ietf-nvo3-framework-01.txt 
                  (work in progress), October 2012. 

        [Nvo3-cp-reqts] Kreeger, L., et al., "Network Virtualization 
                  Overlay Control Protocol Requirements", draft-
                  kreeger-nvo3-overlay-cp-01.txt (work in progress), 
                  July 2012. 

        [Nvo3-dp-reqts] Bitar, N., Lasserre, M., et al., "NVO3 Data 
                  Plane Requirements", draft-bl-nvo3-dataplane-
                  requirements-02.txt (work in progress), October 
                  2012. 



      
      
     Bitar, et al.            Expires April 22, 2013         [Page 60] 
         






     Internet-Draft  Cloud Networking VPN Applicability   October 2012 
         

        [endsystem] Marques, P., wt al., "BGP-signaled end-system 
        IP/VPNs",   draft-ietf-l3vpn-end-system-00.txt (work in 
        progress), October 2012. 

      
      
         
            
     14. Acknowledgments 

        In addition to the authors the following people have 
        contributed to this document: 

        Javier Benitez, Colt 

        Dimitrios Stiliadis, Alcatel-Lucent 

        Samer Salam, Cisco 

        Yakov Rekhter, Juniper
    
     Authors' Addresses 

        Nabil Bitar 
        Verizon 
        40 Sylvan Road 
        Waltham, MA 02145 
        Email: nabil.bitar@verizon.com 
         
        Florin Balus 
        Alcatel-Lucent 
        777 E. Middlefield Road 
        Mountain View, CA, USA 94043   
        Email: florin.balus@alcatel-lucent.com 
         
        Marc Lasserre 
        Alcatel-Lucent  
        Email: marc.lasserre@alcatel-lucent.com 
         







      
      
     Bitar, et al.            Expires April 22, 2013         [Page 61] 
         






     Internet-Draft  Cloud Networking VPN Applicability   October 2012 
         

        Wim Henderickx 
        Alcatel-Lucent  
        Email: wim.henderickx@alcatel-lucent.com 
         
        Ali Sajassi  
        Cisco  
        170 West Tasman Drive  
        San Jose, CA 95134, USA  
        Email: sajassi@cisco.com 
         
        Luyuan Fang 
        Cisco 
        111 Wood Avenue South 
        Iselin, NJ 08830 
        Email: lufang@cisco.com 
         
        Yuichi Ikejiri 
        NTT Communications 
        1-1-6, Uchisaiwai-cho, Chiyoda-ku 
        Tokyo, 100-8019 Japan 
        Email: y.ikejiri@ntt.com 
         
         
        Mircea Pisica 
        BT 
        Telecomlaan 9 
        Brussels 1831, Belgium 
        Email: mircea.pisica@bt.com 
         
        John E. Drake 
        Juniper Networks 
        Email: jnadeau@juniper.net   
      
        Lucy Yong 
        Huawei Technologies (USA) 
        5340 Legacy Drive 
        Plano, TX75025 
        Email: lucy.yong@huawei.com 
      
        Susan Hares 
        Huawei Technologies (USA) 
        2330 Central Expressway 
        Santa Clara, CA 95050 
        Email: susan.hares@huawei.com 

      
      
     Bitar, et al.            Expires April 22, 2013         [Page 62] 
         