Internet-Draft          Enterprise Profile for PTP         November 2013
TICTOC Working Group                                         Doug Arnold
Internet Draft                                              Meinberg-USA
Intended status: Standards Track                          Heiko Gerstung
                                                                Meinberg
Expires: May 22, 2014                                       Nov 23, 2013

          Enterprise Profile for the Precision Time Protocol
               With Mixed Multicast and Unicast Messages


           draft-ietf-tictoc-ptp-enterprise-profile-01.txt


Status of this Memo
     This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
     provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79. This document may not be
     modified, and derivative works of it may not be created, except to
     publish it as an RFC and to translate it into languages other than
     English.

     Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
     Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
     other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
     Drafts.
    
     Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
     months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other
     documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts
     as reference material or to cite them other than as "work in
     progress."

     The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
     http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

     The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
     http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html

     This Internet-Draft will expire on May 22, 2014.

Copyright Notice
     Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
     document authors. All rights reserved.

     This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
     Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
     (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
     publication of this document. Please review these documents
     carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with
     respect to this document. Code Components extracted from this
     document must include Simplified BSD License text as described in
     Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without
     warranty as described in the Simplified BSD License.


Arnold and Gerstung             November 23, 2013               [Page 1]
 
Internet-Draft          Enterprise Profile for PTP              Nov 2013

Abstract

    This document describes a profile for the use of the Precision
    Time Protocol in an IPV4 or IPv6 Enterprise information system
    environment.  The profile uses the End to End Delay Measurement
    Mechanism, allows both multicast and unicast Delay Request and Delay
    Response Messages.

    
Table of Contents

1.   Introduction                              2
2.   Conventions used in this document         3
3.   Technical Terms                           4
4.   Problem Statement                         5
5.   Network Technology                        6 	
6.   Time Transfer and Delay Measurement       7
     6.1.   Unicast Delay Measurement Mode     7
     6.2.   Multicast Delay Measurement Mode   7
     6.3.   Hybrid delay Measurement Mode      8
7.   Default Message Rates                     8
8.   Requirements for Master Clocks            8
9.   Requirements for Slave Clocks            10
10.  Requirements for Transparent Clocks      10
11.  Management and Signaling Messages        10
12.  Forbidden PTP Options                    11
13.  Interoperation with Other PTP Profiles   11
14.  Security Considerations                  11
15.  IANA Considerations                      12
16.  References                               12
     16.1.  Normative References              12
     16.2.  Informative References            12
17.  Acknowledgments                          13
18. Authors addresses                         13

1.  Introduction

     The Precision Time Protocol ("PTP"), standardized in IEEE 1588,
     has been designed in its first version (IEEE 1588-2002) with the
     goal to minimize configuration on the participating nodes. Network
     communication was based solely on multicast messages, which unlike
     NTP did not require that a receiving node ("slave clock") in
     [IEEE1588] needs to know the identity of the time sources in the
     network (the Master Clocks).
	 
     The so-called "Best Master Clock Algorithm" ([IEEE1588] Clause
     9.3), a mechanism that all participating PTP nodes must follow,
     set up strict rules for all members of a PTP domain to determine
     which node shall be the active sending time source (Master Clock).
     Although the multicast communication model has advantages in
     smaller networks, it complicated the application of PTP in larger
     networks, for example in environments like IP based
     telecommunication networks or financial data centers. It is


Arnold and Gerstung             November 23, 2013               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft          Enterprise Profile for PTP              Nov 2013

     considered inefficient that, even if the content of a message
     applies only to one receiver, it is forwarded by the underlying
     network (IP) to all nodes, requiring them to spend network
     bandwidth and other resources like CPU cycles to drop the message.
     The second revision of the standard (IEEE 1588-2008) is the
     current version (also known as PTPv2) and introduced the
     possibility to use unicast communication between the PTP nodes in
     order to overcome the limitation of using multicast messages for
     the bi-directional information exchange between PTP nodes. The
     unicast approach avoided that, in PTP domains with a lot of nodes,
     devices had to throw away up to 99% of the received multicast
     messages because they carried information for some other node.
     PTPv2 also introduced so-called "PTP profiles" ([IEEE1588] Clause
     19.3). This construct allows organizations to specify selections
     of attribute values and optional features, simplifying the
     configuration of PTP nodes for a specific application. Instead of
     having to go through all possible parameters and configuration
     options and individually set them up, selecting a profile on a PTP
     node will set all the parameters that are specified in the profile
     to a defined value. If a PTP profile definition allows multiple
     values for a parameter, selection of the profile will set the
     profile-specific default value for this parameter. Parameters not
     allowing multiple values are set to the value defined in the PTP
     profile. A number of PTP features and functions are optional and a
     profile should also define which optional features of PTP are
     required, permitted or prohibited. It is possible to extend the
     PTP standard with a PTP profile by using the TLV mechanism of PTP
     (see [IEEE1588] Clause 13.4), defining an optional Best Master
     Clock Algorithm and a few other ways. PTP has its own management
     protocol (defined in [IEEE1588] Clause 15.2) but allows a PTP
     profile specify an alternative management mechanism, for example
     SNMP.


2.  Conventions used in this document

     The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL
     NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL"
     in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119
     [RFC2119].

     In this document, these words will appear with that interpretation
     only when in ALL CAPS. Lower case uses of these words are not to
     be interpreted as carrying RFC-2119 significance.
 

Arnold and Gerstung             November 23, 2013              [Page 3]

Internet-Draft         Enterprise Profile for PTP              Nov 2013

3.  Technical Terms

     Acceptable Master Table: A PTP Slave Clock may maintain a list of
     masters which it is willing to synchronize to.

     Alternate Master: A PTP Master Clock, which is not the Best
     Master, may act as a master with the Alternate Master flag set on
     the messages it sends.

     Announce message: Contains the master clock properties of a Master
     clock.  Used to determine the Best Master.

     Best Master:  A clock with a port in the master state, operating
     consistently with the Best Master Clock Algorithm.

     Best Master Clock Algorithm: A method for determining which state
     a port of a PTP clock should be in.  The algorithm works by
     identifying which of several PTP Master capable clocks is the best
     master.  Clocks have priority to become the acting Grandmaster,
     based on the properties each Master Clock sends in its Announce
     Message.

     Boundary Clock: A device with more than one PTP port.  Generally
     boundary clocks will have one port in slave state to receive
     timing and then other ports in master state to re-distribute the
     timing.

     Clock Identity: In IEEE 1588-2008 this is an 64-bit number
     assigned to each PTP clock which must be unique. Often the
     Ethernet MAC address is used since there is already an
     international infrastructure for assigning unique numbers to each
     device manufactured.

     End to End Delay Measurement Mechanism: A network delay
     measurement mechanism in PTP facilitated by an exchange of
     messages between a Master Clock and Slave Clock.

     Grandmaster: the primary master clock within a domain of a PTP
     system

     IEEE 1588: The timing and synchronization standard which defines
     PTP, and describes The node, system, and communication properties
     necessary to support PTP.

     Master clock: a clock with at least one port in the master state.

     NTP: Network Time Protocol, defined by RFC 5905, see [NTP].

     Ordinary Clock: A clock that has a single Precision Time Protocol
     (PTP) port in a domain and maintains the timescale used in the
     domain. It may serve as a master clock, or be a slave clock.

     
Arnold and Gerstung              November 23, 2013              [Page 4]

Internet-Draft          Enterprise Profile for PTP              Nov 2013

     Peer to Peer Delay Measurement Mechanism: A network delay
     measurement mechanism in PTP facilitated by an exchange of
     messages between adjacent devices in a network.

     Preferred Master: A device intended to act primarily as the
     Grandmaster of a PTP system, or as a back up to a Grandmaster.

     PTP: The Precision Time Protocol, the timing and synchronization
     protocol define by IEEE 1588.
     
     PTP port: An interface of a PTP clock with the network.  Note that
     there may be multiple PTP ports running on one physical interface,
     for example a unicast slave which talks to several Grandmaster
     clocks in parallel.

     PTPv2: Refers specifically to the second version of PTP defined by
     IEEE 1588-2008.

     Rogue Master: A clock with a port in the master state, even though
     it should not be in the master state according to the Best Master
     Clock Algorithm, and does not set the alternate master flag.

     Slave clock: a clock with at least one port in the slave state,
     and no ports in the master state.

     Slave Only Clock: An Ordinary clock which cannot become a Master
     clock.

     TLV: Type Length Value, a mechanism for extending messages in
     networked communications.

     Transparent Clock.  A device that measures the time taken for a
     PTP event message to transit the device and then updates the
     message with a correction for this transit time.

     Unicast Discovery: A mechanism for PTP slaves to establish a
     unicast communication with PTP masters using a configures table of
     master IP addresses and Unicast Message Negotiation.

     Unicast Negotiation: A mechanism in PTP for Slave Clocks to
     negotiate unicast Sync, announce and Delay Request Message Rates
     from a Master Clock.

     
4.  Problem Statement

     This document describes a version of PTP intended to work in large
     enterprise networks.  Such networks are deployed, for example, in 
     financial corporations.  It is becoming increasingly common in such 
     networks to perform distributed time tagged measurements, such as 
     one-way packet latencies and cumulative delays on software
     systems spread across multiple computers. Furthermore there is

     
Arnold and Gerstung              November 23, 2013              [Page 5]

Internet-Draft          Enterprise Profile for PTP              Nov 2013
      

     often a desire to check the age of information time tagged by a
     different machine.  To perform these measurements it is necessary
     to deliver a common precise time to multiple devices on a network.
     Accuracy currently required in the Financial Industry range from
     100 microseconds to 500 nanoseconds to the Grandmaster.  This 
     profile does not specify timing performance requirements, but such 
     requirements explain why the needs cannot always be met by NTP, as 
     commonly implemented. Such accuracy cannot usually be achieved with
     a traditional time transfer such as NTP, without adding 
     non-standard customizations such as hardware time stamping, and on 
     path support.  These features are currently part of PTP, or are 
     allowed by it.  Because PTP has a complex range of features and 
     options it is necessary to create a profile for enterprise 
     networks to achieve interoperability between equipment
     manufactured by different vendors.

     Although enterprise networks can be large, it is becoming
     increasingly common to deploy multicast protocols, even across
     multiple subnets. For this reason it is desired to make use of
     multicast whenever the information going to many destinations is
     the same.  It is also advantageous to send information which is
     unique to one device as a unicast message.  The latter can be
     essential as the number of PTP slaves becomes hundreds or
     thousands.

     PTP devices operating in these networks need to be robust.  This
     includes the ability to ignore PTP messages which can be
     identified as improper, and to have redundant sources of time.

     
5.  Network Technology

     This PTP profile SHALL operate only in networks characterized by
     UDP [RFC768] over either IPv4 [RFC791] or IPv6 [RFC2460], as
     described by Annexes D and E in [IEEE1588] respectively.  If a
     network contains both IPv4 and IPv6, then they SHALL be treated as
     separate communication paths.  Clocks which communicate using IPv4
     can interact with clocks using IPv6 if there is an intermediary
     device which simultaneously communicates with both IP versions. A
     boundary clock might perform this function, for example.  A PTP
     domain SHALL use either IPv4 or IPv6 over a communication path,
     but not both. The PTP system MAY include switches and routers.
     These devices MAY be transparent clocks, boundary clocks, or
     neither, in any combination.  PTP Clocks MAY be Preferred Masters,
     Ordinary Clocks, or Boundary Clocks.  The ordinary clocks may be
     Slave Only Clocks, or be master capable.


Arnold and Gerstung              November 23, 2013              [Page 6]

Internet-Draft          Enterprise Profile for PTP              Nov 2013
     Note that clocks SHOULD always be identified by their clock ID and
     not the IP or Layer 2 address.  This is important in IPv6 networks
     since Transparent clocks are required to change the source address
     of any packet which they alter.  In IPv4 networks some clocks
     might be hidden behind a NAT, which hides their IP addresses from
     the rest of the network.  Note also that the use of NATs may place
     limitations on the topology of PTP networks, depending on the port
     forwarding scheme employed.  Details of implementing PTP with NATs
     are out of scope of this document.

     Similar to NTP, PTP makes the assumption that the one way network
     delay for Sync Messages and Delay Response Messages are the same.
     When this is not true it can cause errors in the transfer of time
     from the Master to the Slave. It is up to the system integrator to
     design the network so that such effects do not prevent the PTP
     system from meeting the timing requirements. The details of
     network asymmetry are outside the scope of this document.  See for
     example, [G8271].

     
6.  Time Transfer and Delay Measurement

     Master clocks, Transparent clocks and Boundary clocks MAY be
     either one-step clocks or two-step clocks.  Slave clocks MUST
     support both behaviors. The End to End Delay Measurement Method
     MUST be used.

     Note that, in IP networks, Sync messages and Delay Request
     messages exchanged between a master and slave do not necessarily
     traverse the same physical path. Thus, wherever possible, the
     network SHOULD be traffic engineered so that the forward and
     reverse routes traverse the same physical path.  Traffic
     engineering techniques for path consistency are out of scope of
     this document.

     In all three of the delay measurement modes,  Sync messages MUST
     be sent as PTP event multicast messages (UDP port 319) to the PTP
     primary IP address.   Two step clocks SHALL send Follow-up
     messages as PTP general messages (UDP port 320). Announce messages
     MUST be sent as multicast messages (UDP port 320) to the PTP
     primary address.  The PTP primary IP address is 224.0.1.129 for
     IPv4 and FF0X:0:0:0:0:0:0:181 for Ipv6, where X can be a value 
     between 0x0 and 0xF, see [IEEE1588] Annex E, Section E.3.

6.1.   Unicast Delay Measurement Mode

     All Delay Request PTP event messages and Delay Response PTP
     general messages MUST be sent as unicast messages. Unicast
     Discovery and Unicast Message Negotiation options MUST NOT be
     utilized.

6.2.   Multicast Delay Measurement Mode

     All Delay Request PTP event messages and Delay Response general
     messages MUST be sent as multicast messages.

Arnold and Gerstung              November 23, 2013              [Page 7]

Internet-Draft          Enterprise Profile for PTP              Nov 2013

6.3.   Hybrid Delay Measurement Mode

     Delay Request Messages MAY be sent as either multicast or unicast
     PTP event messages. Master clocks SHALL respond to multicast Delay
     Request messages with multicast Delay Response PTP general
     messages. Master clocks SHALL respond to unicast Delay Request PTP
     event messages with unicast Delay Response PTP general messages.

     The default mode for Enterprise Profile PTP Master Clocks is
     Hybrid Delay Measurement Mode. This allow for the use of Ordinary
     clocks which do not support the Enterprise Profile, as long as
     they are slave Only Clocks.

     
7.  Default Message Rates

     The Sync, Announce and Delay Request default message rates SHALL
     each be once per second.  The Sync and Delay Request message rates
     MAY be set to other values, but not less than once every 128
     seconds, and not more than 128 messages per second.  The Announce
     message rate SHALL NOT be changed from the default value.  The
     Announce Receipt Timeout Interval SHALL be three Announce
     Intervals for Preferred Masters, and four Announce Intervals for
     all other masters.

     
8.  Requirements for Master Clocks

     Master clocks SHALL obey the standard Best Master Clock Algorithm
     from [IEEE1588].  Clocks which are master capable MAY act as
     Alternate masters according to [IEEE1588].  Preferred Master
     Clocks SHOULD operate as Alternate Masters when they are not the
     Best Master. Using multiple masters can mitigate rogue master and
     man-in-the-middle attacks such as delay attacks, packet
     interception / manipulation attacks. Assuming the path to each
     master is different, an attacker would have to attack more than
     one path simultaneously.

     A port of a clock SHALL NOT be in the master state unless the
     clock has a current value for the number of UTC leap
     seconds.  A clock with a port in the master state SHOULD indicate
     the maximum adjustment to its internal clock within one sync
     interval.  The maximum phase adjustment is indicated in the 
     Enterprise Profile announce TLV field for Maximum Phase Adjustment.

     
Arnold and Gerstung              November 23, 2013              [Page 8]

Internet-Draft          Enterprise Profile for PTP              Nov 2013   

     The Announce Messages SHALL include a TLV which indicates that the
     clock is operating in the Enterprise Profile.  The TLV shall have
     the following structure:

     TLV Type (Enumeration16): ORGANIZATION_EXTENSION value = 0003 hex

     Length Field (UInteger16): value = 12. The number of TLV octets
     
     Port Number (UInteger16): The Port Number of the port transmitting
     the TLV. The all-ones Port Number, with value FFFFhex, is used to 
     indicate that the identified profile is applicable to all ports on 
     the clock.

     Organization Unique Identifier (3 Octets): The Organization ID 
     value for IETF assigned by IEEE = 00005Ehex
     
     IETF Profile number (UInteger16): value = 1
     
     Revision number (UInteger8): value = 1

     Delay Measurement Mode (Enumeration8):
               Value 0 = Multicast Delay Measurement Mode
               Value 1 = Unicast Delay Measurement Mode
               Value 2 = Hybrid Delay Measurement Mode
               Values 3-255 = reserved for future use.
     
     Maximum Absolute Phase Adjustment Value within one sync interval
     (UInteger16): value
     
     Maximum Phase Adjustment Units (Enumeration8):
               Value 0 = unknown
               Value 1 = seconds
               Value 3 = milliseconds
               Value 6 = microseconds
               Value 9 = nanoseconds
               Value 12 = picoseconds
               Value 15 = femtoseconds
               All other values reserved for future use
               

     The TLV represents the Delay Request Mode of the Master, not
     necessarily the Grandmaster. So for example, one port of a
     Boundary clock could be set to Unicast Delay Measurement Mode,
     while the rest of the network is Hybrid Delay Measurement Mode.


Arnold and Gerstung              November 23, 2013              [Page 9]

Internet-Draft          Enterprise Profile for PTP              Nov 2013
9.     Requirements for Slave Clocks

     Slave clocks MUST be able to operate properly in a network which
     contains Alternate Masters.  Slaves SHOULD make use of information
     from the Alternate Masters in their clock control subsystems.
     Slave Clocks MUST be able to operate properly in the presence of a
     Rogue Master.  Slaves SHOULD NOT Synchronize to a Rogue Master.
     Slaves MAY use an Acceptable Master Table.  If the Best Master is
     not an Acceptable Master, but an Alternate Master is an Acceptable
     Master, then the Slave SHOULD synchronize to the acceptable
     Alternate Master. Note that IEEE 1588-2008 requires slave clocks to
     support both two-step or one-step Master clocks.  See [IEEE1588], 
     section 11.2.

     Since Announce messages are sent as multicast messages in all
     mode, slaves can obtain the IP addresses of master from the
     Announce messages.  Note that the IP source addresses of Sync and
     Follow-up messages may have been replaced by the source addresses
     of a transparent clock, so slaves MUST send Delay Request messages
     to the IP address in the Announce message.  Sync and Follow-up
     messages can be correlated with the Announce message using the
     clock ID, which is never altered by Transparent clocks.

     
10.     Requirements for Transparent Clocks


     Transparent clocks SHALL NOT change the transmission mode of an
     Enterprise profile PTP message.  For example a Transparent clock
     SHALL NOT change a unicast message to a multicast message.
     Transparent clocks SHALL NOT alter the Enterprise Profile TLV of
     an Announce message, or any other part of an Announce message.

     
11.     Management and Signaling Messages

    PTP Management messages MAY be used.  Any PTP management message
    which is sent with the targetPortIdentity.clockIdentity set to all
    1s (all clocks) MUST be sent as a multicast message.  Management
    messages with any other value of for the Clock Identity is
    intended for a specific clock and MUST be sent as a unicast
    message.  Similarly, if any signaling messages are used they
    MUST also be sent as unicast messages whenever the message is
    intended for a specific clock.

    

Arnold and Gerstung              November 23, 2013             [Page 10]

Internet-Draft          Enterprise Profile for PTP              Nov 2013

12.     Forbidden PTP Options

     Clocks operating in the Enterprise Profile SHALL NOT use peer to
     peer timing for delay measurement.  Clocks operating in the
     Enterprise Profile SHALL NOT use Unicast Message Negotiation to
     determine message rates. Slave clocks operating in the Enterprise
     Profile SHALL NOT use Unicast Discovery to establish connection to
     Master clocks.  Grandmaster Clusters are NOT ALLOWED. Clocks
     operating in the Enterprise Profile SHALL NOT use Alternative Time
     Scales.

     
13.     Interoperation with Other PTP Profiles

     Clocks operating in the Enterprise profile will not interoperate
     with clocks operating in the Power Profile [C37.238], because the

     Enterprise Profile requires the End to End Delay Measurement
     Mechanism and the Power Profile requires the Peer to Peer Delay
     Measurement Mechanism.

     Clocks operating in the Enterprise profile will not interoperate
     with clocks operating in the Telecom Profile for Frequency
     Synchronization[G8265.1], because the Enterprise Profile forbids
     Unicast Message Negotiation, and Unicast Discovery.  These
     features are part of the default manner of operation for the
     Telecom Profile for Frequency Synchronization.

     Clocks operating in the Enterprise profile will interoperate with
     clocks operating in the default profile if the default profile
     clocks operate on IPv4 or IPv6 networks, use the End to End Delay
     Measurement Mechanism, and use management messages in unicast when
     those messages are directed at a specific clock.  If any of these
     requirements are not met than Enterprise Profile clocks will not
     interoperate with Default Profile Clocks.  The Default Profile is
     described in Annex J of [IEEE1588].

     Enterprise Profile Clocks will interoperate with clocks operating
     in other profiles if the clocks in the other profiles obey the
     rules of the Enterprise Profile.  These rules MUST NOT be changed
     to achieve interoperability with other profiles.

     
14.     Security Considerations

     Protocols used to transfer time, such as PTP and NTP can be
     important to security mechanisms which use time windows for keys
     and authorization. Passing time through the networks poses a
     security risk since time can potentially be manipulated.


Arnold and Gerstung              November 23, 2013             [Page 11]

Internet-Draft          Enterprise Profile for PTP              Nov 2013
					 
     The use of multiple simultaneous masters, using the IEEE 1588
     Alternate Master option can mitigate problems from rogue masters
     and man-in-the-middle attacks.  See sections 9 and 10. Additional
     security mechanisms are outside the scope of this document.
           
15.     IANA Considerations

     There are no IANA requirements in this specification.


16.     References

16.1.      Normative References

           [IEEE1588] IEEE std. 1588-2008, "IEEE Standard for a 
                      Precision Clock Synchronization for Networked
                      Measurement and Control Systems." July, 2008. 
           [RFC768]   Postel, J., "User Datagram Protocol," RFC 768,
                      August, 980.
					 
           [RFC791]   "Internet Protocol DARPA Internet Program Protocol
                      Specification," RFC 791, September, 1981.
					 
           [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to
                      Indicate Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
                      March 1997.
					 
           [RFC2460]  Deering, S., Hinden, R., "Internet Protocol,
                      Version 6 (IPv6) Specification," RFC 2460, 
                      December, 1998.

16.2.      Informative References

           [C37.238]  IEEE std. C37.238-2011, "IEEE Standard Profile for
                      Use of IEEE 1588 Precision Time Protocol in Power
                      System Applications," July 2011.

           [G8265.1]  ITU-T G.8265.1/Y.1365.1, "Precision time protocol
                      telecom profile for frequency synchronization,"
                      October 2011.

           [G8271]    ITU-T G.8271/Y.1366, "Time and Phase
                      Synchronization Aspects of Packet Networks"
                      February, 2012.

           [NTP]      Mills, D., Martin, J., Burbank, J., Kasch, W.,
                      "Network Time Protocol Version 4: Protocol and
                      Algorithms Specification," RFC 5905, June 2010.


Arnold and Gerstung             November 23, 2013              [Page 12]

Internet-Draft           Enterprise Profile for PTP             Nov 2013

17.      Acknowledgments

     The authors would like to thank members of IETF for reviewing and
     providing feedback on this draft.

     This document was prepared using 2-Word-v2.0.template.dot.


18.     Authors' Addresses

     Doug Arnold
     Meinberg USA
     228 Windsor River Rd
     Windsor, CA 95492
     USA

     Email: doug.arnold@meinberg-usa.com


     Heiko Gerstung
     Meinberg Funkuhren GmbH & Co. KG
     Lange Wand 9
     D-31812 Bad Pyrmont
     Germany

     Email: Heiko.gerstung@meinberg.de


Arnold and Gerstung              November 23, 2013             [Page 13]
