


v6ops                                                  V. Kuarsingh, Ed.
Internet-Draft                                     Rogers Communications
Intended status: Informational                              July 5, 2011
Expires: January 6, 2012


                       Wireline Incremental IPv6
              draft-kuarsingh-wireline-incremental-ipv6-00

Abstract

   Operators are currently challenged with enabling IPv6 within their
   networks while maintaing IPv4 connectivity beyond IPv4 address
   depletion.  In the Wireline world, this will often require the
   replacement of access network equipment and consumer equipment along
   with the uplift of the core network.  During the transition from the
   IPv4-Only service environment to the IPv6/IPv4 dual service
   environment, operators may often need to use multiple transition
   technologies and mechanisms to maintain services for their customer
   base.  This draft is set up to show how some Wireline provides
   (including Cable, DSL and Fibre) may accomplish this using
   tunnelling, translation and native IPv6 services.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 6, 2012.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of



Kuarsingh                Expires January 6, 2012                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft          Wireline Incremental IPv6              July 2011


   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   3.  Reasons for a Phased Approach  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     3.1.  Relevance of IPv6 and IPv4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     3.2.  IPv4 Resource Challenges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     3.3.  IPv6 Introduction and Maturity . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     3.4.  Impact to Operators  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   4.  IPv6 Transition Technology Analysis  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     4.1.  Automatic Tunnelling using 6to4 and Teredo . . . . . . . .  6
     4.2.  Carrier Grade NAT (NAT444) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     4.3.  6RD  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     4.4.  Native Dual Stack  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     4.5.  DS-Lite  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   5.  IPv6 Transition Phases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     5.1.  Phase 0 - Foundation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
       5.1.1.  Phase 0 - Foundation: Training . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
       5.1.2.  Phase 0 - Foundation: Routing  . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
       5.1.3.  Phase 0 - Foundation: Network Policy and Security  . . 10
       5.1.4.  Phase 0 - Foundation: Transition Architecture  . . . . 10
     5.2.  Phase 1 - Tunnelled IPv6 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     5.3.  Phase 2: Native Dual Stack . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     5.4.  Intermediate Phase for CGN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     5.5.  Phase 3 - Tunnelled IPv4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   6.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   7.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   8.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   9.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     9.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     9.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14











Kuarsingh                Expires January 6, 2012                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft          Wireline Incremental IPv6              July 2011


1.  Introduction

   IPv6 represents the strategic IP protocol version which will meet the
   addressing needs of the Internet into the future.  Many operators are
   already working to implement IPv6 within their networks, and many
   others may just be starting this process.  A solid IPv6 plan will
   need to include both the baseline requirements to enable IPv6 within
   the network, but must also include facilities to provide continuance
   for IPv4 connectivity.  Given the vast number of technological
   options now available to operators for transition to IPv6, the task
   may seem daunting when attempting to identify which technologies are
   appropriate for a given network, and how these technologies can be
   introduced.

   This draft sets out to help operators who may be just starting the
   evaluation process by identifying which technologies can be used in
   an incremental fashion to transition from an IPv4-only environment to
   an efficient IPv6/IPv4 environment.  Although no single plan will
   work for for all operators, generically, those listed herein provide
   a baseline which can be included in many plans.

   This draft is specifically catered towards wireline environments
   which may use technologies such as Cable, DSL and/or Fibre as the
   access method to the end consumer.  This draft also attempts to
   follow the methodologies set out in [I-D.ietf-v6ops-v4v6tran-
   framework] to identify how the technologies can be used.  This
   document also attempts to follow the principles laid out in [RFC6180]
   which provides guidance on using transition mechanisms.  This
   document will show how tunnelling using 6RD and DS-Lite as well as
   translation via CGN can be used with native IPv6 to deliver effective
   dual stack services in an evolving wireline network.


2.  Motivation

   Wireline Operators are increasingly becoming aware of the need to
   support IPv6.  The depletion of unassigned IPv4 addresses within IANA
   and the RIRs has highlighted the need to move beyond IPv4.  In many
   operator environments, the main task will be the addition of IPv6
   into the network.  As straightforward as this task may seem, it will
   require forethought and planning.  However, of greater concern is
   that the introduction of IPv6 may need to take place in a volatile
   environment where IPv4 resources are depleted complicating what
   technologies can be used, and how dual stack services may be offered
   to customers.

   Operators will want to understand which of the prevailing
   technologies can be used in a changing network environment while



Kuarsingh                Expires January 6, 2012                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft          Wireline Incremental IPv6              July 2011


   adapting to the needs and conditions of the network.  The Operator's
   main goal will be to maintain quality IP services to Internet
   customers while the world moves from a predominately IPv4 centric
   system to a dual stack IPv6/IPv4 system and eventually to an IPv6
   centric world.


3.  Reasons for a Phased Approach

   Operators may want to consider a phased approach to IPv6 service
   introduction for a number of reasons.  These reasons include the
   relevance of both IPv4 and IPv6 services in the new ecosystem over
   the next few years.  Both protocols will play a key role in providing
   a holistic service to customers in various ways.  IPv4 resources will
   likely become depleted in many networks during the IPv6 transition
   inhibiting the general use of traditional dual stack.  Additionally,
   IPv6 will often be a new protocol for operators and their staff
   further challenging their task and potentially limiting how quickly
   they can move to full IPv6 dependence.

3.1.  Relevance of IPv6 and IPv4

   The reality for operators over the next few years will be that both
   IPv4 and IPv6 will play a role in the Internet experience.  Although
   many IPv6 advocates seek to move the Internet to IPv6 quickly, the
   fact that many older operating systems and hardware support IPv4-only
   operating modes will need to be accepted.

   Additionally, the Internet is made of of many interconnecting
   systems, networks and various content sources all of which will move
   to IPv6 at different rates.  The Operator's mandate during this time
   of transition will be to support connectivity to both IPv6 and IPv4
   through various technological means.

3.2.  IPv4 Resource Challenges

   Since connectivity to IPv4-only endpoints and/or content will remain
   a reality for a period of time, IPv4 resource challenges are of key
   concern to operators.  The lack of new IPv4 addressees for additional
   endpoints means that growth in some networks will be based on address
   sharing.

   Networks are growing at different rates based on a number of factors
   which may be related to emerging markets and/or proliferation of
   Internet based services.  Given the reality that growth on the
   Internet will continue, IPv4 address constraints will likely impact
   many if not most operators at some point.  This will play an
   important role when considering what technologies are viable as the



Kuarsingh                Expires January 6, 2012                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft          Wireline Incremental IPv6              July 2011


   transition period moves on.  Of note will be any use of technologies
   which rely on IPv4 as the mechanism to supply IPv6 services such as
   6RD.  Also, if native dual stack is considered by the operator,
   challenges on the IPv4 path is also of concern.

3.3.  IPv6 Introduction and Maturity

   Operators will want to or be forced to support IPv6 at some point.
   The introduction of IPv6 will require the operationalization of IPv6.
   The IPv4 environment we have today was built over time and was
   matured by experience.  Although many of these experiences are
   transferable from IPv4 to IPv6, new experience is necessary for IPv6
   nonetheless.

   Engineering and Operational staff will need to become acclimatized to
   IPv6 which will take time as experience is gained.  During this ramp
   up period, Operators will need to be aware that instability may occur
   and should be taking this into account when selecting what
   technologies are viable during early transition.  Operators may not
   want to subject their mature IPv4 service to a "new IPv6" path
   initially while it may be going through growing pains.  This plays a
   role during initial transition when considering technologies which
   require IPv6 to support IPv4 services such as DS-Lite.

   Of consideration as well will be the reality that some of these
   technologies are new and/or are still under development and
   refinement.  Deployment experience may be needed to vet these
   technologies out and stabilize them in production environments.  Many
   supporting systems are also under development and have newly
   developed IPv6 functionality including vendor implementations of
   DHCPv6, Management Tools, Monitoring Systems, Diagnostic systems,
   along with other systems.

   Although the base technological capabilities exist to enable and run
   IPv6 in most environments; until such time as each key technical
   member of an operator's organization can identify IPv6, understand
   it's relevance to the IP Service offering, how it operates and how to
   troubleshoot it - it's still maturing.

3.4.  Impact to Operators

   The lack of new IPv4 addresses related to depletion and the relative
   maturity state of IPv6 within the operator network will both impact
   what technologies can be used, when they can be used and how they can
   be used.  Operators are welcome to evaluate the impact of these
   challenges on their own, but some considerations are highlighted
   herein.




Kuarsingh                Expires January 6, 2012                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft          Wireline Incremental IPv6              July 2011


   The lack of IPv4 addresses will surely mean that any service
   requiring it's use as a method to deliver just IPv4, or a vehicle to
   deliver IPv6 may be short lived.  This may also limited their
   usefulness to initial transition phases.  Nothing precludes an
   operator from using technologies for longer periods of time, but the
   relative impacts need to be considered.  Also, some technologies
   based on native IPv6 delivery will need to be weighed as well.  This
   includes traditional dual stack and more importantly technologies
   like DS-Lite which require a native IPv6 path to the customer premise
   The operator may want to wait until a certain maturity level is
   reached with respect to IPv6 before making IPv6 connectivity
   mandatory to service IPv4 flows given the potential for failure at
   the outset.


4.  IPv6 Transition Technology Analysis

   Understanding the main IPv6 transition technologies and those related
   to dealing with IPv4 run out should be a primary goal of any
   operator.  Although this draft is not designed to list all options or
   to provide a full technical analysis of each of the identified
   technologies, it provides a brief description and explains how they
   can or may be used in a transitioning operator network.

4.1.  Automatic Tunnelling using 6to4 and Teredo

   Operators may not be actively deploying IPv6, but automatic
   mechanisms do exist on deployed operating systems and hardware that
   should be of note.  Such technologies include 6to4 described within
   [RFC3056] which is mostly commonly used in a deployment mode using
   anycast relays as described in [RFC3068].  Additionally, Teredo
   [RFC4380] is also used widely by many Internet hosts as a means to
   reach the IPv6 world when no native or operator provided path is made
   available.

   The operator may not want or have intended for these technologies to
   be active in their networks, but should be aware that the traffic
   exists and may be inclined to provide the best possible experience
   for these endpoints.  Drafts such as [I-D.ietf-v6ops-6to4-advisory]
   have been written to help operators understand observed problems and
   provide guidelines on how to manage such protocols.  An Operator may
   want to incrementally provide local relays for 6to4 and/or Teredo to
   help improve the protocol's performance for ambient traffic utilizing
   these methods.  Experiences such as those described in [I-D.jjmb-
   v6ops-comcast-ipv6-experiences] show that local relays have proved
   beneficial to 6to4 protocol performance.





Kuarsingh                Expires January 6, 2012                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft          Wireline Incremental IPv6              July 2011


4.2.  Carrier Grade NAT (NAT444)

   Carrier Grade NAT (GGN), specifically as deployed in a NAT444
   scenario [I-D.ietf-behave-lsn-requirements], is also a relevant
   technology.  CGN/NAT444 is not a IPv6 specific function, but may
   prove beneficial for those operators who offer dual stack services to
   endpoints.  CGNs are known to cause certain challenges for the IPv4
   service path as described in documents like [I-D.donley-nat444-
   impacts], but may often be necessary for a time.

   In a network where IPv4 address availability is low or no new
   addressees can be assigned to Internet hosts, a CGN/NAT444 deployment
   may be a viable way to provide continued access to the IPv4 path.
   Other technologies may also be used, but a provider may choose to use
   this method earlier on since it's a well understood method of
   delivering IPv4 connectivity - notwithstanding the challenges of
   NAT444.  When considered in the overall IPv6 transition, CGN/NAT444
   may play a vital role in delivery Internet services.

4.3.  6RD

   6RD as described in [RFC5969] does provide a quick and effective way
   to deliver IPv6 services to access network endpoints which do not yet
   support IPv6. 6RD provides tunnelled connectivity to IPv6 over the
   existing IPv4 path.  The lack of native IPv6 for a customer premise
   may be related to technological challenges of delivering IPv6 on a
   give access type or related to other operational or technical
   impediments that may existing in an operator's environment.

   6RD defiantly offers a solid early transition option to operators by
   eliminating the bottle neck of needing to deploy native IPv6 to the
   access edge.  Over time, as the access edge is upgraded, 6RD can be
   replaced by native IPv6 access. 6RD can be delivered along with CGN/
   NAT444, but this would be a sub-optimal way of delivering service
   since the operator would then need to relay all IPv6 traffic as well
   as provide NAT functionally for IPv4 flows.

   6RD may also be seen as advantageous during early transition while
   IPv6 traffic volumes are low.  During this period, the operator can
   gain experience with IPv6 on the core and improve their peering
   framework to meet those of the IPv4 service.  Scaling of 6RD may be
   required by adding relays to the operator's network, but since 6RD is
   stateless, this task is quite manageable.  In the case where CGN/
   NAT444 is used, there are stateful considerations to be made on the
   NAT444 path.

   Operators may want to use 6RD, as noted, while traffic volumes are
   low and while internal services are mainly on IPv4.  As higher



Kuarsingh                Expires January 6, 2012                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft          Wireline Incremental IPv6              July 2011


   capacities are reached on the IPv6 path, the operator may want to
   move away from delivering heavy loads on a tunnelled connection. 6RD
   can continue to run indefinitely if the operator wishes to continue
   this service, but over time, native IPv6 would be a much more
   efficient way of delivering robust IPv6 services.

4.4.  Native Dual Stack

   Native Dual Stack is often referred to as the "Gold Standard" of IPv6
   and IPv4 delivery.  It is a method of service delivery which is
   already used in some deployments.  Native Dual Stack does however
   require that Native IPv6 be delivered to the customer premise.  This
   technology option is most desirable in many cases and can be used
   immediately if the access network and customer premise equipment
   supports IPv6, or can also be used incrementally to tunnelling
   options such as 6RD over time.

   As time progresses, Native Dual Stack may be challenging to deliver
   if more IPv4 addresses are not available on the IPv4 path.  For a
   sub-set of the IPv6 Native Dual Stack Customers, operators may
   include CGN/NAT444 as an assist technology.  Delivering Native Dual
   Stack would require the operator's core and access network support
   IPv6 with the required assisting systems like DHCPv6, DNS, and
   diagnostic/management facilities to help maintain the IPv6
   connection.

4.5.  DS-Lite

   DS-Lite, as described in [I-D.ietf-softwire-dual-stack-lite], is an
   architecturally desirable way of delivery both IPv4 and IPv6 services
   in an IPv4 constrained environment.  DS-Lite is able to provide IPv4
   services to customer networks which are only addressed with IPv6.
   DS-Lite uses tunnelling mechanisms to pass IPv4 traffic between the
   customer's network device (often a CPE) and the IPv4 internet using a
   provider managed AFTR.

   DS-Lite however can only be used where there are native IPv6
   facilities to the customer permise endpoint.  This may mean that the
   technology's use may not be viable during early transition.  The
   operator may also not want to use DS-Lite immediately after IPv6
   introduction as the organization may be development and maturing
   their IPv6 environment and may not want to subject the customers IPv4
   connection to the IPv6 path.  This is likely an early transition
   consideration and would diminish over time as IPv6 service delivery
   is matured.  The provider may also want to make sure that most of
   their internal services, and external provider content is available
   over IPv6 before deploying DS-Lite.  This would lower the overall
   load on the AFTR devices helping reduce cost and load on that layer



Kuarsingh                Expires January 6, 2012                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft          Wireline Incremental IPv6              July 2011


   of the network.  Nothing precludes an operator from using DS-Lite
   earlier in the transition, but the operator needs to be aware of the
   challenges that can arise.  If DS-Lite is used during early
   transition the operator will face scenario where they have support
   personnel learning to troubleshoot IPv6 while this new protocol is
   supporting the legacy IPv4 service.

   One of the strongest benefits of DS-Lite is the ability to continue
   to grow IPv4 services if required without the need to deploy more
   IPv4 addressees to customer endpoints.  This is quite advantageous as
   the transition period progresses and IPv4 resources become more and
   more challenging to secure.


5.  IPv6 Transition Phases

   The Phases described below are not provided as a ridged set of stops
   but as a guideline which can be considered by the operator.  The
   phases reflect the need to support IPv4 and IPv6 during transition as
   well as the premise that some technologies may prove beneficial at
   various periods during the IPv6 transition.

   Operators may want to follow all these steps, skip some steps if
   possible or develop their own plans should they have other
   considerations which may be of relevance to them.  The main goal
   however should be a set of phases that helps introduce IPv6, and
   allows for both protocols to work for a period of time as the
   Internet as whole moves to IPv6, followed by a declining need to add
   more IPv4 support.

   Additional guidelines and information on utilizing IPv6 transition
   mechanisms can also be found in [RFC6180].

5.1.  Phase 0 - Foundation

   Before moving an organization to support IPv6 services, a foundation
   needs to be made to support IPv6.  This foundation includes the
   following basic (non-exhaustive) list of items.

5.1.1.  Phase 0 - Foundation: Training

   Training may seem to be the most obvious step, but needs to be done
   effectively and widely across key technical personnel.  Unlike IPv4
   which had existed for a long period of time before it became "mission
   critical" for many organizations, IPv6 is being introduced at a time
   when IP services are vial for most many Internet users.  This should
   not be taken likely and organizations need to commit to training
   their staff.  Staff may also have far less if any experience with



Kuarsingh                Expires January 6, 2012                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft          Wireline Incremental IPv6              July 2011


   IPv6 which is not the same as with IPv4.  This means the little
   expose they get in their training may be all they have to lean on as
   they seek to support IPv6 at the outset.

5.1.2.  Phase 0 - Foundation: Routing

   The network will all need to be in place to support IPv6.  This
   includes the routed infrastructure along with addressing principles,
   routing principles, peering and related network functions.  Since
   IPv6 is quite different from IPv4 in the number of addresses which
   are made available, careful attention to a scalable and manageable
   architecture needs to be made.  Also, given that customer
   environments will no longer receive a token single address as is
   common in IPv4, operators will need to understand the impacts of
   delegating larges sums of addresses (Prefixes) to consumer endpoints.
   Delegating prefixes can be of specific importance in Cable
   environments where downstream customers often move between access
   nodes, raising the concern of frequent renumbering and/or managing
   movement of routed prefixes within the network.

5.1.3.  Phase 0 - Foundation: Network Policy and Security

   Like many principles, network policy and security need to be
   considered for IPv6.  It is possible that many of the IPv4 policies
   may transfer over to the IPv6 world, others may not be applicable.
   There is also a potential that new policies need to be made to deal
   with issues specifically related to IPv6.  This document does not
   highlight these specific issues, but raises the awareness they are of
   consideration and should be addressed.

5.1.4.  Phase 0 - Foundation: Transition Architecture

   The operator may want plan out their transition architecture in
   advance (with obvious room for flexibility) to help optimize how they
   will build out and scale their networks.  If the operator should want
   to use multiple technologies like CGN/NAT444, DS-Lite and 6RD, they
   may want to plan out where such equipment may be located and
   potentially choose locations which can be used for all three roles.
   This would allow for the least disruption as the operator evolves the
   transition environment to meet the needs of the network.

5.2.  Phase 1 - Tunnelled IPv6

   During the initial phase of transition the operator may want to
   support IPv6 before native IPv6 services are possible on the access
   network.  During this period of time, tunnelled access to IPv6 is
   likely a very viable and desirable option.  Providers can deploy
   relays for automatic tunnelling technologies like 6to4 and Teredo,



Kuarsingh                Expires January 6, 2012               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft          Wireline Incremental IPv6              July 2011


   and can more importantly deploy technologies like 6RD.  It should be
   noted that technologies like 6to4 and Teredo do not share the same
   address selection behaviours as those like 6RD as per address
   selection [RFC3484].

   The operator can deploy 6RD relays quite easily and scale them as
   needed to meet the early customer needs of IPv6.  Since 6RD requires
   the upgrade or replacement of most CPEs, the operator may want ensure
   that the CPEs support not just 6RD but Native Dual Stack and other
   tunnelling technologies if possible. 6RD client side deployments are
   now available in the retail channel products and within the OEM
   market making it a viable option for a wide range of operations.
   Retail availability of 6RD is important since not all operators
   control or have influence over what is deployed in the consumer site.

   If the operator does not have the access network challenge of
   deploying Naive IPv6, they may want to skip this phase.  However, the
   operator may still want to deploy 6to4 and/or Teredo relays to help
   the automatic tunnelling technology operation while Native IPv6 is
   deployed.  This initial phase also provides the added benefit of
   allow the operational folks to deterministically know what the IPv6
   prefix assignment is based on the IPv4 address.  Many operational
   tools are available or have been built to identify what IPv4 (often
   dynamic) address was assigned to a customer host/CPE.  So a simple
   tool and/or method can be built to help the operational folks in an
   organization know what the IPv6 prefix is for 6RD based on to
   knowledge of the IPv4 address.

5.3.  Phase 2: Native Dual Stack

   As a follow-up phase to "Tunnelled IPv6" or as an initial step, the
   operator may deploy Native IPv6 to the customer premise.  This phase
   would then allow for both IPv6 and IPv4 to be natively access by the
   customer equipment.  It is also possible that the second phase be
   enabled in pockets of the network while the access network is
   undergoing upgrades.

   As one of the most desirable options, Native Dual Stack should be
   sought as soon as possible if the operator's network allows.  During
   this phase, the operator can confidently work with content providers
   and internal groups to move content to IPv6.  Since there are no
   translation devices needed for this mode of operation, it allows both
   protocols (IPv6 and IPv4) to work efficiently within the network.
   Efficiency in this context refers to the need (or lack there of) to
   translate, incrementally route or relay customer traffic within the
   operator's network.





Kuarsingh                Expires January 6, 2012               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft          Wireline Incremental IPv6              July 2011


5.4.  Intermediate Phase for CGN

   During the first two phases, acquiring more IPv4 addresses may become
   challenging, therefore CGN may be required.  The CGN/NAT444
   infrastructure can be enabled if needed during either phase.  CGN/
   NAT444 is less optimal in a 6RD deployment (if used with 6RD to a
   given endpoint) since all traffic must transverse some type of
   operator equipment.

   In the case of Native Dual Stack, CGN/NAT444 can be used to assist in
   extending connectivity for the IPv4 path.  During this time, for
   endpoints subject to the CGN/NAT444 function, the Native IPv6 path is
   available for higher quality connectivity.  It would be the
   expectation that the IPv6 path becomes better utilized by the
   customer over time by virtue of IPv6 support in the home network and
   within the content provider's realm.

5.5.  Phase 3 - Tunnelled IPv4

   Over time, the operator will mature IPv6 and have more ubiquitous
   coverage within the network.  Once the operator is familiar with
   IPv6, tools have been developed and operational procedures refined,
   more efficient modes of connectivity can be enabled.  Once such
   technology is DS-Lite.  DS-Lite allows the operator to grow the IPv4
   customer base if needed without the need to deploy more IPv4
   addresses to customers.  DS-Lite still requires IPv4 address sharing,
   but this is seen as no worse and often more advantageous then NAT444
   and other address sharing options give a single NAT layer.

   The operator can also move endpoints (Dual Stack) to DS-Lite
   retroactively in an attempt to reclaim IPv4 addresses for
   redeployment.  Redeployment of addressees may be desirable if IPv4
   resources are needed for legacy equipment which cannot be upgraded to
   IPv4 and no new IPv4 addressees can be acquired otherwise.  The
   operator may want to have already moved most external content and
   internal content to IPv6 before this phase implemented.  By having a
   significant amount of traffic on IPv6, the operator would limit the
   amount of translation resources which are needed at the AFTR layer to
   support IPv4 flows.  This would also be a benefit to the customer as
   their traffic need not be translated by a operator device improving
   performance.

   If the operator was forced to enable CGN for a NAT444 deployment,
   they may be able to co-locate the AFTR and CGN functions within the
   network to simplify capacity management and the engineering of flows.
   This phase can also co-exist with Native Dual Stack if desired since
   the same basic foundation is needed for both technologies on the IPv6
   side.  DS-Lite however requires incremental functions in the network



Kuarsingh                Expires January 6, 2012               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft          Wireline Incremental IPv6              July 2011


   such as the programming of the CPE and the implementation of the
   AFTRs'.


6.  IANA Considerations

   No IANA considerations are defined at this time.


7.  Security Considerations

   No Additional Security Considerations are made in this document.


8.  Acknowledgements

   Thanks to the following people for their textual contributions and/or
   guidance on IPv6 deployment considerations: John Brzozowski, Lee
   Howard, Jason Weil, Nik Lavorato, John Cianfarani, and Chris Donley.


9.  References

9.1.  Normative References

   [I-D.ietf-v6ops-v4v6tran-framework]
              Carpenter, B., Jiang, S., and V. Kuarsingh, "Framework for
              IP Version Transition Scenarios",
              draft-ietf-v6ops-v4v6tran-framework-01 (work in progress),
              February 2011.

   [RFC6180]  Arkko, J. and F. Baker, "Guidelines for Using IPv6
              Transition Mechanisms during IPv6 Deployment", RFC 6180,
              May 2011.

9.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.donley-nat444-impacts]
              Donley, C., Howard, L., Kuarsingh, V., Chandrasekaran, A.,
              and V. Ganti, "Assessing the Impact of NAT444 on Network
              Applications", draft-donley-nat444-impacts-01 (work in
              progress), October 2010.

   [I-D.ietf-behave-lsn-requirements]
              Perreault, S., Yamagata, I., Miyakawa, S., Nakagawa, A.,
              and H. Ashida, "Common requirements for IP address sharing
              schemes", draft-ietf-behave-lsn-requirements-01 (work in
              progress), March 2011.



Kuarsingh                Expires January 6, 2012               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft          Wireline Incremental IPv6              July 2011


   [I-D.ietf-softwire-dual-stack-lite]
              Durand, A., Droms, R., Woodyatt, J., and Y. Lee, "Dual-
              Stack Lite Broadband Deployments Following IPv4
              Exhaustion", draft-ietf-softwire-dual-stack-lite-11 (work
              in progress), May 2011.

   [I-D.ietf-v6ops-6to4-advisory]
              Carpenter, B., "Advisory Guidelines for 6to4 Deployment",
              draft-ietf-v6ops-6to4-advisory-02 (work in progress),
              June 2011.

   [I-D.jjmb-v6ops-comcast-ipv6-experiences]
              Brzozowski, J., "Comcast IPv6 Experiences",
              draft-jjmb-v6ops-comcast-ipv6-experiences-00 (work in
              progress), March 2011.

   [RFC3056]  Carpenter, B. and K. Moore, "Connection of IPv6 Domains
              via IPv4 Clouds", RFC 3056, February 2001.

   [RFC3068]  Huitema, C., "An Anycast Prefix for 6to4 Relay Routers",
              RFC 3068, June 2001.

   [RFC3484]  Draves, R., "Default Address Selection for Internet
              Protocol version 6 (IPv6)", RFC 3484, February 2003.

   [RFC4380]  Huitema, C., "Teredo: Tunneling IPv6 over UDP through
              Network Address Translations (NATs)", RFC 4380,
              February 2006.

   [RFC5969]  Townsley, W. and O. Troan, "IPv6 Rapid Deployment on IPv4
              Infrastructures (6rd) -- Protocol Specification",
              RFC 5969, August 2010.


Author's Address

   Victor Kuarsingh (editor)
   Rogers Communications
   8200 Dixie Road
   Brampton, Ontario  L6T 0C1
   Canada

   Email: victor.kuarsingh@rci.rogers.com
   URI:   http://www.rogers.com







Kuarsingh                Expires January 6, 2012               [Page 14]

