


Network Working Group                                           H. Singh
Internet-Draft                                                 W. Beebee
Updates: 4862 (if approved)                          Cisco Systems, Inc.
Intended status: Standards Track                        October 14, 2011
Expires: April 16, 2012


                  Enhanced Duplicate Address Detection
                 draft-hsingh-6man-enhanced-dad-01.txt

Abstract

   Appendix A of [RFC4862] discusses Loopback Suppression and Duplicate
   Address Detection (DAD).  However, [RFC4862] does not settle on one
   specific automated means to detect Loopback of Neighbor Discovery
   (ND) [RFC4861] messages used by DAD.  Several service provider
   communities have expressed a need for automated detection of looped
   backed ND messages used by DAD.  This document outlines an algorithm
   to automate detection of looped back IPv6 ND messages used by DAD.
   Further, for certain access networks the document automates resolving
   a specific duplicate address conflict.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 16, 2012.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents



Singh & Beebee           Expires April 16, 2012                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                Enhanced DAD                  October 2011


   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   3.  Algorithm to Detect Looped Back ND message  . . . . . . . . . . 4
     3.1.  General Rules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
     3.2.  Processing Rules for Senders  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
     3.3.  Processing Rules for Receivers  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   4.  Impact on SEND  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   5.  Changes to RFC 4862 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   6.  Actions to Perform on Detecting a Genuine Duplicate . . . . . . 6
   7.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   8.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   9.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   10. Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7




























Singh & Beebee           Expires April 16, 2012                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                Enhanced DAD                  October 2011


1.  Terminology

   o  DAD-failed state - Duplication Address Detection failure as
      specified in [RFC4862].  Failure also includes if the Target
      Address is optimistic.  Optimistic DAD is specified in [RFC4429].

   o  Looped back message - also referred to as a reflected message.
      The message sent by the sender is received by the sender due to
      the network or a Upper Layer Protocol on the sender looping the
      message back.

   o  NS(DAD) - shorthand notation to denote an NS with unspecified IPv6
      source-address issued during DAD.


2.  Introduction

   Appendix A of [RFC4862] discusses Loopback Suppression and Duplicate
   Address Detection (DAD).  However, [RFC4862] does not settle on one
   specific automated means to detect Loopback of ND messages used by
   DAD.  One specific DAD message is a Neighbor Solicitation (NS),
   specified in [RFC4861].  The NS is issued by the network interface of
   an IPv6 node for DAD.  Another message involved in DAD is a Neighbor
   Advertisement (NA).  The algorithm proposed in this document focuses
   on detecting an NS looped back to the transmitting interface during
   the DAD operation.  Detecting a looped back NA is of no use because
   no problems with DAD will occur if a node receives a looped back NA.
   Detecting of any other looped back ND messages outside of the DAD
   operation is not critical and thus this document does not cover such
   detection.

   Recently service providers have reported a DAD loopback problem.
   IPv6 Loopback testing is underway on a router.  A network interface
   of the router is enabled for IPv6.  The interfaces issues an NS for
   the IPv6 link-local address DAD.  The NS is reflected back to the
   interface due to the Loopback test and the interface is stuck in a
   DAD-failed state requiring manual intervention.  In another service
   provider network, two broadband modems in a home have the Ethernet
   ports of each modem connected to a network hub.  The access
   concentrator serving the modems is the first-hop IPv6 router for the
   modems.  The access concentrator also supports proxying of DAD
   messages.  Each modem is IPv4 online.  The network interface of the
   access concentrator serving the two broadband modems is enabled for
   IPv6 and the interface issues a NS(DAD) message for the IPv6 link-
   local address.  The NS message reaches one modem first and this modem
   sends the message to the hub which sends the message to the second
   modem which forwards the message back to the access concentrator.
   The looped back NS message causes the network interface on the access



Singh & Beebee           Expires April 16, 2012                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                Enhanced DAD                  October 2011


   concentrator to be in a DAD-failed state.  Such a network interface
   typically serves over six thousand broadband modems causing all the
   modems (and hosts behind the modems) to fail to get IPv6 online on
   the access network.  Additionally, it may be tedious for the access
   concentrator to find out which of the six thousand or more homes
   looped back the DAD message.  Clearly there is a need for automated
   detection of looped back NS messages during DAD operations by a node.


3.  Algorithm to Detect Looped Back ND message

   The document proposes use of the Nonce Option (specified in
   [RFC3971]).  The nonce is a random number as specified in [RFC3971].
   If SEND is enabled on the router and the router also supports the new
   automated ND Loopback detection (specified in this document), there
   is integration with the algorithm of this document and SEND.  See
   more details in the Impact on SEND section.

   When the IPv6 network interface issues a NS(DAD) message, the
   interface includes the Nonce Option in the NS(DAD) message and saves
   the nonce in local store.  Subsequently if the interface receives an
   identical NS(DAD) message, the interface logs a system management
   message, updates any statistics counter, and drops the looped back
   NS(DAD).  If the DupAddrDetectTransmits variable for the interface is
   greater than one, subsequent NS(DAD) messages for the same Target
   Address should be suppressed.  If the interface receives a NS(DAD)
   message with a different nonce, the interface logs a DAD-failed
   system management message, updates any statistics, and behaves
   identical to the behavior specified in [RFC4862] for DAD failure.

   Six bytes of random nonce is sufficiently large for nonce collisions.
   However if there is a collision because two nodes generated the same
   random nonce, then the algorithm will incorrectly detect a looped
   back NS(DAD) when the NS(DAD) was issued to signal a genuine
   duplicate.  Since each looped back NS(DAD) event is logged to system
   management, the administrator of the network will have to intervene
   manually.

   The algorithm is capable of detecting any ND solicitation (NS and
   Router Solicitation) or advertisement (NA and Router Advertisement)
   that is looped back.  However, saving a nonce and nonce related data
   for all ND messages has impact on memory of the node and also adds
   the algorithm state to a substantially larger number of ND messages.
   Therefore this document does not recommend using the algorithm
   outside of the DAD operation by an interface on a node.






Singh & Beebee           Expires April 16, 2012                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                Enhanced DAD                  October 2011


3.1.  General Rules

   A node MUST implement detection of looped back NS(DAD) messages
   during DAD for an interface address.

3.2.  Processing Rules for Senders

   If a node has been configured to use the algorithm of this document,
   when sending a NS(DAD) for a tentative or optimistic interface
   address the sender MUST generate a random nonce associated with the
   interface address, MUST save the nonce, and MUST include the nonce in
   the Nonce Option included in the NS(DAD).  If a looped back NS(DAD)
   is detected by the interface, and if the DupAddrDetectTransmits
   variable for the interface is greater than one, subsequent NS(DAD)
   messages for the same Target Address SHOULD be suppressed.

3.3.  Processing Rules for Receivers

   The node has been configured to use the algorithm of this document.
   If an interface on the node receives any NS(DAD) message that matches
   the interface address (in tentative or optimistic state), the
   receiver compares the nonce in the message with the saved nonce.  If
   a match is found, the node logs a system management message, updates
   any statistics counter, and drops the received message.  If the
   received NS(DAD) message includes a nonce and no match is found with
   the saved nonce, the node logs a system management message for DAD-
   failed and updates any statistics counter.


4.  Impact on SEND

   The SEND document uses the Nonce Option in the context of matching an
   NA with an NS.  However, no text in SEND has an explicit mention of
   detecting looped back ND messages.  If this document updates
   [RFC4862], SEND should be updated to integrate with the algorithm of
   this document.  A minor update to SEND would be to explicitly mention
   that the nonce in SEND is also used by SEND to detect looped back NS
   messages during DAD operations by the node.  In a mixed SEND
   environment with SEND and unsecured nodes, the lengths of the nonce
   used by SEND and unsecured nodes MUST be identical.


5.  Changes to RFC 4862

   The following text is added to [RFC4862] at a yet to be determined
   location in [RFC4862].

   A router that supports IPv6 DAD MUST implement the detection of



Singh & Beebee           Expires April 16, 2012                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                Enhanced DAD                  October 2011


   looped back NS messages during DAD operation as specified in this
   document.  A network interface on any other IPv6 node that is not a
   router SHOULD implement the detection of looped back NS messages
   during DAD operation as specified in this document.


6.  Actions to Perform on Detecting a Genuine Duplicate

   As described in paragraphs above the nonce can also serve to detect
   genuine duplicates even when the network has potential for looping
   back ND messages.  When a genuine duplicate is detected, the node
   follows the manual intervention specified in section 5.4.5 of
   [RFC4862].  However, in certain networks such as an access network if
   the genuine duplicate matches the tentative or optimistic IPv6
   address of a network interface of the access concentrator, automated
   actions are proposed.

   One access network is a cable broadband deployment where the access
   concentrator is the first-hop IPv6 router to several thousand
   broadband modems.  The router also supports proxying of DAD messages.
   The network interface on the access concentrator initiates DAD for an
   IPv6 address and detects a genuine duplicate due to receiving an
   NS(DAD) or an NA message.  On detecting such a duplicate the access
   concentrator logs a system management message, drops the received ND
   message, and blocks the modem on whose layer 2 service identifier the
   NS(DAD) or NA message was received on.

   The network described above follows a trust model where a trusted
   router serves untrusted IPv6 host nodes.  Operators of such networks
   have a desire to take automated action if a network interface of the
   trusted router has a tentative or optimistic address duplicate with a
   host served by trusted router interface.  Any other network that
   follows the same trust model MAY use the automated actions proposed
   in this section.


7.  Security Considerations

   The nonce can be exploited by a rogue deliberately changing the nonce
   to fail the looped back detection algorithm.  SEND is recommended for
   this exploit.


8.  IANA Considerations

   None.





Singh & Beebee           Expires April 16, 2012                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                Enhanced DAD                  October 2011


9.  Acknowledgements

   Thanks to Eric Levy-Abegnoli and Erik Nordmark for their guidance and
   review of the document.


10.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC3971]  Arkko, J., Kempf, J., Zill, B., and P. Nikander, "SEcure
              Neighbor Discovery (SEND)", RFC 3971, March 2005.

   [RFC4429]  Moore, N., "Optimistic Duplicate Address Detection (DAD)
              for IPv6", RFC 4429, April 2006.

   [RFC4861]  Narten, T., Nordmark, E., Simpson, W., and H. Soliman,
              "Neighbor Discovery for IP version 6 (IPv6)", RFC 4861,
              September 2007.

   [RFC4862]  Thomson, S., Narten, T., and T. Jinmei, "IPv6 Stateless
              Address Autoconfiguration", RFC 4862, September 2007.


Authors' Addresses

   Hemant Singh
   Cisco Systems, Inc.
   1414 Massachusetts Ave.
   Boxborough, MA  01719
   USA

   Phone: +1 978 936 1622
   Email: shemant@cisco.com
   URI:   http://www.cisco.com/


   Wes Beebee
   Cisco Systems, Inc.
   1414 Massachusetts Ave.
   Boxborough, MA  01719
   USA

   Phone: +1 978 936 2030
   Email: shemant@cisco.com
   URI:   http://www.cisco.com/




Singh & Beebee           Expires April 16, 2012                 [Page 7]

