


REPUTE                                                      M. Kucherawy
Internet-Draft                                         November 20, 2013
Intended status: Informational
Expires: May 24, 2014


        Considerations Regarding Third-Party Reputation Services
                  draft-ietf-repute-considerations-03

Abstract

   Reputation services offer quality assessments about likely future
   behavior, based on past behaviors.  The use of these services has
   become a common tool in many applications that seek to apply
   collected intelligence about traffic sources.  Often this is done
   because it is common or even expected operator practice.  It is
   therefore important to be aware of a number of considerations for
   both operators and consumers of the data.  This document includes a
   collection of the best advice available regarding providers and
   consumers of reputation data, based on experience to date.  Much of
   this is based on experience with email reputation systems, but the
   concepts are generally applicable.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on May 24, 2014.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of



Kucherawy                 Expires May 24, 2014                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft            Reputation Operations            November 2013


   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Background  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   3.  Using Reputation Services . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   4.  Providing Reputation Services . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   5.  Evolution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   6.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   7.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   8.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   Appendix A.  Acknowledgments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9

































Kucherawy                 Expires May 24, 2014                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft            Reputation Operations            November 2013


1.  Introduction

   Reputation services involve collecting feedback from the community
   about sources of Internet traffic and aggregating that feedback into
   a rating of some kind.  Common examples include feedback about
   traffic associated with specific email addresses, URIs or parts of
   URIs, IP addresses, etc.  The specific collection, analysis, and
   rating methods vary from one service to the next and one problem
   domain to the next, but several operational concepts appear to be
   common to all of these.

   The promise of the protection that relying on reputation services
   offers can be enticing, and many users and operators alike typically
   engage those services merely because it is expected of them.  A
   critical notion, however, is that use of such a service explicitly
   involves a third party in the flow of data being received.  This is
   often taken for granted, with potentially disastrous results.

   This document highlights this and other considerations in providing
   and consuming reputation data services.

2.  Background

   The anti-abuse community has historically focused on identifying
   sources that misbehave, i.e., that earn negative reputations.  For
   email, this means identifying sources of spam; for security, it means
   identifying sources of penetration attacks.  The purpose here is to
   identify and filter traffic from bad actors.  This grew out of
   operational need.  As the Internet grew, so did the occurrence of
   problematic traffic, especially in email.  The pragmatics of email
   (i.e., the fact that the total IP address space is more constrained
   than the total email address space) drove the focus on using IP
   addresses as the focus of reputation, in addition to the fact that IP
   addresses have a degree of validation (via the TCP/IP infrastructure)
   where email addresses have had none.

   The major considerations around a third-party reputation service are:

   Raw data:  The method of obtaining the information that will be
      analyzed;

   Rating method:  The techniques used on the collected data to compute
      a rating or other expression of expected behavior;

   Publication:  How consumers obtain the computed ratings.

   A specific example of a publication method in common use in the email
   space is the DNS blacklist [DNSBL].  In particular, the operator of a



Kucherawy                 Expires May 24, 2014                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft            Reputation Operations            November 2013


   reputation service computes reputations of IP addresses and stores
   them in a database.  Via a DNSBL query, a consumer can query the
   database as to whether mail should be accepted from a particular
   source of incoming [SMTP], based on previous observations and
   feedback.  The service uses the IP address of the source as the basis
   for a query to the database, accessed through the Domain Name System
   [DNS].  [DNSBL] includes several points in its Security
   Considerations document that are repeated and further developed here.

   However, regardless of the identifier used for a reputation, bad
   actors can evade detection or its consequences by changing
   identifiers (e.g., move to a new IP address, register a new domain
   name, use a sub-domain).  This makes the problem space effectively
   boundless, especially as IPv6 rolls out, with its vastly larger
   address space.

   A framework for reputation services is introduced in [REPUTE] and the
   documents it references.

3.  Using Reputation Services

   Operators that choose to make use of treputation services to
   influence content allowed to pass into or through their
   infrastructures need to understand that they are granting a third
   party (the reputation service provider, or RSP) the ability to affect
   the handling of incoming traffic, for better or worse.  Of course,
   this is the whole point of engaging an RSP when everything is working
   properly, but a number of issues are worthy of consideration before
   establishing such a relationship.

   Some cases have occurred where an RSP made the unilateral decision to
   terminate its service.  To encourage its clients to stop issuing
   queries, it began reporting a maximally negative reputation about all
   subjects, causing rejection of all incoming traffic during the
   incident period.  Although one would hope such incidents to be rare,
   automated means to detect such unfortunate returns (malicious or
   otherwise) and take remedial should be considered.

   RSPs will be the subject of attacks once it is understood that
   success in doing so will allow malicious content to evade detection
   and filtering.  Users of RSPs need to plan for possible interruptions
   in service availability or quality.

   Similarly, some actors will try to "game" the service, which is to
   say that such actors will attempt to determine patterns of behavior
   that result in the reporting of favorable reputations, and in doing
   so, acquire artificially inflated reputations.  One could reasonably
   assume that a reputation service is inherently fragile.  For



Kucherawy                 Expires May 24, 2014                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft            Reputation Operations            November 2013


   operational clients, this should prompt balanced and comparative,
   rather than unilateral, use of the service.

   It is suggested that, when engaging an RSP, an operator should try to
   learn the following things about the RSP in order to understand the
   exposure potential:

   o  the RSP's basis for listing or not listing particular subjects;

   o  if an RSP is paid by its listees, the rate and criteria for
      rejection from being listed;

   o  how the RSP collects data about subjects;

   o  how many data points are input to the reported reputation;

   o  whether reputation is based on a reliable identifier;

   o  how the RSP establishes reliability and authenticity of those
      data;

   o  how continuing data validity is maintained (e.g., on-going
      monitoring of the reported data and sources);

   o  how actively data validity is tracked (e.g., how changes are
      detected);

   o  how disputed reputations are handled;

   o  how often input data expire;

   o  whether older information is more or less influential than newer;

   o  whether the reported reputation a scalar, a Boolean value, a
      collection of values, or something else;

   o  when transitioning among RSPs, the differences between them among
      these above points; that is, whether a particular score from one
      means the same thing from another.

   An operator using an RSP would be wise to ensure it has the
   capability to give preference to local policies, for cases where the
   client expects to disagree with the reported reputation.

   An operator should be able limit the impact of a negative reputation
   on content acceptance.  For example, rather than rejecting content
   outright when a negative reputation is returned, simply subject it to
   additional (i.e., more thorough) local analysis before permitting the



Kucherawy                 Expires May 24, 2014                  [Page 5]

Internet-Draft            Reputation Operations            November 2013


   traffic to pass.  In other words, the reputation may simply allow
   certain layers of a multi-layered filtering system to be bypassed
   when that reputation is favorable.

   A sensible default should apply when the RSP is not available.  This
   can also be a query to a different RSP known to be less robust than
   the primary one.

   Recent proposals such as the experimental system implemented in
   [OPENDKIM] have focused on tailoring operation to prefer or emphasize
   content whose sources have positive reputations.  See Section 5 for
   discussion of this notion.  As stated in Section 1, negative
   reputations are easy to shed, while the universe of things that will
   earn and maintain positive reputations is relatively small.
   Designing a filtering system that observes these notions is expected
   to be more lightweight to operate and harder to game.

   One choice is to query and cross-reference multiple RSPs.  This can
   help to detect which ones under comparison are reliable, and offsets
   the effect of anomalous replies.  More generally, a robust mechanism
   that is using a third-party service needs to contain an array of
   mechanisms, and to limit its dependence on any one mechanism, as well
   as protect against for misbehavior by an individual mechanism.

4.  Providing Reputation Services

   Operators intending to provide a reputation service need to consider
   that there are many flavors of clients.  There will be clients that
   are prepared to make use of a reputation service blindly, while
   others will be interested in understanding more fully the nature of
   the service being provided.  These can be likened to a consumer
   credit check that only seeks a yes-or-no reply versus wanting to
   review a detailed credit report.  An operator of an RSP should be
   prepared to answer as many of the questions identified in Section 3
   as possible, not only because wise clients will ask, but also because
   they reflect issues that have arisen over the years, and diligent
   exploration of the points they raise will result in a better
   reputation service.

   Obviously, in computing reputations via traffic analysis, some
   private algorithms may come into play.  For some RSPs, such "secret
   sauce" comprises their competitive advantage over others in the same
   space.  This document is not suggesting that all private algorithms
   need to be exposed for a reputation service to be acceptable.
   Instead, it is anticipated that enough of the above details need to
   be available to ensure consumers (and in some cases, industry or the
   general public) that the RSP can be trusted to influence key local
   policy decisions.



Kucherawy                 Expires May 24, 2014                  [Page 6]

Internet-Draft            Reputation Operations            November 2013


   Reputations should be based on accurate identifiers, i.e., some
   property of the content under analysis that is difficult to falsify.
   For example, in the realm of email, the address found in the From:
   header field of a message is typically not verifiable, while the
   domain name found in a validated domain-level signature is.  In this
   case, constructing a reputation system based on the domain name is
   more useful than one based on the From: field.

   The biggest frustration with most RSPs to date has been the challenge
   of dealing with errors: there ofen is no visible, accessible, and
   transparent process for remediating the errant addition of an
   identifier to a negative reputation list.  An RSP in widespread use
   is perceived to have enormous power when its results are used to
   reject traffic outright; when a "bad" entry is added referencing a
   good actor, it can have destructive effects, so an effective
   mechanism to fix such problems needs to exist.

   Clients clients with varying sensitivities need to be accomodated.
   The mechanism that is used to access the RSP should provide an
   ability to request that query results include details about the basis
   for producing those results.  This will help the user to decide how
   to apply those results.  For example, it should be possible for the
   reply to contain:

   o  the result itself;

   o  the number of data points used to compute the result;

   o  the age range of the data;

   o  source diversity of the input data;

   o  currency of the result (i.e., when it was computed);

   o  basis of the result (i.e., which identifier was used).

   The systems and algorithms used by the RSP to compute the reported
   reputation will need to be hardened as much as practicable against
   gaming or other forms of data poisoning.  Larger source diversities
   are harder to overcome with poisoned input, but are expensive to
   build in terms of both infrastructure and time.

   Systems focused on assigning positive reputations rather than
   negative ones are promising since positive reputations, if made
   difficult to earn, put a large cost on bad actors, which may be
   enough to dissuade them entirely.





Kucherawy                 Expires May 24, 2014                  [Page 7]

Internet-Draft            Reputation Operations            November 2013


5.  Evolution

   Recent consideration of reputation efforts is evolving toward the
   identification of good actors rather than bad actors, and giving them
   preferential treatment.  This drastically reduces the problem space:
   There are vastly more IP addresses and email addresses used by bad
   actors to generate problematic traffic than are used by good actors
   to generate desirable traffic.

   Moreover, good actors tend to be represented by stable names and
   addresses, allowing users to rely on these to identify and give
   preferential treatment to their traffic.  Good actors have no need to
   hop around to different addresses, and already work to keep their
   traffic clean.  In addition, good actors are willing and able to
   collaborate in the assessment process, such as by supplying validated
   identifiers that are associated with their traffic.

   This new approach of focusing on identification of good actors has
   only been tried to date using manually edited whitelists, but has
   shown promising results on that scale.

6.  Security Considerations

   Several points are raised above that can be described as threats to
   the delivery of valid user data.  This document highlights and
   discusses those matters, but introduces no new security issues.

7.  IANA Considerations

   This memo contains no actions for IANA.

   [RFC Editor: Please remove this section prior to publication.]

8.  Informative References

   [DNS]       Mockapetris, P., "Domain Names -- Concepts and
               Facilities", RFC 1034, November 1987.

   [DNSBL]     Levine, J., "DNS Blacklists and Whitelists", RFC 5782,
               February 2010.

   [OPENDKIM]  "OpenDKIM (Open Source DKIM)", July 2013,
               <http://www.opendkim.org>.

   [REPUTE]    Borenstein, N. and M. Kucherawy, "An Architecture for
               Reputation Reporting", RFC 7070, November 2013.

   [SMTP]      Klensin, J., "Simple Mail Transfer Protocol", RFC 5321,



Kucherawy                 Expires May 24, 2014                  [Page 8]

Internet-Draft            Reputation Operations            November 2013


               October 2008.

Appendix A.  Acknowledgments

   The author wishes to acknowledge the following for their review and
   constructive criticism of this proposal: Chris Barton, Dave Crocker,
   Vincent Schonau

Author's Address

   Murray S. Kucherawy

   EMail: superuser@gmail.com






































Kucherawy                 Expires May 24, 2014                  [Page 9]

