


Internet Engineering Task Force                                R. Shakir
Internet-Draft                                                       C&W
Intended status: Informational                         February 20, 2011
Expires: August 24, 2011


Operational Requirements for Enhanced Error Handling Behaviour in BGP-4
          draft-shakir-idr-ops-reqs-for-bgp-error-handling-01

Abstract

   BGP-4 is utilised as a key intra- and inter-Autonomous System routing
   protocol in modern IP networks.  The failure modes as defined by the
   original protocol standards are based on a number of assumptions
   around the impact of session failure.  Numerous incidents both in the
   global Internet routing table and within Service Provider networks
   have been caused by strict handling of a single invalid UPDATE
   message causing large-scale failures in one or more Autonomous
   Systems.

   This memo describes the current use of BGP-4 within Service Provider
   networks, and outlines a set of requirements for further work to
   enhance the mechanisms available to a BGP-4 implementation when
   erroneous data is detected.  Whilst this document does not provide
   specification of any standard, it is intended as an overview of a set
   of enhancements to BGP-4 to improve the protocol's robustness to suit
   its current deployment.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 24, 2011.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the



Shakir                   Expires August 24, 2011                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft     Requirements for BGP Error Handling     February 2011


   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.1.  Role of BGP-4 in Service Provider Networks . . . . . . . .  3
     1.2.  Overview of Operator Requirements for BGP-4 Error
           Handling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.  Avoiding use of NOTIFICATION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   3.  Recovering RIB Consistency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   4.  Reducing the Impact of Session Reset . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   5.  Operational Toolset for Monitoring BGP . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   6.  Operational Complexities Introduced by Altering RFC4271  . . . 14
   7.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
   8.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
   9.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
   10. References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
     10.1. Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
     10.2. Informational References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
   Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22




















Shakir                   Expires August 24, 2011                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft     Requirements for BGP Error Handling     February 2011


1.  Introduction

   Where BGP-4 [RFC4271] is deployed in the Internet and Service
   Provider networks, numerous incidents have been recorded due to the
   manner in which [RFC4271] specifies errors in routing information
   should be handled.  Whilst the behaviour defined in the existing
   standards retains utility, the deployments of the protocol have
   changed within modern networks, resulting in significantly different
   demands for protocol robustness.  Whilst a number of Internet Drafts
   have been written to begin to enhance the behaviour of BGP-4 in terms
   of the handling of erroneous messages, this draft intends to define a
   set of requirements for ongoing work.  These requirements are
   considered from the perspective of a Network Operator, and hence this
   draft does not intend to define the protocol mechanisms by which such
   error handling behaviour is to be implemented.

1.1.  Role of BGP-4 in Service Provider Networks

   BGP was designed as an inter-Autonomous System (AS) routing protocol
   and hence many of the error handling mechanisms within the protocol
   specification are designed to be conducive to this role.  In general,
   this consideration as an inter-AS routing propagation mechanism
   results in the view that a BGP session propagates a relatively small
   amount of network-layer reachability information (NLRI) between two
   ASes.  In this case, it is the expectation of session resilience for
   those adjacencies that are key to routing continuity (for example, it
   is expected that two networks peering via BGP would connect multiple
   times in order to safeguard equipment or protocol failure).  In
   addition, there is some expectation of multiple paths to a particular
   NLRI being available - it would be expected that a network can fall
   back to utilising alternate, less direct, paths where a failure of a
   more direct path occurs.

   Traditional network architectures would deploy an Interior Gateway
   Protocol (IGP) to carry infrastructure and customer prefixes, with an
   Exterior Gateway Protocol (EGP) such as BGP being utilised to
   propagate these prefixes to other Autonomous Systems.  However, with
   the growth of IP-based services, this is no longer considered best
   practice.  In order to ensure that convergence is within acceptable
   time bounds, the amount of routing information carried within the IGP
   is significantly reduced - and tends to be only infrastructure
   prefixes. iBGP is then utilised to propagate both customer, and
   external prefixes within an AS.  As such, BGP has become an IGP, with
   traditional IGPs acting as a means by which to propagate the routing
   information which is required to establish a BGP session, and reach
   the egress node within the local routing domain.  This change in role
   presents different requirements for the robustness of BGP as a
   routing protocol - with the expectation of similar level of



Shakir                   Expires August 24, 2011                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft     Requirements for BGP Error Handling     February 2011


   robustness to that of an IGP being set.

   Along with this change in role, the nature of the IP routing
   information that is carried has changed.  BGP has become a ubiquitous
   means by which service information can be propagated between devices.
   For instance, BGP is utilised to carry routing information for IP/
   MPLS VPN services as described in [RFC4364].  Since there is an
   existing deployment of the protocol between PE devices in numerous
   networks, it has been adapted to propagate this routing information,
   as its use limits number of routing protocols required on each
   device.  This additional information being propagated represents a
   large change in requirement for the error handling of the protocol -
   where session failure occurs, it is likely a complete service outage
   for at least a subset of a network's customers is experienced where
   an erroneous packet may have occurred within a different sub-topology
   or even service (a different address family for example).  For this
   reason, there is a significant demand to avoid service affecting
   failures that may be triggered by routing information within a single
   sub-topology or service.

   Both within Internet and multi-service routing architectures, a
   number of BGP sessions propagate a large proportion of the required
   routing information for network operation.  For Internet routing,
   these are typically BGP sessions which propagate the global routing
   table to an AS - failure of these sessions may have a large impact on
   network service, based on a single erroneous update.  In an multi-
   service environment, typical deployments utilise a small number of
   core-facing BGP sessions, typically towards route reflector devices.
   Failure of these sessions may also result in a large impact to
   network operation.  Clearly, the avoidance of conditions requiring
   these sessions to fail is of great utility to any network operator,
   and provides further motivation for the revision of the existing
   behaviour.

   Whilst the behaviour in [RFC4271] is suited to ensuring that BGP
   messages with erroneous routing information in are limited in scope
   (by means of session reset), with the above considerations, it is
   clear that this mechanism is not suited to all deployments.  It
   should, however, be noted that the change in scope affects the
   handling only of errors occurring after BGP session establishment.
   There is no current operational requirement to amend the means by
   which error handling in session establishment, or liveliness
   detection, are performed.

1.2.  Overview of Operator Requirements for BGP-4 Error Handling

   It is the intention of this document to define a set of criteria for
   the manner in which a revised error handling mechanism in BGP-4 is



Shakir                   Expires August 24, 2011                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft     Requirements for BGP Error Handling     February 2011


   required to conform.  The motivation for the definition of these
   requirements can be summarised based on certain behaviour currently
   present in the protocol that is not deemed acceptable within current
   operational deployments, or where there is a short-fall in the tool
   set available to an operator.  These key requirements can be
   summarised as follows:

   o  It is unacceptable within modern deployments of the BGP-4 protocol
      that a single erroneous UPDATE packet affects prefixes that it
      does not carry.  This requirement therefore requires some
      modification to the means by which erroneous UPDATE packets are
      handled, and reacted to - with a particular focus on avoiding the
      use of the NOTIFICATION message.

   o  It is recognised that some error conditions may occur within the
      BGP-4 protocol may not always be handled gracefully, and may
      result in conditions whereby an implementation cannot recover.  In
      these (and similar) cases, it is unacceptable for an operator that
      this reset of the BGP-4 session results in interruption to
      forwarding packets (by means of withdrawing prefixes installed by
      BGP-4 into a device's RIB, and subsequently FIB).  To this end,
      there is a requirement to define a session reset mechanism which
      provides session re-initialisation in a non-destructive manner.

   o  Further to the requirements to provide a more robust protocol, the
      current visibility into error conditions within the BGP-4 protocol
      is extremely limited - where further modifications to this
      behaviour are to be made, complexity is likely to be added.  Thus,
      to ensure that BGP-4 is manageable, there are requirements for
      mechanisms by which the protocol can be examined and monitored.

   This document describes each of these requirements in further depth,
   along with an overview of means by which they are expected to be
   achieved.  In addition, the mechanism by which the enhancements
   meeting these requirements are to interact is discussed.
















Shakir                   Expires August 24, 2011                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft     Requirements for BGP Error Handling     February 2011


2.  Avoiding use of NOTIFICATION

   The error handling behaviour defined in RFC4271 is problematic due to
   the limited options that are available to an implementation.  When an
   erroneous BGP message is received, at the current time, the
   implementation must either ignore the error, or send a NOTIFICATION
   message, after which it is mandatory to terminate the BGP session.
   It is apparent that this requirement is at odds with that of protocol
   robustness.

   There is significant complexity to this requirement.  The mechanism
   defined in [I-D.chen-ebgp-error-handling] describes a means by which
   no NOTIFICATION message is generated for all cases whereby NLRI can
   be extracted from an UPDATE.  The NLRI contained within the erroneous
   UPDATE message is considered as though the remote BGP speaker has
   provided an UPDATE marking it as withdrawn.  This results in a limit
   in the propagation of the invalid routing information, whilst also
   ensuring that no traffic is forwarded via a previously-known path
   that may no longer be valid.  This mechanism is referred to as
   "treat-as-withdraw".

   Whilst this behaviour results in avoiding a NOTIFICATION message,
   keeping other routing information advertised by the remote BGP
   speaker within the RIB, it may result in unreachability for a sub-set
   of the NLRI advertised by the remote speaker.  Two cases should be
   considered - that where the entry for a prefix in the Adj-RIB-In of
   the neighbour propagating an erroneous packet is utilised, and that
   where the prefix installed in the device's RIB is learnt from another
   BGP speaker.  In the former case, should the identified NLRI not be
   treated as withdrawn, the original NLRI is utilised within the global
   RIB.  However, this information is potentially now invalid (i.e. it
   no longer provides a valid forwarding path), whilst an alternate
   (valid) path may exist in another Adj-RIB-In.  By continuing to
   utilise the NLRI for which the UPDATE was considered invalid, traffic
   may be forwarded via an invalid path, resulting in routing loops, or
   black-holing.  In the second case, no impact to the forwarding of
   traffic, or global RIB, is incurred, yet where treat-as-withdraw is
   implemented, possibly stale routing information is purged from the
   Adj-RIB-In of the neighbour propagating errors.

   Whilst mechanisms such as "treat-as-withdraw" are currently
   documented, the proposals are limited in their scope - particularly
   in terms of restrictions to implementation only on eBGP sessions.
   This limitation is made based on the view that the BGP RIB must be
   consistent across an autonomous system.  By implementing treat-as-
   withdraw for a iBGP session, one or more routers within the
   Autonomous System may not have reachability to a prefix, and hence
   blackholing of traffic, or routing loops, may occur.  It should,



Shakir                   Expires August 24, 2011                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft     Requirements for BGP Error Handling     February 2011


   however, be considered if this view is valid, in light of the manner
   in which BGP is utilised within operator networks.  Inconsistency in
   a RIB based on a single UPDATE being treated as withdrawn may cause a
   inconsistency in a single sub-topology (e.g.  Layer 3 VPN service),
   or a service not operating completely (in the case of an UPDATE
   carrying service membership information).  Where a NOTIFICATION and
   teardown is utilised this is destructive to all sub-topologies in all
   address family identifiers (AFIs) carried by the session in question.
   Even where mechanisms such as multi-session BGP are utilised, a whole
   AFI is affected by such a NOTIFICATION message.  In terms of routing
   operation, it is therefore far less costly to endure a situation
   where a limited sub-set of routing information within an AS is
   invalid, than to consider all routing information as invalid based on
   a single trigger.

   It is considered that, if extended to cover iBGP, the mechanisms
   described in [I-D.chen-ebgp-error-handling] and
   [I-D.ietf-idr-optional-transitive] provide a means to avoid the
   transmission of a NOTIFICATION to a remote BGP speaker based on a
   single erroneous message, where at all possible, and hence meet this
   requirement.  The failure cases whereby NLRI cannot be extracted from
   the UPDATE message represent a case whereby the receiving system
   cannot handle the error gracefully based on this mechanism.




























Shakir                   Expires August 24, 2011                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft     Requirements for BGP Error Handling     February 2011


3.  Recovering RIB Consistency

   The recommendations described in Section 2 may result in the RIB for
   a topology within an AS being inconsistent across the AS' internal
   routers.  Alternatively, where such mechanisms are deployed at an AS
   boundary, interconnects between two ASes may be inconsistent with
   each other.  There are therefore risks of traffic blackholing, due to
   missing routing information, or forwarding loops.  Whilst this is
   deemed an acceptable compromise in the short term, clearly, it is
   suboptimal.  Therefore, a requirement exists to provide mechanisms by
   which a BGP speaker is able to recover the consistency of the Adj-
   RIB-In for a particular neighbour.

   It is envisaged that during such routing inconsistencies, the local
   BGP speaker is aware that some routing information was not able to be
   processed - due to the fact that an UPDATE message was not parsed
   correctly.  If the 'treat-as-withdraw' mechanism described within
   Section 2 is utilised, it is also possible for the local BGP speaker
   to have determined the set of NLRI for which an erroneous UPDATE
   message was received.  In this scenario, by utilising targeted
   mechanisms to re-request the specific NLRI that was unreachable, this
   routing information can be re-transmitted from the remote BGP
   speaker.  Such a request requires extension to the existing BGP-4
   protocol, in terms of specific UPDATE generation filters with a
   transient lifetime.  It is envisaged that the work within
   [I-D.zeng-one-time-prefix-orf] provides a mechanism allowing targeted
   elements of the Adj-RIB-In for a BGP neighbour to be recovered.

   In addition to such cases where specific routing information is known
   to be erroneous, the more general case where either a large amount of
   the Adj-RIB-In is contained in UPDATE messages subject to treat-as-
   withdraw, or the specific prefixes are unknown to the local BGP
   speaker must be considered.  In this case, there is a requirement for
   a BGP speaker to re-request the entire RIB advertised by a remote
   neighbour.  In this case, where such re-advertisement is required, it
   is envisaged that a ROUTE-REFRESH as per the description in [RFC2918]
   is utilised.  [I-D.keyur-bgp-enhanced-route-refresh] provides a means
   by which the ROUTE-REFRESH mechanism can be extended in order to meet
   this requirement.

   It is of particular note for both means of recovering RIB consistency
   described that these are effective only when considering transitive
   errors within an implementation - for instance, should an RFC
   interpretation error within an implementation be present, regardless
   of the number of times a specific UPDATE is generated, it is likely
   that this error condition will persist.  For this reason, there is an
   requirement to consider the means by which such consistency recovery
   mechanisms are utilised.  It is not advisable that a transitive



Shakir                   Expires August 24, 2011                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft     Requirements for BGP Error Handling     February 2011


   filter and advertisement mechanism is triggered by all error handling
   events due to the load this is likely to place on the neighbour
   receiving such a request.  Where this BGP speaker is a relatively
   centralised device - a route reflector (as described by [RFC4456])
   for example - the act of generation of UPDATE messages with such
   frequency is likely to cause disproportionate load.  It is therefore
   an operational requirement of such mechanisms that means of request
   dampening be required by any such extension.











































Shakir                   Expires August 24, 2011                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft     Requirements for BGP Error Handling     February 2011


4.  Reducing the Impact of Session Reset

   Even where protocol enhancements allow errors in the BGP-4 protocol
   to cease to trigger NOTIFICATION messages, and hence reset a BGP
   session, it is clear that some error conditions may not be exited.
   In particular, errors due to existing state, or memory structures,
   associated with a specific BGP session will not be handled.  It is
   therefore important to consider how these error conditions are
   currently handled by the protocol.  It should be noted that the
   following discussion and analysis considers only those NOTIFICATION
   messages generated in response to errors in UPDATE messages (as
   defined by Section 6.3 in [RFC4271]).

   The existing NOTIFICATION behaviour triggers a reset of all elements
   of the BGP-4 session, as described in Section 6 of [RFC4271].  It is
   expected that session teardown requires an implementation to re-
   initialise all structures and state required for session maintenance.
   Clearly, there is some utility to this requirement, as error
   conditions in BGP are, in general, exited from.  However, this
   definition is responsible for the forwarding outages within networks
   utilising BGP for route propagation when each error is experienced.
   The requirement described in Section 2 is intended to reduce the
   cases whereby a NOTIFICATION is required, however, any mechanism
   implemented as a response to this requirement by definition cannot
   provide a session reset to the extent of that achieved by the current
   behaviour.

   In order to address this, there is a requirement for a means by which
   a BGP speaker can signal that an unhandled error condition in an
   UPDATE message occurred - requiring a session reset - yet also
   continue to utilise the paths advertised by the neighbour that are
   currently in use within the RIB.  In this case, the Adj-RIB-In
   received from the neighbour is not considered invalid, despite a
   NOTIFICATION, and session reset, being required.  This set of
   requirements is akin to those answered by the BGP Graceful Restart
   mechanism described in [RFC4724].  Since the operational requirement
   in this case is to provide a means to achieve a complete session
   restart without disrupting the forwarding path of those prefixes in
   use within a BGP speaker's RIB, it is expected that utilising a
   procedure similar to the Graceful Restart mechanism meets the error
   handling requirement.  By responding to an error condition (repeated
   or otherwise) with a message indicating that an error that cannot be
   handled has occurred, forcing session reset, whilst retaining
   forwarding information within the RIB allows forwarding to all
   prefixes within a system's RIB to continue, whilst the session
   restarts.  By placing a time bound on the restart lifetime, should an
   error condition not be transient - for example, should an error have
   occurred with the BGP process, rather than a specific of the BGP



Shakir                   Expires August 24, 2011               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft     Requirements for BGP Error Handling     February 2011


   session - the remote BGP speaker is still detected as an invalid
   device for forwarding.

   It should, however, be noted that a protocol enhancement meeting this
   requirement is not able to solve all error conditions - however, a
   complete restart of the BGP and TCP session between two BGP speakers
   implements an identical recovery mechanism to that which is achieved
   by the existing behaviour.  Where an error condition such as memory
   or configuration corruption has occurred in a BGP implementation, it
   is expected that a mechanism meeting this requirement continues to
   detect this, by means of a bound on time for session restart to
   occur.  Whilst there may be some consideration that packets continue
   to be forwarded through a device which can be in an failure mode of
   this nature for a longer period, due to this requirement, the
   architecture of modern IP routers should be considered.  A divided
   forwarding and control plane is common in many devices, as well as
   process separation for software-based devices - corruption of a
   specific protocol daemon does not necessarily imply forwarding is
   affected.  Indeed, where forwarding behaviour of a device is
   affected, it is envisaged that a failure detection mechanism (be it
   Bidirectional Forwarding Detection, or indeed BGP KEEPALIVE packets)
   will detect such a failure in almost all cases, with the symptomatic
   behaviour of such a failure being an invalid UPDATE message in very
   few other cases.



























Shakir                   Expires August 24, 2011               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft     Requirements for BGP Error Handling     February 2011


5.  Operational Toolset for Monitoring BGP

   A significant complexity that is introduced through the requirements
   defined in this document is that of monitoring BGP session status for
   an operator.  Although the existing error handling behaviour causes a
   disproportionate failure, session failure is extremely visible to
   most operational personnel within a Network Operator due to both
   existing definitions of SNMP trap mechanisms for BGP, along with the
   forwarding impact typically caused by such a failure.  By introducing
   mechanisms by which errors of this nature are not as visible, this is
   no longer the case.  There is a requirement that where subsets of the
   RIB on a device are no longer reachable from a BGP speaker, or indeed
   an AS, that some mechanism to determine the cause is available to an
   operator.  Whilst, to some extent, this can be solved by mandating a
   sub-requirement of each of the aforementioned requirements that a BGP
   speaker must log where such errors occur, and are hence handled, this
   does not solve all cases.  In order to clarify this requirement, the
   example of the transmission of an erroneous Optional Transitive
   attribute can be considered.  Since, by definition, there is no
   requirement for all BGP speakers to parse such an attribute, a
   receiving router may treat NLRI as withdrawn based on an erroneous
   attribute not examined by its neighbour.  In this case, the upstream
   device or network, propagating the UPDATE, has no visibility of this
   error.  Operationally, however, it is of interest to the upstream
   router operator that such invalid information was propagated.

   The requirement for logging of error conditions in transmitted BGP
   messages, which are visible to only the receiver, cannot be achieved
   by any existing BGP message, or capability.  It is envisaged that
   each erroneous event should be transmitted to the remote peer -
   including the information as to the set of NLRI that were considered
   invalid.  Whilst with some mechanisms this is achieved by default
   (for example, One-Time Prefix ORF [I-D.zeng-one-time-prefix-orf]
   (Outbound Route Filtering) will transmit the set of prefixes that are
   required), the operator requirement is to know which prefixes may
   have been unreachable in all cases.  It is envisaged that an
   extension to meet this requirement will allow for such information to
   be transmitted between peers, and hence logged.  Such a mechanism may
   provide further utility as a either a diagnostic, or logging toolset.

   It should be noted that numerous work items within the IETF exist at
   the time of writing that begin to solve this requirement.  Within the
   IDR working group both [I-D.raszuk-bgp-diagnostic-message] and
   [I-D.ietf-idr-advisory] provide mechanisms by which such information
   can be propagated in-band to an existing BGP session.  Transmitting
   such diagnostic information in-band is considered the optimal means
   by which to propagate details of errors present in UPDATE messages,
   due to the fact that no additional protocols (and hence security and



Shakir                   Expires August 24, 2011               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft     Requirements for BGP Error Handling     February 2011


   trust concerns) must be configured between two Autonomous Systems
   (where the errors occur at an AS boundary), and the load on each BGP
   speaker is increased only due to an additional capability, rather
   than an additional code base, and protocol.  Clearly, any mechanism
   implemented in-band to a BGP session is required to be relatively
   lightweight, since the information provided over the session is an
   enhancement to the operational visibility of the protocol, and should
   not disrupt core protocol operations.  Other, out-of-band, mechanisms
   - such as that proposed in [I-D.ietf-grow-bmp] are likely to provide
   mechanisms by which further insight into BGP operation can be
   achieved.  The fact that such a protocol is implemented independently
   of the BGP protocol results in further flexibility to provide
   detailed protocol data, without introducing further complexity to the
   BGP protocol itself.





































Shakir                   Expires August 24, 2011               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft     Requirements for BGP Error Handling     February 2011


6.  Operational Complexities Introduced by Altering RFC4271

   The existing NOTIFICATION and subsequent teardown of a BGP session
   upon encountering an error has the advantage that a consistent
   approach to error handling is required of all implementations of the
   BGP-4 protocol.  This is of operational advantage, as it provides a
   clear expectation of the behaviour of the protocol.  The requirements
   defined herein add further complexity to the error-handling within
   BGP, and hence are liable to compromise the existing deterministic
   protocol behaviour.  It is therefore deemed that there is a further
   requirement to provide a clear method by which an erroneous UPDATE
   should be reacted to, in order that all protocol implementations
   provide a consistent means by which recovery is achieved.  A further
   complexity is introduced due to the disparate nature of the work
   items altering the BGP error handling behaviour - since all items are
   likely to be implemented as a BGP capability [RFC5492], situations
   are likely to occur between devices (especially those with different
   BGP implementations), where some of the mechanisms referenced are
   unsupported.  This adds further barriers to a standard definition of
   the BGP-4 error handling behaviour.

   In general, the approach considered ideal upon encountering an
   erroneous UPDATE message can be divided into two cases - those where
   the NLRI can be determined from the message, and those where it
   cannot be.  The latter case is the simpler of the two.  In this case,
   there is a requirement for the implementation to reset the BGP
   session, utilising the reduced-impact approach, described in
   Section 4.  In the case where the remote BGP speaker is in a
   transient error condition related to specific peer data structures,
   or state, a single instance of this behaviour is likely to exit the
   error condition.  In the case of implementation errors, it is
   possible that the BGP session in question may enter a continuous loop
   of being reset, with a partial RIB being held by one or more of the
   BGP speakers due to an non-deterministic order of UPDATE propagation.
   It is therefore a requirement that within this reduced-impact
   procedure any subsequent UPDATE messages that would result in further
   session resets are ignored.  Whilst this results in a condition where
   an undetermined amount of the RIB is inconsistent, partial
   reachability is maintained.  In this case, the operational toolsets
   discussed in Section 5 is likely to provide mechanisms by which this
   condition can be brought to the attention of the relevant operators.
   This requirement to accept a partial RIB, which results in potential
   invalid traffic forwarding is a direct result of the deployments of
   BGP-4, as described in Section 1.1.

   The case where NLRI can be determined from an erroneous UPDATE
   provides further complexities.  In this case, a BGP speaker is aware
   of the sub-set of the RIB which have been identified as being



Shakir                   Expires August 24, 2011               [Page 14]

Internet-Draft     Requirements for BGP Error Handling     February 2011


   contained within invalid UPDATE messages.  This allows a local BGP
   speaker to re-request single prefixes, utilising a mechanism such as
   "one-time prefix ORF".  However, a similar result is achieved by re-
   requesting the entire RIB - albeit with greater resource
   requirements.  It is therefore expected that the process of recovery
   utilises a staged set of mechanisms to attempt to restore consistency
   of the RIB:

   1.  Where available, a mechanism capable of requesting only the NLRI
       determined to have been contained within a invalid UPDATE should
       be utilised.  However, since it is possible that such an error
       condition can be transient in nature, it is likely that more than
       one request is to be transmitted (assuming the first does not
       return a valid UPDATE message).  In order to allow a
       deterministic process, there is a requirement for a limit on the
       number of specific requests transmitted to be defined.

   2.  Where a specific refresh mechanism is not available, a peer
       should re-request the entire RIB.  Again, there is a requirement
       to limit the number of complete RIB requests that should be sent
       via an implementation, in order to provide a bound both on the
       expected level of load a device may experience, and on the time
       for which the RIB may be inconsistent.

   3.  Finally, a session reset should be performed, as per the reduced-
       impact NOTIFICATION requirement defined in Section 4.  At this
       point, a similar challenge to that discussed above exists, should
       the error condition persist.  In this case, as defined above,
       there is a requirement to ignore those UPDATE messages that
       continue to be erroneous.

   It is envisaged that where limits are required, these will be defined
   on a per memo-basis, or within a further revision of the requirements
   described herein.

   Whilst the approach described above provides a standard means by
   which error recovery may be handled on a per UPDATE basis, further
   complexities are raised where multiple errors occur.  Clearly,
   following this procedure causes control-plane load on both the BGP
   speakers - for this reason, consideration of how repeated use of the
   mechanisms discussed in this document is required.  It is notable
   that errors may not occur with UPDATE messages relating to only a
   single NLRI, independent errors in multiple NLRIs may be experienced.
   For this reason, it is required that an implementation rate limits
   the number of error handling events sourced towards a particular
   neighbour.  It is expected that such rate limiting, or event
   suppression is achieved on a per-session basis, where state
   information is already held, rather than on a per-prefix basis as it



Shakir                   Expires August 24, 2011               [Page 15]

Internet-Draft     Requirements for BGP Error Handling     February 2011


   is envisaged that such behaviour presents significant scaling
   problems, and introduces further state requirements for an
   implementation of the protocol.  It is recommended that where a flag
   indicative of erroneous behaviour is implemented, the state of such a
   value is maintained independently of session establishment.














































Shakir                   Expires August 24, 2011               [Page 16]

Internet-Draft     Requirements for BGP Error Handling     February 2011


7.  IANA Considerations

   This memo includes no request to IANA.
















































Shakir                   Expires August 24, 2011               [Page 17]

Internet-Draft     Requirements for BGP Error Handling     February 2011


8.  Security Considerations

   The requirements outlined in this document provide mechanisms by
   which erroneous BGP messages may be responded to with limited impact
   to forwarding operation.  This is of benefit to the security of a BGP
   speaker in general.  Where UPDATE messages may have been propagated
   by a single malicious Autonomous System or router within a network
   (or the Internet default free zone - DFZ), which are then propagated
   to all devices within the same routing domain, all other NLRI
   available over the same session become unreachable.  This mechanism
   may provide means by which an Autonomous System can be isolated from
   required routing domains (such as the Internet), should the relevant
   UPDATE messages be propagated via specific paths.  By reducing the
   impact of such failures, it is envisaged that this possibility may be
   constrained to a specific set of NLRI, or a specific topology.

   Some mechanisms meeting the requirements specified in this document,
   particularly those within Section 5 may provide further security
   concerns, however, it is envisaged that these are addressed in per-
   enhancement memos.































Shakir                   Expires August 24, 2011               [Page 18]

Internet-Draft     Requirements for BGP Error Handling     February 2011


9.  Acknowledgements

   The author would like to thank Rob Evans, David Freedman, Tom
   Hodgson, Sven Huster, Jonathan Newton, Neil McRae, Thomas Mangin, Tom
   Scholl and Ilya Varlashkin for their review and valuable feedback.














































Shakir                   Expires August 24, 2011               [Page 19]

Internet-Draft     Requirements for BGP Error Handling     February 2011


10.  References

10.1.  Normative References

   [I-D.chen-ebgp-error-handling]
              Chen, E., Mohapatra, P., and K. Patel, "Revised Error
              Handling for BGP Updates from External Neighbors",
              draft-chen-ebgp-error-handling-00 (work in progress),
              September 2010.

   [I-D.ietf-grow-bmp]
              Scudder, J., Fernando, R., and S. Stuart, "BGP Monitoring
              Protocol", draft-ietf-grow-bmp-05 (work in progress),
              December 2010.

   [I-D.ietf-idr-advisory]
              Scholl, T., Scudder, J., Steenbergen, R., and D. Freedman,
              "BGP Advisory Message", draft-ietf-idr-advisory-00 (work
              in progress), October 2009.

   [I-D.ietf-idr-optional-transitive]
              Scudder, J. and E. Chen, "Error Handling for Optional
              Transitive BGP Attributes",
              draft-ietf-idr-optional-transitive-03 (work in progress),
              September 2010.

   [I-D.keyur-bgp-enhanced-route-refresh]
              Patel, K., Chen, E., and B. Venkatachalapathy, "Enhanced
              Route Refresh Capability for BGP-4",
              draft-keyur-bgp-enhanced-route-refresh-01 (work in
              progress), October 2010.

   [I-D.raszuk-bgp-diagnostic-message]
              Raszuk, R., Chen, E., and B. Decraene, "BGP Diagnostic
              Message", draft-raszuk-bgp-diagnostic-message-00 (work in
              progress), October 2010.

   [I-D.zeng-one-time-prefix-orf]
              Zeng, Q. and J. Dong, "One-time Address-Prefix Based
              Outbound Route Filter for BGP-4",
              draft-zeng-one-time-prefix-orf-01 (work in progress),
              October 2010.

   [RFC2918]  Chen, E., "Route Refresh Capability for BGP-4", RFC 2918,
              September 2000.

   [RFC4271]  Rekhter, Y., Li, T., and S. Hares, "A Border Gateway
              Protocol 4 (BGP-4)", RFC 4271, January 2006.



Shakir                   Expires August 24, 2011               [Page 20]

Internet-Draft     Requirements for BGP Error Handling     February 2011


   [RFC4364]  Rosen, E. and Y. Rekhter, "BGP/MPLS IP Virtual Private
              Networks (VPNs)", RFC 4364, February 2006.

   [RFC4456]  Bates, T., Chen, E., and R. Chandra, "BGP Route
              Reflection: An Alternative to Full Mesh Internal BGP
              (IBGP)", RFC 4456, April 2006.

   [RFC4724]  Sangli, S., Chen, E., Fernando, R., Scudder, J., and Y.
              Rekhter, "Graceful Restart Mechanism for BGP", RFC 4724,
              January 2007.

   [RFC5492]  Scudder, J. and R. Chandra, "Capabilities Advertisement
              with BGP-4", RFC 5492, February 2009.

10.2.  Informational References

   [RFC5881]  Katz, D. and D. Ward, "Bidirectional Forwarding Detection
              (BFD) for IPv4 and IPv6 (Single Hop)", RFC 5881,
              June 2010.
































Shakir                   Expires August 24, 2011               [Page 21]

Internet-Draft     Requirements for BGP Error Handling     February 2011


Author's Address

   Rob Shakir
   Cable&Wireless Worldwide

   Email: rob.shakir@cw.com













































Shakir                   Expires August 24, 2011               [Page 22]

