A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3543

        Title:      Registration Revocation in Mobile IPv4
        Author(s):  S. Glass, M. Chandra
        Status:     Standards Track
        Date:       August 2003
        Mailbox:    steven.glass@sun.com, mchandra@cisco.com
        Pages:      33
        Characters: 81805
        Updates/Obsoletes/SeeAlso:    None

        I-D Tag:    draft-ietf-mobileip-reg-revok-07.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3543.txt


This document defines a Mobile IPv4 Registration Revocation
mechanism whereby a mobility agent involved in providing Mobile IP
services to a mobile node can notify the other mobility agent
providing Mobile IP services to the same mobile node of the
termination of this registration.  The mechanism is also usable by a
home agent to notify a co-located mobile node of the termination of
its binding as well.  Moreover, the mechanism provides for this
notification to be acknowledged.  A signaling mechanism already
defined by the Mobile IPv4 protocol is leveraged as a way to inform a
mobile node of the revocation of its binding.

This document is a product of the IP Routing for Wireless/Mobile Hosts
Working Group.

This is now a Proposed Standard Protocol.

This document specifies an Internet standards track protocol for
the Internet community, and requests discussion and suggestions
for improvements.  Please refer to the current edition of the
"Internet Official Protocol Standards" (STD 1) for the
standardization state and status of this protocol.  Distribution
of this memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.
