A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3220

        Title:      IP Mobility Support for IPv4
        Author(s):  C. Perkins, Ed.
        Status:     Standards Track
        Date:       December 2001
        Mailbox:    charliep@iprg.nokia.com
        Pages:      97
        Characters: 238343
        Obsoletes:  2002

        I-D Tag:    draft-ietf-mobileip-rfc2002-bis-08.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3220.txt


This document specifies protocol enhancements that allow transparent
routing of IP datagrams to mobile nodes in the Internet.  Each
mobile node is always identified by its home address, regardless of
its current point of attachment to the Internet.  While situated
away from its home, a mobile node is also associated with a
care-of address, which provides information about its current
point of attachment to the Internet.  The protocol provides for
registering the care-of address with a home agent.  The home agent
sends datagrams destined for the mobile node through a tunnel to
the care-of address.  After arriving at the end of the tunnel, each
datagram is then delivered to the mobile node.

This document is a product of the IP Routing for Wireless/Mobile Hosts
Working Group of the IETF.

This is now a Proposed Standard Protocol.

This document specifies an Internet standards track protocol for
the Internet community, and requests discussion and suggestions
for improvements.  Please refer to the current edition of the
"Internet Official Protocol Standards" (STD 1) for the
standardization state and status of this protocol.  Distribution
of this memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.
