

General Area                                                     R. Hill
Internet-Draft                                         Hill & Associates
Intended status: Informational                      
Expires: December 25, 2013                                 June 25, 2013


             "Non Accession to the ITRs Considered Harmful"
               draft-hill-itr-non-accession-harmful-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 25, 2013.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is based on a more detailed legal analysis [Hill-2013]
   and the author wishes to acknowledge Oxford University Press for
   their permission to publish this summarized version. The full
   version is at http://ijlit.oxfordjournals.org/content/early/2013/06/
   10/ijlit.eat008.full?ijkey=otqkCXVOAelJUPy&keytype=ref

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Hill          Expires December 25, 2013                         [Page 1]

Internet-Draft            Non Accession Harmful                June 2013


Abstract

  One of the treaties administered by the International 
  Telecommunications Union is the International Telecommunications
  Regulations (ITRs), whose purpose is to promote the development of
  telecommunication services.  The 1988 version of the ITRs opened the
  way for privatisation, liberalization, and the growth of the Internet 
  and mobile networks.  Given the subsequent significant structure and
  technological changes, the ITU membership agreed to meet in 2012 to
  revise the ITRs.  While consensus was found on an overwhelming 
  majority of the treaty text, some provisions proved to be 
  controversial, leading to a split in the membership and sharp
  criticism of selected provisions.
  
  As a result, some ITU Member States did not sign the treaty.  This
  document analyses that criticism and attempts to place it in context; 
  it identifies problems that may arise if states to not accede
  to the treaty, and suggests a way forward, concluding that not 
  acceding may have undesirable results for the citizens of 
  non-signatory countries and for interoperability in general.    
 






























Hill          Expires December 25, 2013                         [Page 2]

Internet-Draft            Non Accession Harmful                June 2013


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.  The 2012 ITRs  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   3.  Criticism of the 2012 ITRs   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   4.  Analysis of the Criticism  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     4.1.  Analysis of Criticism of Specific Provisions . . . . . . .  6
   5.  A Way Forward?           . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   6.  IANA considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   7.  Security considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   8.  Acknowledgments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   9. Informative references  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10






































Hill                   Expires December 25, 2013                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft            Non Accession Harmful                June 2013


1.  Introduction

   The World Conference on International Telecommunications (WCIT-12)
   was convened in December 2012 at the request of the ITU members in 
   order to revise the International Telecommunication Regulations
   (ITRs), which had been agreed in 1988 and which opened the way for
   the privatisation and liberalization that has since characterized the
   telecommunications sector, paving the way for the growth of the
   Internet. [WCIT-12]

   The purpose of the ITRs is to establish general principles which
   relate to the provision and operation of international 
   telecommunication services offered to the public as well as to the
   underlying international telecommunication transport means used to 
   provide such services.  And this with a view to attaining the
   purposes of the International Telecommunication Union in promoting
   the development of telecommunication services and their most
   efficient operation while harmonizing the development of facilities
   for worldwide telecommunications. 

   It was felt necessary to revise the ITRs in light of the significant
   changes structural and technological changes that have taken place
   since 1988, in particular privatisation, liberalization, and the
   growth of mobile and IP-based networks.

   Unlike previous ITU conference, the ITU membership failed to reach
   consensus, with the result that the treaty agreed at WCIT was not
   signed by all the states present and having the right to sign: 89
   signed and 55 did not.  Countries that did not sign the ITR may
   accede to them at any time.

   A refusal by some countries to accede to the new ITRs could deprive
   their citizens of certain benefits (such as transparency of roaming
   prices, prevention of numbering misuse, transmission of calling party
   identification, improved accessibility for people with disabilities,
   and best practices regarding energy efficiency and e-waste).

   Further, non-uniform implementation could create difficulties for
   companies operating worldwide, if different regulatory regimes 
   emerge. 
 
   In the limit, refusal to implement the new ITRs might result in the
   development of non-harmonized national practices which might lead to
   an undesired fragmentation of the Internet. 

   These undesirable consequences can be avoided if all countries accede
   to the ITRs with the understanding that the controversial clauses do
   not in fact have the negative effects which have been attributed to
   them by some commentators. 


Hill                     Expires December 25, 2013              [Page 4]

Internet-Draft            Non Accession Harmful                June 2013


2.  The 2012 ITRs

   Much of the 1988 ITRs were retained with some editorial revisions to 
   bring them up to date.  In particular, the article on charging and
   accounting was significantly streamlined and brought into alignment
   with modern practices.  In addition, new provisions were added to
   prevent misuse of telephone numbers, to ensure transmission of 
   calling line identification, to ensure transparency of international 
   roaming prices, to improve network security, to combat spam, to
   improve energy-efficiency and reduce e-waste, and to facilitate use
   of telecommunications by people with disabilities. [WCIT-12]
 
   Most of the treaty text was not controversial, but certain specific
   provisions of the treaty were controversial.  Those provisions are
   contained in 6 paragraphs out of a total of 77 paragraphs that
   comprise the main text of the treaty.  One Resolution adopted by
   WCIT was also controversial.  If that is included, then the
   controversial text comprises less than 2 pages out of the total 24
   pages approved at the conference. [Hill-2013]

3.  Criticism of the 2012 ITRs

   It has been said that the WCIT outcomes establish a new
   international regulatory regime for the Internet and give new powers
   to the ITU.  This new regime threatens the current multi-stakeholder
   model for Internet governance which has proven its worth, and it
   threatens economic growth and freedom of speech around the world.
   [EC-2012], [US-2013], [New-2013]

   In particular a provision in the Preamble of the ITRs creates new
   rights for states (which threaten established individual rights);
   new articles on security and spam invite governments to take
   content-based action which could result in regulation of speech on
   the Internet; a new Resolution represents a direct extension of
   ITU's role and scope into the Internet and shifts the emphasis from
   community and consensus to centralization through government action.

4.  Analysis of the Criticism

   The criticism of the 2012 ITRs appears to be based on a superficial
   and out-of-context reading of the provisions in question.  When 
   analysed correctly from the legal point of view, it can be seen that
   the new provision in the Preamble does not conflict with existing
   rights of individuals or of states; that the new provisions on
   security and spam cannot be understood to related to content; and
   that the new Resolution does not in any way expand ITU's role and
   scope, while it does recognize the multi-stakeholder model agreed at
   the World Summit on the Information Society (WSIS). [Hill-2013]



Hill                     Expires December 25, 2013              [Page 5]

Internet-Draft            Non Accession Harmful                June 2013
   
   Thus it is incorrect to conclude that the WCIT outcomes establish a
   new international regulatory regime for the Internet and give new
   powers to the ITU.  Nor do they threaten the current
   multi-stakeholder model for Internet governance or free speech.

4.1.  Analysis of Criticism of Specific Provisions

   Regarding criticism of specific provisions [Hill-2013]:

   * The new provision in the Preamble does not create any additional
     rights or obligations, it merely recognizes the rights and
     obligations that already existed under the Constitution, see in
     particular its Article 35.
   * New language in Article 1 regarding "authorized operating
     agencies" merely aligns the ITRs with the ITU Constitution (which
     has precedence over the ITRs) and thus does not extend the scope
     of the ITRs.
   * Article 5A on security and 5B on spam must be interpreted in light
     of Article 1, which defines the scope of the treaty and states
     that      it does not address the content-related aspects of
     telecommunications.  Since the ITRs do not address content, those
     articles cannot be seen to be addressing content.  Thus, those
     articles are about measures that do not depend on content.  There
     are such security measures and such measures to combat spam.  
   * Those who argue, in the alternative, that there are no possible
     non-content-related measures regarding security and spam are in
     effect arguing that the two articles are inoperative, because
     Article 1 (Purpose and Scope) excludes content-related aspects and
     prevails over Articles 5A and 5B.  The usual approach to such a
     situation would be to sign the treaty with a reservation of the
     form "we will not apply Article 5B because we believe that it is 
     inconsistent with the Purpose and Scope".  
   * In any case, by virtue of the "no content" provision of Article 1,
     no country could invoke the ITRs as justification for imposing
     content-filtering.  That is, since content is outside the scope of
     the ITRs, so is content-filtering. Of course a country might impose
     content-filtering, but it could not invoke the ITRs as a legal
     basis for doing so.  That is, the "necessary measures" referred to
     in Article 5B cannot be understood to include content-filtering. 
   * Paradoxically, those who refuse to implement Article 5B on the
     grounds that it is related to content are in effect arguing against
     limitations on measures to counter spam.  Indeed at present there
     aren't (to the author's knowledge) any international treaties that
     limit what states can do regarding spam, apart from obligations
     relating to human rights.  If it is understood that Article 5B
     does not relate to content, then that article puts an obligation on
     states not to deal with the content-related aspects of spam.  That
     is a significant restriction. Those who state that Article 5B
     applies to content are in effect denying the restriction and opting
     for the status quo, where there are no restrictions (apart from
     human rights) regarding how to deal with spam.  And they are in
  
Hill                     Expires December 25, 2013              [Page 6]

Internet-Draft            Non Accession Harmful                June 2013
     

     effect creating a situation where there is no basis in
     international law (apart from human rights) to complain regarding
     anti-spam measures.  Similar considerations apply regarding Article
     5A on security: refusal to accept this article is tantamount to
     refusing to accept restrictions on security measures (apart from
     those arising out of human rights obligations).
   * Articles 5A and 5B call for cooperation amongst ITU Member States,
     a call which also appears in WTSA Resolutions 50 and 52. Many
     countries have initiatives regarding security and spam.  Presumably
     it would be desirable for countries to cooperate to adopt "best
     practices" in these area.  That is, practices that clearly do not
     impinge on human rights and that respect due process.  So it would
     appear that the call for cooperation is positive, because it 
     should make it less likely that some country would (perhaps
     unwittingly) adopt inappropriate measures.  That is, the call for
     cooperation appears to make it more likely that security measures
     would follow the best-practices models that are generally agreed.
   * The operative part of Resolution 3 invites ITU Member States to
     discuss Internet-related technical, development and public-policy
     issues within the mandate of ITU at various ITU forums; to engage
     with all their stakeholders in this regard.  And it instructs the
     Secretary-General of ITU to continue to take the necessary steps
     for ITU to play an active and constructive role in the development
     of broadband and the multi-stakeholder model of the Internet as 
     expressed in paragraph 35 of the Tunis Agenda; and to support the
     participation of Member States and all other stakeholders, as
     appropriate, in the activities of ITU in this regard.  The
     Resolution cannot (and does not) expand ITU's role and scope, and
     it cannot (and does not) modify the WSIS outcomes.  It does not
     shift the emphasis from the multi-stakeholder model towards
     top-down government action, on the contrary, it promotes
     multi-stakeholder consultations.
   
5.  A Way Forward?

   A refusal by some countries to implement the new ITRs could deprive
   their citizens of certain benefits (such as transparency of roaming
   prices, prevention of numbering misuse, transmission of calling party
   identification, improved accessibility for people with disabilities,
   and best practices regarding energy efficiency and e-waste).
   [Hill-2013]

   Further, non-uniform implementation could create difficulties for
   companies operating worldwide, if different regulatory regimes
   emerge. 
  
   In the limit, refusal to implement the new ITRs might result in the
   development on non-harmonized national practices which might lead to
   an undesired fragmentation of the Internet. [LS-2013]


Hill                     Expires December 25, 2013              [Page 7]

Internet-Draft            Non Accession Harmful                June 2013

   There are various scenarios regarding what could happen in the future:
   * Most countries agree to be bound by the ITRs
   * Most countries do not agree to be bound by the ITRs
   * Most countries implement the ITRs in a non-controversial manner:
     - Recognize that Preamble does not prevent suspension of services
       or otherwise modify existing rights and obligations
     - Recognize that there is no extension of the covered entities or
       of the scope
     - Recognize that the security and spam provisions do not relate to 
       content
     - Recognize that Resolution 3 does not change the mandate of the ITU

   Implementation of the 2012 ITRs in a non-controversial manner might
   appear to be the solution that is most consistent with a legal
   analysis of the treaty and the solution that is most likely to avoid
   undesirable consequences. [Hill-2013]
 
6.  IANA considerations

   There are no requests for IANA allocation of code-points in this
   document, nor are any other IANA actions required.

   
7.  Security considerations

   The uncoordinated development of networks poses a risk of harm to
   the Internet.  A persisting split between signatories and non-
   signatories of the ITRs could pose such a risk.

   Indeed, the recently revealed United States PRISM program
   [Savage-2013] is an example of unilateral surveillance of foreign
   Internet communications that some [ISOC-2013] consider inappropriate.
   And surely most would consider the Iranian control of Internet
   [Musil-2013] to be inappropriate.

 8.  Acknowledgments

   This document is based on a more detailed legal analysis [Hill-2013]
   and the author wishes to acknowledge Oxford University Press for
   their permission to publish this summarized version.  This summarized
   version was presented at the GiGaNet workshop in Geneva on "The
   global governance of the Internet: Intergovernmentalism,
   multistakeholderism and networks", 17-18 May 2013.









Hill                     Expires December 25, 2013              [Page 8]

Internet-Draft            Non Accession Harmful                June 2013

9.  Informative references

   [EC-2012]  European Commission, "No change to telecoms and internet
              governance - EU Member States amongst dozens not signing
              proposed new International Telecommunications Regulations
              (ITR) Treaty, remain 100% committed to open internet"
              (memo 12/992 of 14/12/2012), http://europa.eu/rapid/
              press-release_MEMO-12-991_en.htm  
   
   [Hill-2013]
              Richard Hill, "WCIT: failure or success, impasse or way
              forward", International Journal of Law and Information
              Technology (forthcoming) DOI:10.1093/ijlit/eat008,
              http://ijlit.oxfordjournals.org/content/early/2013/06/
              10/ijlit.eat008.full?ijkey=otqkCXVOAelJUPy&keytype=ref

   [ISOC-2013]
              Internet Society, "Statement on the Importance of Open
              Global Dialogue Regarding Online Privacy", 12 June 2013,
              http://www.internetsociety.org/news/internet-society-
              statement-importance-open-global-dialogue-regarding-
              online-privacy

   [LS-2013]  L.S., "Internet Regulation: A digital cold war?", The
              Economist, http://www.economist.com/blogs/babbage/2012/
              12/internet-regulation

   [Musil-2013]
              Steven Musil, "Iran develops software to control social
              networks", 6 January 2013, CNET, http://news.cnet.com/8301
              -1023_3-57562295-93/iran-develops-software-to-control-
              access-to-social-networks/

   [New-2013] William New, "European Commission VP Kroes Urges Open
              Internet, Prods Copyright Owners", Intellectual Property
              Watch, 21 March 2013, <http://www.ip-watch.org/2013/03/21/
              european-commission-vp-kroes-urges-open-internet-prods-
              copyright-owners

   [Savage-2013]
              Charlie Savage, Edward Wyatt, and Peter Baker, "U.S.
              Confirms that it Gathers Online Data Overseas", The New
              York Times, June 6, 2013, http://www.nytimes.com/2013/06/
              07/us/nsa-verizon-calls.html?_r=0






   
 
Hill                     Expires December 25, 2013              [Page 9]

Internet-Draft            Non Accession Harmful                June 2013


[US-2013]     Witness statements made at the 5 February 2013 Hearing
              "Fighting for Internet Freedom, Dubai and Beyond", U.S.
              House of Representatives Committee on Energy and
              Commerce's Subcommittee on Communications and Technology
              http://energycommerce.house.gov/hearing/fighting-for-internet
              -freedom-dubai-and-beyond

[WCIT-12]     ITU "World Conference on International Telecommunications"
              http://www.itu.int/wcit.  See in particular the
              presentation http://www.itu.int/en/wcit-12/Documents/
              wcit-myth-buster-en.pptx


Authors' Addresses

   Richard Hill
   Hill & Associates
   Geneva, Switzerland

   Phone:
   Fax:
   Email: rhill@hill-a.ch
   URI:   www.hill-a.ch




























Hill                     Expires December 25, 2013             [Page 10]


