A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3437

        Title:      Layer-Two Tunneling Protocol Extensions for PPP
                    Link Control Protocol Negotiation
        Author(s):  W. Palter, W. Townsley
        Status:     Standards Track
        Date:       December 2002
        Mailbox:    mark@townsley.net, palter.ietf@zev.net
        Pages:      10
        Characters: 20820
        Updates/Obsoletes/SeeAlso:    None

        I-D Tag:    draft-ietf-l2tpext-link-07.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3437.txt


This document defines extensions to the Layer Two Tunneling Protocol
(L2TP) for enhanced support of link-specific Point to Point Protocol
(PPP) options.  PPP endpoints typically have direct access to the
common physical media connecting them and thus have detailed knowledge
about the media that is in use.  When the L2TP is used, the two PPP
peers are no longer directly connected over the same physical media.
Instead, L2TP inserts a virtual connection over some or all of the PPP
connection by tunneling PPP frames over a packet switched network such
as IP.  Under some conditions, an L2TP endpoint may need to negotiate
PPP Link Control Protocol (LCP) options at a location which may not
have access to all of the media information necessary for proper
participation in the LCP negotiation.  This document provides a
mechanism for communicating desired LCP options between L2TP endpoints
in advance of PPP LCP negotiation at the far end of an L2TP tunnel, as
well as a mechanism for communicating the negotiated LCP options back
to where the native PPP link resides.

This document is a product of the Layer Two Tunneling Protocol
Extensions Working Group of the IETF.

This is now a Proposed Standard Protocol.

This document specifies an Internet standards track protocol for
the Internet community, and requests discussion and suggestions
for improvements.  Please refer to the current edition of the
"Internet Official Protocol Standards" (STD 1) for the
standardization state and status of this protocol.  Distribution
of this memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.


