A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3573

        Title:      Signalling of Modem-On-Hold status
                    in Layer 2 Tunneling Protocol (L2TP)
        Author(s):  I. Goyret
        Status:     Standards Track
        Date:       July 2003
        Mailbox:    igoyret@lucent.com
        Pages:      13
        Characters: 22758
        Updates/Obsoletes/SeeAlso:    None

        I-D Tag:    draft-ietf-l2tpext-v92-moh-05.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3573.txt


The Layer 2 Tunneling Protocol (L2TP) defines a mechanism for
tunneling Point-to-Point Protocol (PPP) sessions.  It is common for
these PPP sessions to be established using modems connected over the
public switched telephone network.

One of the standards governing modem operation defines procedures
that enable a client modem to put the call on hold and later, re-
establish the modem link with minimal delay and without having to
redial.  While the modem call is on hold, the client phone line can
be used to place or receive other calls.

The L2TP base protocol does not provide any means to signal these
events from the L2TP Access Controller (LAC), where the modem is
physically connected, to the L2TP Network Server (LNS), where the PPP
session is handled.

This document describes a method to let the LNS know when a client
modem connected to a LAC has placed the call on hold.

This document is a product of the Layer Two Tunneling Protocol
Extensions Working Group of the IETF.

This is now a Proposed Standard Protocol.

This document specifies an Internet standards track protocol for
the Internet community, and requests discussion and suggestions
for improvements.  Please refer to the current edition of the
"Internet Official Protocol Standards" (STD 1) for the
standardization state and status of this protocol.  Distribution
of this memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.

