


MPLS Working Group                                              A. Atlas
Internet-Draft                                                  R. Torvi
Intended status: Standards Track                                 M. Jork
Expires: January 10, 2013                               Juniper Networks
                                                            July 9, 2012


            Ingress Protection for RSVP-TE p2p and p2mp LSPs
              draft-torvi-mpls-rsvp-ingress-protection-00

Abstract

   Protection against node failure is important for RSVP-TE LSPs,
   whether point-to-point or point-to-multipoint.  While [RFC4090]
   provides a mechanism for node protection, it does not specify how to
   protect against failure of the ingress node.  This document specifies
   the RSVP extensions to support ingress node protection and describes
   the necessary processing behavior.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 10, 2013.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2012 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of



Atlas, et al.           Expires January 10, 2013                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft       RSVP-TE LSP Ingress Protection            July 2012


   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Failure Detection Issues and Solution  . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Description of Behavior  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     3.1.  Ingress Node . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
       3.1.1.  Required Configuration Information . . . . . . . . . .  5
       3.1.2.  Signaling Behavior . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.2.  Backup Node  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
       3.2.1.  Behavior for On-Forwarding-Path Backup Node  . . . . .  7
       3.2.2.  Behavior for Off-Forwarding-Path Backup Node . . . . .  7
     3.3.  Merge Node . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     3.4.  Global Repair  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     3.5.  Ingress Revival and Administrative Switching . . . . . . .  9
   4.  RSVP Extensions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     4.1.  INGRESS-PROTECTION object  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   5.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10





























Atlas, et al.           Expires January 10, 2013                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft       RSVP-TE LSP Ingress Protection            July 2012


1.  Introduction

   It is desirable to protect RSVP-TE LSPs, whether p2p or p2mp, against
   ingress failure.  To do this, a backup node must be pre-identified
   and prepared with the necessary state so that it can forward traffic
   when necessary.

   Conceptually, a proxy ingress node is created that starts the RSVP
   signaling.  The explicit path of the LSP goes from the proxy ingress
   node to the backup node and then to the real ingress node.  The
   behavior and signaling for the proxy ingress node is done by the real
   ingress node.

   The backup node must be only one logical hop away from the ingress,
   whether that be via a direct link or a tunnel.


                                 [ traffic source ]
                                  |             |
                                  |             |
                                  |             |
                          [ proxy ingress ]  [ backup ]
                          [ & ingress     ]     |
                                 |              |
                                 |----[ MP ]----|


          Figure 1: Example Protected LSP with Proxy Ingress Node

   There are three different scenarios that this document addresses for
   ingress protection.  All three can be handled using the same set of
   signaling defined in this document.

   A. Traffic Source detects failure  The traffic source(s) can rapidly
      determine that the ingress has failed and switch over to sending
      traffic to the backup node.  When this mode is specified, the
      backup node will forward any appropriately received traffic along
      its bypass tunnel to the merge point(s).

   B. MP detects failure  The traffic source(s) always send traffic to
      both the ingress and backup nodes.  The backup node always
      forwards traffic along its bypass tunnel to the merge point(s).
      Each MP determines whether the ingress node has failed and, if so,
      switches over to accepting the traffic from the backup node.







Atlas, et al.           Expires January 10, 2013                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft       RSVP-TE LSP Ingress Protection            July 2012


   C. Backup detects failure  The traffic source(s) always send traffic
      to both the ingress and backup nodes.  The backup node does not
      forward the received traffic from the traffic source under normal
      conditions.  When the backup node determines that the ingress node
      has failed, the backup node starts forwarding the traffic alongs
      its bypass tunnel(s) to the merge point(s).

   For all three scenarios, it is necessary for the backup node to know
   the merge point(s) and associated MPLS labels.  This is accomplished
   by having the RSVP Path and RESV messages go through the backup node,
   although the forwarding path need not go through the backup node.
   There are two cases of interest - on-forwarding-path and off-
   forwarding-path.  In the on-forwarding-path case, the backup node is
   already the immediate node after the ingress node for the LSP.  In
   the off-forwarding-path, the backup node is not the immediate node
   after the ingress node for all asociated sub-LSPs.

   For ingress protection to be functional, the backup node must have
   access and knowledge of the appropriate traffic to send into the
   protected LSP.  The ingress node must be capable of describing the
   traffic to the backup node.

   Once the backup node has the necessary state for the LSP, including
   the set of merge points, the backup node can use bypass tunnels as
   described in [RFC4090].  If the LSP is a point-to-multipoint, then
   the backup node has the option of choosing to use a bypass p2mp
   tunnel for protection.

   Finally, an assumption of local protection is that a global repair
   mechanism will occur to replace the patched LSP with a new fully
   functional one.  To do this, it is necessary that the backup node be
   able to enact a global repair that still allows sharing of bandwidth
   resources between the old and new LSPs.


2.  Failure Detection Issues and Solution

   For each of the different scenarios, the details of detecting an
   ingress node failure can vary.  This document does not specify the
   details of how to do so, but it is possible using either approriately
   routed BFD sessions or direct link information.

   For traffic-source detection and fail-over, the traffic source can
   merely monitor the state of the direct links over which traffic is
   sent to the ingress.

   For MP detection, the MP can be configured with the appropriate BFD
   discriminators used on the BFD sessions.  It is desirable for the MP



Atlas, et al.           Expires January 10, 2013                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft       RSVP-TE LSP Ingress Protection            July 2012


   to know that the ingress can't send traffic to the MP or downstream
   (for when the ingress is protecting against the MP failure).  The
   appropriate BFD discriminators will vary by MP; they are not signaled
   in the RSVP extensions described in this draft.

   For backup node detection, the backup node can be configured with the
   appropriate BFD discriminators used on the BFD sessions.  Again, they
   are not signaled in the RSVP extensions described in this draft.


3.  Description of Behavior

3.1.  Ingress Node

3.1.1.  Required Configuration Information

   The ingress node must be configured with four pieces of information
   for these extensions to work.

   Backup Node Address  The ingress node must know an IP address for the
      backup node that can be included in the ERO.

   Protection Scenario  The ingress node must know whether the traffic
      source, backup node, or merge point(s) will be responsible for
      handling fail-over.

   Ingress-Protector-Context-Id  The Ingress-Protector-Context-Id is
      used for the Extended Session ID in ingress-protected LSPs instead
      of using the ingress node's loopback address.  The Ingress-
      Protector-Context-Id should not be the same as another address
      associated with a router that may signal TE LSPs.  By having an
      Ingress-Protector-Context-Id, the backup node can perform global
      repair.

   Application Traffic Identifier  The ingress and backup node must both
      know what application traffic should be directed into the LSP.  A
      commonly understood Application Traffic Identifier is sent between
      the ingress and backup nodes in RSVP signaling.  The exact meaning
      of the identifier should be configured similarly at both the
      ingress and backup nodes.  The Application Traffic Identifier is
      understood within the unique context of the Ingress-Protector-
      Context-Id.

   With this additional information, the ingress node can create and
   signal the necessary RSVP extensions to support ingress protection.






Atlas, et al.           Expires January 10, 2013                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft       RSVP-TE LSP Ingress Protection            July 2012


3.1.2.  Signaling Behavior

   The ingress node is responsible for starting the RSVP signaling for
   the proxy-ingress node.  To do this, the following is done for the
   RSVP Path message.

   1.  Compute the EROs for the LSP as normal for the ingress.

   2.  If the selected backup node is not the first node on the path
       (for all sub-LSPs), then insert at the beginning of the ERO first
       the backup node and then the ingress node.

   3.  Change the IPv4 tunnel sender address in the Sender Template
       Object to be that of the Ingress-Protector-Context-Id.

   4.  In the Path RRO, instead of recording the ingress node's address,
       replace it with the Ingress-Protector-Context-Id.

   5.  Leave the HOP object populated as usual with information for the
       ingress-node.

   6.  Add the INGRESS-PROTECTION object to the Path message.  Allocate
       a second LSP-ID to be used in the INGRESS-PROTECTION object.

   7.  The RSVP Path message is sent to the backup node as normal.
       Since the backup node must be only one logical hop away from the
       ingress, normal RSVP signaling can be used.

   When the backup node is off the forwarding path, there are additional
   behaviors for the ingress node to do when it is handling the
   associated PATH and RESV messages.

   When the ingress node receives an RSVP Path message with an INGRESS-
   PROTECTION object and the object specifies that node as the ingress
   node and the PHOP as the backup node, the ingress node SHOULD check
   the Failure Scenario specified in the INGRESS-PROTECTION object and,
   if it is not the "MP detects failure" scenario, then the ingress node
   SHOULD remove the INGRESS-PROTECTION object from the PATH message
   before sending it out.  Additionally, the ingress node must store
   that it will install ingress forwarding state for the LSP rather than
   midpoint forwarding.

   When an RSVP RESV message is received by the ingress, it uses the
   NHOP to determine whether the message is received from the backup
   node or from a different node.  The stored associated PATH message
   contains an INGRESS-PROTECTION object that identifies the backup
   node.  If the RESV message is not from the backup node, then ingress
   forwarding state should be set up, and the INGRESS-PROTECTION object



Atlas, et al.           Expires January 10, 2013                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft       RSVP-TE LSP Ingress Protection            July 2012


   MUST be added to the RESV before it is sent to the NHOP, which should
   be the backup node.  If the RESV message is from the backup node,
   then the LSP should be considered available for use.

   If the backup node is on the forwarding path, then a RESV is received
   with an INGRESS-PROTECTION object and an NHOP that matches the backup
   node.  In this case, the ingress node's address will not appear after
   the backup node in the RRO.  The ingress node should set up ingress
   forwarding state, just as is done if the LSP weren't ingress-node
   protected.

3.2.  Backup Node

   An LER determines that the LSP is ingress-protected based upon the
   presence of the INGRESS-PROTECTION object in the PATH message.  An
   LER can further determine that it is the backup node if one of its
   addresses is listed as the backup node in the INGRESS-PROTECTION
   object.

3.2.1.  Behavior for On-Forwarding-Path Backup Node

   If the backup node is on the forwarding path, then the backup node
   MUST remove the INGRESS-PROTECTION object from the PATH message
   before forwarding it.

   If the failure scenario is either "MP-detected" or "Backup-detected",
   then the backup node is responsible for determining if the ingress
   node has failed and forwarding the identified traffic from the
   traffic source(s) to the next-hop(s) on the LSP instead of forwarding
   the traffic from the ingress node.

   When the backup node receives a RESV message, it should add back in
   the INGRESS-PROTECTION object before forwarding it.

3.2.2.  Behavior for Off-Forwarding-Path Backup Node

   When the backup node receives a PATH message with the INGRESS-
   PROTECTION object, the backup node examines the INGRESS-PROTECTION
   object to learn what traffic associated with the LSP and what failure
   scenario is being used.  The backup node forwards the PATH message to
   the ingress node with the normal RSVP changes.

   When the backup node receives a RESV message with the INGRESS-
   PROTECTION object, the backup node records an IMPLICIT-NULL label in
   the RRO.  The backup node creates the appropriate forwarding state
   for the failure scenario specified.  For the "MP-detected" and
   "traffic-source-detected", this means that backup node forwards any
   received identified traffic into the bypass tunnel(s) to the merge



Atlas, et al.           Expires January 10, 2013                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft       RSVP-TE LSP Ingress Protection            July 2012


   point(s).  For the "backup-detected", this means that the backup node
   creates state to quickly determine the ingress has failed and switch
   to sending any received identified traffic into the bypass tunnel(s)
   to the merge point(s).  Then the backup node forwards the RESV
   message to the ingress node, which is acting for the proxy ingress.

   If the backup node doesn't have a bypass tunnel to a merge point,
   then the backup node can wait to send the RESV until such has been
   created or it can send a Path Err with an Error Code of "Routing
   Problem (24)" and a new Error Value sub-code of "No Bypass Tunnel to
   Merge Point (TBD)".

3.3.  Merge Node

   An LSR that is serving as a Merge Node may need to support the
   INGRESS-PROTECTION object and functionality defined in this
   specification if the LSP is ingress-protected where the failure
   scenario is "MP-detected".  An LSR can determine that it must be a
   merge point by examining the INGRESS-PROTECTION object and
   determining that it is neither the ingress node nor the backup node
   and the PHOP is the ingress node.

   In that case, when the LSR receives a PATH message with an INGRESS-
   PROTECTION object, the LSR MUST remove the INGRESS-PROTECTION object
   before forwarding on the PATH message.

   If the failure scenario specified is "MP-detected", the MP must
   connect up the fast-failure detection (as configured) to accepting
   backup traffic received from the backup node.  There are a number of
   different ways that the MP can enforce not forwarding traffic
   normally received from the backup node.  For instance, first, any
   LSPs set up from the backup node should not be signaled with an
   IMPLICIT NULL label and second, the associated label for the ingress-
   protected LSP could be set to normally discard inside that context.

   When the MP receives a RESV message whose matching PATH state had an
   INGRESS-PROTECTION object, the MP SHOULD add the INGRESS-PROTECTION
   object to the RESV message before forwarding it.

3.4.  Global Repair

   When the backup node learns the ingress node has failed (e.g. via the
   IGP), then the backup node can compute new ERO(s) and signal the new
   LSP so that it no longer relies upon local repair.  To do this, the
   backup node uses the same Ingress-Protector-Context-Id as the Ipv4
   tunnel sender address in the Sender Template Object and uses the
   previously allocated second LSP-ID signaled in the INGRESS-PROTECTION
   object.  This allows the new LSP to share resources with the old LSP.



Atlas, et al.           Expires January 10, 2013                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft       RSVP-TE LSP Ingress Protection            July 2012


3.5.  Ingress Revival and Administrative Switching

   In a future version, it is intended to describe the behavior when the
   ingress node comes back and how to handle management-triggered
   switches from ingress to backup node and vice versa.


4.  RSVP Extensions

4.1.  INGRESS-PROTECTION object

        Class-Num = TBD
        C-Type = TBD

                    0             1              2             3
             +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
             |       Length (bytes)      |  Class-Num  |   C-Type    |
             +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
             |                Backup Node Address                    |
             +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
             |                Ingress Node Address                   |
             +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
             |           Application Traffic Identifier              |
             +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
             |   Secondary LSP ID        | Protection  |  Flags      |
             |                           | Scenario    |             |
             +-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+



                    Figure 2: INGRESS-PROTECTION object

   Backup Node Address

   Ingress Node Address

   Application Traffic Identifier

   Ingress-Protector-Context-Id

   Secondary LSP ID

   Protection Scenario  Indicates if (1) traffic source(s), (2) backup
      node, (3) or merge point(s) will handle the fail-over.







Atlas, et al.           Expires January 10, 2013                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft       RSVP-TE LSP Ingress Protection            July 2012


   Control Flags  Backup sent flags: (0x01)Ingress-Protection in-use,
      (0x02)Ingress Detected Down, (0x04)Admin Override caused Ingress-
      Protection-in-use.  Ingress sent flags: (0x08)Revert Control to
      Ingress, (0x10)Force control to Backup


5.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC2205]  Braden, B., Zhang, L., Berson, S., Herzog, S., and S.
              Jamin, "Resource ReSerVation Protocol (RSVP) -- Version 1
              Functional Specification", RFC 2205, September 1997.

   [RFC3209]  Awduche, D., Berger, L., Gan, D., Li, T., Srinivasan, V.,
              and G. Swallow, "RSVP-TE: Extensions to RSVP for LSP
              Tunnels", RFC 3209, December 2001.

   [RFC4090]  Pan, P., Swallow, G., and A. Atlas, "Fast Reroute
              Extensions to RSVP-TE for LSP Tunnels", RFC 4090,
              May 2005.

   [RFC4875]  Aggarwal, R., Papadimitriou, D., and S. Yasukawa,
              "Extensions to Resource Reservation Protocol - Traffic
              Engineering (RSVP-TE) for Point-to-Multipoint TE Label
              Switched Paths (LSPs)", RFC 4875, May 2007.


Authors' Addresses

   Alia Atlas
   Juniper Networks
   10 Technology Park Drive
   Westford, MA  01886
   USA

   Email: akatlas@juniper.net


   Raveendra Torvi
   Juniper Networks
   10 Technology Park Drive
   Westford, MA  01886
   USA

   Email: rtorvi@juniper.net




Atlas, et al.           Expires January 10, 2013               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft       RSVP-TE LSP Ingress Protection            July 2012


   Markus Jork
   Juniper Networks
   10 Technology Park Drive
   Westford, MA  01886
   USA

   Email: mjork@juniper.net












































Atlas, et al.           Expires January 10, 2013               [Page 11]

