Network Working Group                                          B. Liu
Internet Draft                                               S. Jiang
Intended status: Informational            Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd
Expires: January 11, 2012                                July 11, 2011

                    IPv6 Site Renumbering Gap Analysis
                   draft-liu-6renum-gap-analysis-01.txt


Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF). Note that other groups may also distribute working
   documents as Internet-Drafts. The list of current Internet-Drafts is
   at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 04, 2012.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors. All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document. Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document. Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Abstract

   This document briefly introduces the existing mechanisms could be
   utilized by IPv6 site renumbering and envisions the effort could be
   done. This document tries to cover the most explicit issues and
   requirements of IPv6 renumbering. Through the gap analysis, the
   document provides a basis for future work to identify and develop



Liu & Jiang           Expires January 11, 2012                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft   IPv6 Site Renumbering Gap Analysis          July 2011


   solutions or to stimulate such development as appropriate. The gap
   analysis is presented following a renumbering event procedure clue.



Table of Contents


   1. Introduction ................................................ 3
   2. Overall Requirements for Renumbering ........................ 3
   3. Existing Components for IPv6 Renumbering .................... 4
      3.1. Relevant Protocols and Mechanisms   .................... 4
      3.2. Management Tools ....................................... 4
      3.3. Procedures/Policies .................................... 5
   4. Managing Prefixes ........................................... 5
      4.1. Prefix Delegation ...................................... 5
      4.2. Prefix Assignment ...................................... 5
   5. Address Configuration ....................................... 6
      5.1. Host Address Configuration ............................. 6
      5.2. Router Address Configuration ........................... 7
      5.3. Static Address Configuration ........................... 8
   6. Address Relevant Entries Update ............................. 9
      6.1. DNS Records Update ..................................... 9
      6.2. In-host Server Address Update ......................... 10
      6.3. Filters ............................................... 10
   7. Renumbering Event Management ............................... 11
      7.1. Renumbering Notification .............................. 11
      7.2. Synchronization Management ............................ 12
      7.3. Renumbering Monitoring........................... ..... 12
   8. Miscellaneous .............................................. 12
      8.1. Multicast ............................................. 12
      8.2. Mobility .............................................. 13
   9. Gap Summary ................................................ 13
      9.1. Managing Prefixes ..................................... 13
      9.2. Address configuration ................................. 13
      9.3. Address relevant entries update ....................... 14
      9.4. Renumbering event management .......................... 15
   10. Security Considerations ................................... 15
   11. IANA Considerations ....................................... 16
   12. References ................................................ 16
      12.1. Normative References ................................. 16
      12.2. Informative References ............................... 17
   13. Acknowledgments ........................................... 17






Liu & Jiang           Expires January 11, 2012                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft   IPv6 Site Renumbering Gap Analysis          July 2011




1. Introduction

   As introduced in [RFC5887], renumbering, especially for medium to
   large sites and networks, is currently viewed as an expensive,
   painful, and error-prone process, avoided by network managers as much
   as possible. If IPv6 site renumbering continues to be considered
   difficult, network managers will turn to Provider Independent (PI)
   addressing for IPv6 to attempt to minimize the need for future
   renumbering. However, widespread use of PI may create very serious
   BGP4 scaling problems. It is thus desirable to develop tools and
   practices that may make renumbering a simpler process to reduce
   demand for IPv6 PI space.

   This document performs a gap analysis to provide a basis for future
   work to identify and develop solutions or to stimulate such
   development as appropriate. Gap analysis draws on existing work in
   (at least) [RFC5887] and [RFC4192]. The [I-D.jiang-6renum-enterprise]
   contributions are incorporated into the more detailed gap analysis.
   In this document, we discuss the overall requirements for
   renumbering. The gap analysis is organized by the main steps of
   renumbering process, which include the prefix management, the node
   address (re)configuration, and address relevant entries update in
   various gateways, routers and servers, etc. Besides the steps, a sub-
   clause of renumbering event management is presented independently,
   which targets to help the operational/administrative process.

2. Overall Requirements for Renumbering

   This section introduces the overall ultimate goals we want to achieve
   in renumbering event. Some existing mechanisms have already provide
   useful help. Further efforts may be achieved in the future.

   o Prefix delegation and delivery should be automatic and accurate in
      aggregation and coordination.

   o Address reconfiguration should be automatically achieved through
      standard protocols with minimum human intervene.

   o Address relevant entries update should be processed integrally and
      error-prevented. [Open Question]Is it necessary to develop
      automatic entries update mechanisms? If necessary, do we need
      standard protocols/interface for it?





Liu & Jiang           Expires January 11, 2012                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft   IPv6 Site Renumbering Gap Analysis          July 2011


   o [Open Question] Is it necessary/possible to develop a ''One-Click''
      fully automatic renumbering technology? What scenarios have the
      potential possibility?

   o [Open Question] Is session survivability within our scope?

3. Existing Components for IPv6 Renumbering

3.1. Relevant Protocols and Mechanisms

   Generally, renumbering is achieved by utilizing existing protocols
   rather than dedicated renumbering protocols.

   o RA messages, defined in [RFC4861], are used to deprecate/announce
      old/new prefixes and to advertise the availability of an upstream
      router. In renumbering, it is one of basic mechanisms for host
      configuration.

   o When a host is renumbered, it may use SLAAC [RFC4862] for address
      configuration with the new prefix. Hosts receive RA messages which
      contain routable prefix(es) and the address(es) of the default
      router(s), then hosts can generate IPv6 address(es) by themselves.

   o Hosts configured through DHCPv6 [RFC3315] can reconfigure
      addresses by initialing RENEW sessions when the current addresses'
      lease time are expired or they receive the reconfiguration
      messages initiatedinitiated by the DHCPv6 servers.

   o DHCPv6-PD (Prefix Delegation) [RFC3633] enables automated
      delegation of IPv6 prefixes using the DHCPv6. initiated

   o [RFC2894] defined standard ICMPv6 messages for router renumbering.
      This is a dedicated protocol for renumbering, but has not been
      widely used.

3.2. Management Tools

   Some operations of renumbering could be automatically processed by
   management tools in order to make the renumbering process more
   efficient and accurate. The tools may be designed dedicated for
   renumbering or just common tools could be utilized for some
   operations in renumbering.

   Following are samples of the tools.





Liu & Jiang           Expires January 11, 2012                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft   IPv6 Site Renumbering Gap Analysis          July 2011


   o [LEROY] proposed a mechanism of macros to automatically update the
      address relevant entries/configurations inside the DNS, firewall,
      etc. The macros can be delivered though SOAP protocol from a
      network management server to the managed devices.

   o Asset management tools/systems. These tools may provide the
      ability of managing configuration files in nodes so that it is
      convenient to update the address relevant configuration in these
      nodes.

3.3. Procedures/Policies

   o [RFC4192] proposed a procedure for renumbering an IPv6 network
      without a flag day. The document includes a set of operational
      suggestions which can be followed step by step by network
      administrators.

   o [I-D.jiang-6renum-enterprise] analyzes the enterprise renumbering
      events and gives the recommendations among the existing
      renumbering mechanisms. According to the different stages,
      renumbering considerations are described in three categories:
      considerations and recommendations during network design, for
      preparation of enterprise network renumbering, and during
      renumbering operation

4. Managing Prefixes

   When renumbering an enterprise site, a short prefix may be divided
   into longer prefixes for subnets. So we need to carefully manage the
   prefixes for prefix delivery, delegation, aggregation,
   synchronization, coordination, etc.

4.1. Prefix Delegation

   Usually, the short prefix comes down from the operator and received
   by DHCPv6 server or router inside the enterprise network. The short
   prefix could be automatically delegated through DHCPv6-PD. Then the
   downlink DHCP servers or routers can begin advertising the longer
   prefixes to the subnets.

4.2. Prefix Assignment

   When subnet routers receive the longer prefixes, they can directly
   assign them to the hosts. The prefix assignment overlaps with the
   host address configuration, which is described in the following
   section 5.1.



Liu & Jiang           Expires January 11, 2012                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft   IPv6 Site Renumbering Gap Analysis          July 2011


5. Address Configuration

5.1. Host Address Configuration

   Both of the DHCPv6 and ND protocols have IP address configuration
   function. They are suitable for different scenarios respectively.
   During renumbering, the SLAAC-configured hosts can reconfigure IP
   addresses by receiving ND Router Advertisement (RA) messages
   containing new prefix information (It should be noted that, the
   prefix delivery could be achieved through DHCP according to the new
   IETF DHC WG document [I.D ietf-dhc-host-gen-id]). The DHCPv6-
   configured hosts can reconfigure addresses by initiating RENEW
   sessions when the current addresses' lease time are expired or
   receiving the reconfiguration messages initiated by the DHCPv6
   servers.

   o SLAAC and DHCPv6 address configuration co-existence

        While an IPv6 site is being renumbered, both DHCPv6 and ND may
        be used to reconfigure the host addresses. The co-existence
        issue mainly includes following aspects:

        - Dynamic upstream learning

          [RFC5887] mentioned that, DHCP-configured hosts may want to
          learn about the upstream availability of new prefixes or loss
          of prior prefixes dynamically by deducing from periodic RA
          messages. But there is no standard specifying what approach
          should be taken by a DHCPv6-configured host when it receives
          RA messages containing new prefix. It depends on the operation
          system of the host and cannot be predicted or controlled by
          the network.

        - DHCP/SLAAC conflict

          If the DHCP-managed host accepts the new prefix in RA, it may
          violet the DHCPv6-managed policies. But if it ignores the RA
          messages and there are no DHCPv6 reconfiguration messages
          received either, the renumbering would fail. What is worse,
          the host may even receive both the RA messages and DHCP-v6
          reconfiguration messages and finds the prefixes in the two
          protocols are different. This means serious network
          configuration error occurring.

          [Open Question]It is hard for the host to identify the RA
          messages containing new prefix(es) representing adding an
          uplink or conflict caused by network configuration mistake.


Liu & Jiang           Expires January 11, 2012                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft   IPv6 Site Renumbering Gap Analysis          July 2011


        -  SLAAC-configured hosts finding DHCPv6 in use

          [RFC5887] mentioned RA message of ND protocol contains a
          "Managed Configuration" flag to indicate DHCPv6 is in use. But
          it is unspecified what behavior should be taken when the host
          receives RA messages with "M" set to 1. The gap of standard
          will cause ambiguous host behavior because it depends on the
          operation system of the host.

          The host may start a DHCPv6 session and receives the DHCPv6
          address configuration. It is also possible that the host finds
          the DHCPv6 assigned prefix is different from the prefix in the
          RA messages, which means multiple uplinks are available or
          there is a serious network configuration error.

          Another possibility is that the host may receive no response
          from any DHCPv6 servers, which means the DHCPv6 service is not
          available and the "Managed Configuration" flag was mis-
          configured.

   o DHCPv6 reconfigure bulk usage

        [RFC5887] mentioned that ''DHCPv6 reconfiguration doesn't appear
        to be widely used for bulk renumbering purposes''.
        [Open Question] Using DHCPv6 reconfiguration can be considered
        as ''stateful'' renumbering which need sessions maintained between
        DHCP servers and clients. So maybe it is too heavy for the
        servers. So is it possible for bulk renumbering? Is there any
        requirement?

   o RA prefix lifetime limitation

        In section 5.5.3 of [RFC4862], it is defined that ''If the
        received Valid Lifetime is greater than 2 hours or greater than
        RemainingLifetime, set the valid lifetime of the corresponding
        address to the advertised Valid Lifetime.'' So when renumbering,
        if the previous RemainingLifetime is longer than two hours, it
        is impossible to reduce a prefix's lifetime less than two hours.
        This limitation is to prevent denial-of-service attack.
        [Open Question]This limitation requires renumbering to be
        planned in advance so that an immediate renumbering event is
        impossible. Should it be considered as a standard gap for
        renumbering?

5.2. Router Address Configuration

   o Learning new prefixes


Liu & Jiang           Expires January 11, 2012                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft   IPv6 Site Renumbering Gap Analysis          July 2011


        As described in [RFC5887], ''if a site wanted to be multihomed
        using multiple provider-aggregated (PA) routing prefixes with
        one prefix per upstream provider, then the interior routers
        would need a mechanism to learn which upstream providers and
        prefixes were currently reachable (and valid).  In this case,
        their Router Advertisement messages could be updated dynamically
        to only advertise currently valid routing prefixes to hosts.
        This would be significantly more complicated if the various
        provider prefixes were of different lengths or if the site had
        non-uniform subnet prefix lengths.''

   o Restart after renumbering

        "Some routers cache IP addresses in some situations. So routers
        might need to be restarted as a result of site renumbering"
        [RFC2072].
        After investigation, it seems (need further confirmation) this
        caused by individual implementation and only happen on the old
        type of routers. Therefore, it is not an issue anymore.

   o Router naming

        In [RFC4192], it is suggested that ''To better support
        renumbering, switches and routers should use domain names for
        configuration wherever appropriate, and they should resolve
        those names using the DNS when the lifetime on the name
        expires.''
        As [RFC5887] described, this capability is not new, and at least
        it is present in most IPsec VPN implementations. But many
        administrators do not realize that it could be utilized to avoid
        manual modification during renumbering.
        [Open Question]Whether it is not easy to use or just suitable in
        few situations needs further investigation.

5.3. Static Address Configuration

   Further gap analysis about static address issue could consider the
   following suggestions (proposed by George Wesley in the mail list).

   o Documenting how to limit the places where static addresses must be
      used (vs FQDN or autoconf).

   o Identifying gaps and proposing solutions in other areas to reduce
      the number of places that static addresses are required.





Liu & Jiang           Expires January 11, 2012                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft   IPv6 Site Renumbering Gap Analysis          July 2011


   o Documenting any gaps in [RFC4192] to make renumbering easier for a
      statically-numbered set of hosts and potentially identifying a
      problem statement for improving renumbering for static.

   [Open Question]Besides the open questions above, the ULA utilization
   issue may also need consideration.

6. Address Relevant Entries Update

   When nodes in a site have been renumbered, then all the entries in
   the site which contain the nodes' addresses must be updated. The
   entries mainly include DNS records and filters in various entities
   such as ACLs in firewalls/gateways.

6.1. DNS Records Update

   o DNS update automation

        For DNS records update, most sites will achieve it by
        maintaining a DNS zone file and loading this file into the
        site's DNS server(s).  Synchronization between host renumbering
        and the updating of its A6 or AAAA record is hard. [RFC5887]
        mentioned that an alternative is to use Secure Dynamic DNS
        Update [RFC3007], in which a host informs its own DNS server
        when it receives a new address. But Secure Dynamic DNS Update
        hasn't been widely deployed.

        [Open Question]To popularize the [RFC3007] or to develop a
        lightweight dedicated protocol for this need to be considered.

        DNS entries commonly have matching Reverse DNS entries which
        will also need to be updated during renumbering.

        [Open Question]So synchronizing the procedures of forward and
        reverse DNS or even combining forward and reverse DNS updates in
        a single procedure also need to be considered.

   o DNS data structure optimization

        [RFC2874] proposed a new A6 record type for DNS recording IPv6
        address/prefix. And several extensions on query and processing
        were also proposed. With the A6 record and the extensions, an
        IPv6 address can be defined by using multiple DNS records. This
        feature increases the complexity of resolver but reduce the cost
        of zone file maintenance. So renumbering could be easier than
        AAAA record. But the [RFC2874] has not been widely used.



Liu & Jiang           Expires January 11, 2012                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft   IPv6 Site Renumbering Gap Analysis          July 2011


        [Open Question]Is the DNS data structure optimization such as
        [RFC2874] necessary for easing renumbering? If necessary, is the
        optimization in [RFC2874] enough?

   o DNS authority

        As described in [I-D.chown-v6ops-renumber-thinkabout], ''it is
        often the case in enterprises that host web servers and
        application servers on behalf of collaborators and customers
        that DNS zones out of the administrative control of the host
        maintain resource records concerning addresses for nodes out of
        their control. When the service host renumbers, they do not have
        sufficient authority to change the records.''

        [Open Question]Whether it is only an operational issue or
        additional protocol/mechanism is needed to standardize the
        interaction between DNS systems needs to be considered.

6.2. In-host Server Address Update

   While DNS records addresses of hosts in servers, hosts also record
   addresses of servers such as DNS server, radius server, etc. While
   renumbering, the hosts must update the records if the server
   addresses changed. Addresses of DHCPv6 servers do not need to be
   updated. They are dynamic discovered using DHCPv6 relevant multicast
   addresses.

   o The DNS server addresses for hosts are configured by DHCPv6. But
      current DHCPv6 messages do not indicate hosts the lifetimes of DNS.
      If the DNS lifetime expired and has been renumbered, the hosts may
      still use the old addresses. DHCPv6 should be extended to indicate
      hosts the associated DNS lifetimes when making DNS configuration.
      How does the DHCP server could know about the DNS lifetime is
      another issue.

6.3. Filters

   o Filters Management

        Filters based on addresses or prefixes are usually spread in
        various devices. As [RFC5887] described, some address
        configuration data might be widely dispersed and much harder to
        find, even will inevitably be found only after the renumbering
        event. So there's a big gap for filter management.





Liu & Jiang           Expires January 11, 2012               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft   IPv6 Site Renumbering Gap Analysis          July 2011


        In [LEROY], a server is used for managing filter update in
        various devices. But identifying where and which of the filters
        need to be updated during renumbering is still a gap.

   o Filter Update Automation Operation

        As mentioned in section 3.2, [LEROY] proposed a mechanism which
        can automatically update the filters. The mechanism utilizes
        macros suitable for various devices such as routers, firewalls
        etc. to update the filter entries based on the new prefix. Such
        automation tool is valuable for renumbering because it can
        reduce manual operation which is error-prone and inefficiency.

        [Open Question]Besides the macros, [LEROY] also proposed to use
        SOAP to deliver the macros to the devices. So there may be
        requirement of protocol standardization. [LEROY] uses
        application layer protocol while we may consider whether it is
        possible and suitable to use network layer protocol.

        [Open Question] Update of filters based on prefixes and filters
        based on addresses may have different requirements and methods.
        For example, the prefix-based filters may consider to be updated
        though DHCPv6 server, which may provide better efficient.

7. Renumbering Event Management

   From the perspective of network management, renumbering is a kind of
   event which may need additional process to make the process more easy
   and manageable.

7.1. Renumbering Notification

   If hosts or servers are aware of a renumbering event happening, it
   may help the relevant process. Following are several examples of such
   additional process may ease the renumbering. Further contributions
   are expected.

   o A notification mechanism may be needed to indicate the hosts that
      a renumbering event of local recursive DNS happen or is going to
      take place.

   o [RFC4192] suggests that ''reducing the delay in the transition to
      new IPv6 addresses applies when the DNS service can be given prior
      notice about a renumbering event.'' Reducing delay could improve
      the efficiency of renumbering.




Liu & Jiang           Expires January 11, 2012               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft   IPv6 Site Renumbering Gap Analysis          July 2011


7.2. Synchronization Management

   o DNS update synchronization

        DNS update synchronization focuses on the coordinating between
        DNS and other entities/mechanims, for example, as described in
        [RFC5887], synchronizing the SLAAC and DNS updates, and of
        reducing the SLAAC lease time and DNS TTL.

   [Gaps TBD]

7.3. Renumbering Monitoring

   While treating renumbering a network event, mechanisms to monitor the
   renumbering process may be needed. Considering the address
   configuration operation may be stateless(if ND is used for
   renumbering), it is difficult for monitoring. But for the DNS and
   filter update, it is quite possible to monitor the whole process.

   [Gaps TBD]

8. Miscellaneous

8.1. Multicast

   o The embedding of IPv6 unicast addresses into multicast addresses
      and the embedded-RP (Rendezvous Point)[RFC3956] will cause issues
      when renumbering.

        As [I-D.chown-v6ops-renumber-thinkabout] described, ''If the RP
        address changes, then the group addresses must also be changed.
        This may happen not only when a site is renumbered, but also if
        a site is restructured or the RP is moved within the site.  The
        embedded address is used by routers to determine the RP address.
        Applications must use new group addresses once the RP is not
        available on the old address.''

   o Changing the unicast source address of a multicast sender might
      also be an issue for receivers.

        As [I-D.chown-v6ops-renumber-thinkabout] described, ''If a site's
        unicast prefix changes, then one will also need to change the
        multicast addresses.  By way of example, a site renumbering away
        from prefix 2001:DB8:BEEF::/48" might have globally-scoped
        multicast addresses in use under the prefix
        "FF3E:30:2001:DB8:BEEF::/96".  One may continue using the old
        addresses for a while, but this should be avoided since another


Liu & Jiang           Expires January 11, 2012               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft   IPv6 Site Renumbering Gap Analysis          July 2011


        site may inherit the prefix and they may end up using the same
        multicast addresses.''

8.2. Mobility

   o [RFC5887] suggested that, for Mobile IP, define a better mechanism
      to handle change of home agent address while mobile is
      disconnected.

9. Gap Summary

9.1. Managing Prefixes

   None. (call for contributions)

9.2. Address configuration

   o Host address configuration

        - SLAAC and DHCPv6 address configuration co-existence

          -Dynamic upsteam learning:
          DHCP-configured host may want to learn about the upstream
          availability of new prefixes or loss of prior prefixes
          dynamically by deducing from periodic RA messages.

          -DHCP/SLAAC conflict:
          Prefixes in the two protocols' massages may be different,
          which may be caused by serious network configuration error. A
          diagnosis/report mechanism is needed here.

          -SLAAC-configured hosts find DHCPv6 is in use:
          RA messages contain a "Managed Configuration" flag to indicate
          DHCPv6 is in use. But it is unspecified what behavior should
          be taken when the host receives RA messages with "M" set to 1.
          The gap of standard will cause ambiguous host behavior.

        - DHCPv6 reconfigure bulk usage

          Maybe it is too heavy for the server. So is it possible for
          bulk renumbering? Is there any requirement?

        - RA prefix lifetime limitation

          If previous RemainingLifetime is longer than two hours, it is
          impossible to reduce a prefix's lifetime less than two hours.
          Is it a standard gap for renumbering?


Liu & Jiang           Expires January 11, 2012               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft   IPv6 Site Renumbering Gap Analysis          July 2011


   o Router address configuration

        - Learning new prefixes

          If the site is multihoming, the interior routers would need a
          mechanism to learn which upstream providers and prefixes were
          currently reachable (and valid).

        - Restart after renumbering

          Some routers cache IP addresses in some situations. So routers
          might need to be restarted as a result of site renumbering.

        - Router naming

          Using domain names for routers is suitable in some scenarios
          but has not been widely deployed. Whether it is not easy to
          use or just suitable in few situations needs further
          investigation.

   o Static address configuration

   Further work is needed.

9.3. Address relevant entries update

   o DNS records update

        - DNS update automation

          Synchronization between host renumbering and the updating of
          its DNS records is hard. Forward and reverse DNS entries
          update may need to be combined together.

        - DNS data structure optimization

          Is the DNS data structure optimization as A6 record [RFC2874]
          necessary for easing renumbering?

        - DNS authority

          DNS zones are out of the administrative control. Authority
          collaboration is needed.

   o In-host server address update




Liu & Jiang           Expires January 11, 2012               [Page 14]

Internet-Draft   IPv6 Site Renumbering Gap Analysis          July 2011


          Hosts also record addresses of servers such as DNS server
          addresses, radius server address, etc. While renumbering, the
          host must update the records if these server addresses changed.

   o Filters

        - Filters management

          There is a gap of filter management to identify where and
          which of the filters need to be updated during renumbering.
          Manageable filter update may be also needed.

        - Filter update automation operation

          Automation update tool is valuable for renumbering, and there
          may be requirement of protocol standardization to deliver of
          facility the tools.

9.4. Renumbering event management

   o  Renumbering notification

   If hosts/servers are aware of a renumbering event happening, it may
   help the relevant process. A basic way is to extend current protocol
   messages to carry the renumbering notification.

   o  Synchronization management

        - DNS update synchronization

          An example is synchronizing the SLAAC and DNS updates, and of
          reducing the SLAAC lease time and DNS TTL.

        [TBD]

   o  Renumbering monitoring

   Mechanisms to monitor the process and feedback of renumbering may be
   needed. [TBD]

10. Security Considerations

   o Prefix Validation

   Prefixes from the ISP may need authentication to prevent prefix
   fraud. Announcing changes of site prefix to other sites (for example,



Liu & Jiang           Expires January 11, 2012               [Page 15]

Internet-Draft   IPv6 Site Renumbering Gap Analysis          July 2011


   those that configure routers or VPNs to point to the site in
   question) also need validation.

   In the LAN, Secure DHCPv6 ([I-D.ietf-dhc-secure-dhcpv6]) or SeND
   ([RFC3971], Secure Neighbor Discovery) deployment may need to
   validate prefixes.

   o Influence to Security Controls

   During renumbering, security controls (e.g. ACLs) blocking access to
   legitimate resources should not be interrupted.

11. IANA Considerations

   None.

12. References

12.1. Normative References

   [RFC2894] M. Crawford, "Router Renumbering for IPv6", RFC 2894,
             August 2000.

   [RFC2874] Crawford, M., and C. Huitema, "DNS Extensions to Support
             IPv6 Address Aggregation and Renumbering", RFC 2874, July
             2000.

   [RFC3007] B. Wellington, "Secure Domain Name System (DNS) Dynamic
             Update", RFC 3007, November 2000.

   [RFC3315] R. Droms, Bound, J., Volz, B., Lemon, T., Perkins, C., and
             M. Carney, "Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol for IPv6
             (DHCPv6)", RFC 3315, July 2003.

   [RFC3633] Troan, O. and R. Droms, "IPv6 Prefix Options for Dynamic
             Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP) version 6", RFC 3633,
             December 2003.

   [RFC3956] P. Savola, and B. Haberman. "Embedding the Rendezvous Point
             (RP) Address in an IPv6 Multicast Address.", RFC 3956,
             November 2004.



   [RFC3971] Arkko, J., Ed., Kempf, J., Zill, B., and P. Nikander
             "SEcure Neighbor Discovery (SEND)", RFC 3971, March 2005



Liu & Jiang           Expires January 11, 2012               [Page 16]

Internet-Draft   IPv6 Site Renumbering Gap Analysis          July 2011


   [RFC4861] Narten, T., Nordmark, E., Simpson, W., and H. Soliman,
             "Neighbor Discovery for IP version 6 (IPv6)", RFC
             4861,September 2007.

   [RFC4862] Thomson, S., Narten, T., and T. Jinmei, "IPv6 Stateless
             Address Autoconfiguration", RFC 4862, September 2007.

12.2. Informative References

   [RFC2072] H. Berkowitz, "Router Renumbering Guide"  RFC2072

   [RFC4192] Baker, F., Lear, E., and R. Droms, "Procedures for
             Renumbering an IPv6 Network without a Flag Day", RFC 4192,
             September 2005.

   [RFC5887] Carpenter, B., Atkinson, R., and H. Flinck, "Renumbering
             Still Needs Work", RFC 5887, May 2010.

   [I-D.ietf-dhc-secure-dhcpv6]
             Jiang, S., and Shen S., "Secure DHCPv6 Using CGAs", working
             in progress.

   [I-D.chown-v6ops-renumber-thinkabout]
             Chown, T., "Things to think about when Renumbering an IPv6
             network", Work in Progress, September 2006.

   [I-D.jiang-6renum-enterprise]
             Jiang, S., and Liu B., " IPv6 Enterprise Network
             Renumbering Scenarios and Guidelines ", Working in
             Progress, July 2011.

   [LEROY]  Leroy, D. and O. Bonaventure, "Preparing network
             configurations for IPv6 renumbering", International of
             Network Management, 2009, <http://
             inl.info.ucl.ac.be/system/files/dleroy-nem-2009.pdf>

13. Acknowledgments

   This work adopts significant amounts of content from [RFC5887] and
   [I-D.chown-v6ops-renumber-thinkabout], so thank for Brian Carpenter,
   Randall Atkinson, Hannu Flinck, Tim Chown, Mark Thompson, Alan Ford,
   and Stig Venaas. Some useful materials were provided by Oliver
   Bonaventure and his student Damien Leroy, thanks for them, too.

   Useful comments and contributions were made by George Wesley, and
   others.



Liu & Jiang           Expires January 11, 2012               [Page 17]

Internet-Draft   IPv6 Site Renumbering Gap Analysis          July 2011


   This document was prepared using 2-Word-v2.0.template.dot.

Authors' Addresses

   Bing Liu
   Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd
   Huawei Building, No.3 Xinxi Rd.,
   Shang-Di Information Industry Base, Hai-Dian District, Beijing
   P.R. China

   Email: leo.liubing@huawei.com


   Sheng Jiang
   Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd
   Huawei Building, No.3 Xinxi Rd.,
   Shang-Di Information Industry Base, Hai-Dian District, Beijing
   P.R. China

   Email: jiangsheng@huawei.com




























Liu & Jiang           Expires January 11, 2012               [Page 18]

