 



INTERNET-DRAFT                                                     B.Liu
Intended Status: Standard Track                                  S.Jiang
Expires: September 8, 2011                  Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd
                                                           March 7, 2011


       SLAAC/DHCPv6 conflicts diagnostic during site renumbering
                 draft-liu-ipv6-renum-conflicts-00.txt


Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as
   Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html


Copyright and License Notice

   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors. All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document. Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document. Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


 


B.Liu & S.Jiang        Expires September 8, 2011                [Page 1]

INTERNET DRAFT     draft-liu-ipv6-renum-conflicts-00       March 7, 2011


Abstract

   While an IPv6 site is being renumbered, both DHCPv6 and ND may be
   used to reconfigure the host addresses. This may cause potential
   address configuration conflicts during renumbering procedure. The
   issue mainly include two situations: a) Address configuration method
   conflict, which means a host receives a new prefix comes from another
   address configuration protocol. b) Address prefix conflict, a host
   receives both DHCPv6 and ND address configuration messages which
   assign different address prefixes. This documents analyzes the
   conflict issues and proposes a conflict report mechanism for hosts to
   report the conflicts to DHCPv6 servers.



Table of Contents

   1  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
      1.1  IPv6 renumbering  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
      1.2  DHCPv6/ND address configuration conflict  . . . . . . . . . 3
   2  Terminolog . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   3  Conflict Report Mechanism  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
      3.1  Host behavior . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
      3.2  Conflict Report Trigger . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
      3.3  DHCPv6 Reconfiguration Conflict Options . . . . . . . . . . 6
      3.4  Report processing by DHCPv6 server  . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   4  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   5  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   6  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   7  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
      7.1  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
      7.2  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   Author's Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8















 


B.Liu & S.Jiang        Expires September 8, 2011                [Page 2]

INTERNET DRAFT     draft-liu-ipv6-renum-conflicts-00       March 7, 2011


1  Introduction

1.1  IPv6 renumbering

   "Renumbering" is an event of changing in IP addressing information
   associated with a host or subnet [RFC1900]. [RFC5887] and 
   [I-D.chown-v6ops-renumber-thinkabout] described numerous reasons why
   such sites might need to renumber in a planned fashion, for example,
   change of site topology, change of service provider etc.

   [RFC4192] provided a general procedure of renumbering in an IPv6
   network, which is achieved by changing address prefix. Before the old
   prefix is withdrawn, the hosts are assigned a new prefix. Both the
   old and the new prefixes may be usable till the new prefix is stable
   in the site systems, such as DNS, ACL .etc. Then the old prefix will
   be withdrawn. The transition periods are variable according to
   different network management settings. 

   [RFC4192] also mentioned several methods to reconfigure addresses
   while renumbering:

       o  Stateful address configuration through Dynamic Host
          Configuration Protocol for IPv6 (DHCPv6) protocol [RFC3315]

       o  Stateless address configuration through Neighbor Discovery
          Protocol[RFC4861] (SLAAC) [RFC4862]

       o  Manual configuration

   This document focuses on the address reconfiguration problem and
   there is a specific issue of IPv6 site renumbering described as the
   following.

1.2  DHCPv6/ND address configuration conflict

   Both of the DHCPv6 and ND protocols have IP address configuration
   function. They are suitable for different scenarios respectively.
   During renumbering, the SLAAC-configured hosts can reconfigure IP
   addresses by receiving ND Router Advertisement (RA) messages
   containing new prefix information. The DHCPv6-configured hosts can
   reconfigure addresses by initialing RENEW sessions when the current
   addresses' lease time is expired or receiving the reconfiguration
   messages initialed by the DHCPv6 servers. 

   But DHCPv6 and ND address configuration may overlap and cause
   conflict on a host. The issue includes two situations:

      - A DHCPv6-configured host receives RA messages containing new
 


B.Liu & S.Jiang        Expires September 8, 2011                [Page 3]

INTERNET DRAFT     draft-liu-ipv6-renum-conflicts-00       March 7, 2011


        prefix

   Ideally, hosts in a DHCPv6-managed network should not receive any ND
   address configuration messages to avoid potential confusion. But some
   factors may cause this happen. For example, a sub-net of a   DHCPv6-
   managed network may be mis-configured to use SLAAC for address  
   configuration; or a DHCPv6-managed network contains hosts (some
   specific types of Apple Mac computers, e.g.) that don't support
   DHCPv6 as the default so that SLAAC will be used along with DHCPv6 as
   a necessary supplement.

   There are no standards specifying what approach should be taken by a
   DHCPv6-configured host when it receives RA messages containing new
   prefix. It depends on the operation system of the host and cannot be
   predicted or controlled by the network. If the host accepts the new
   prefix in RA, it may violet the DHCPv6-managed policies. But if it
   ignores the RA messages and there are no DHCPv6 reconfiguration
   messages received either, the renumbering would fail. What is worse,
   the host may even receive both the RA messages and DHCP-v6
   reconfiguration messages and finds the prefixes in the two protocols
   are different. This means serious network configuration error
   occurring.

      - A SLAAC-configured finds DHCPv6 is in use

   [RFC5887] and [I-D.jiang-ipv6-site-renum-guideline] mentioned RA
   message of ND protocol contains a "Managed Configuration" flag to  
   indicate DHCPv6 is in use. But it is unspecified what behavior should
   be taken when the host receives RA messages with "M" set to 1. The
   gap of standard will cause ambiguous host behavior because it depends
   on the operation system of the host. 

   The host may start a DHCPv6 session and receives the DHCPv6 address
   configuration. It is also possible that the host finds the DHCPv6
   assigned prefix is different from the prefix in the RA messages,
   which means there is a serious network configuration error. 

   Another possibility is that the host may receive no response from any
   DHCPv6 servers, which means the DHCPv6 service is not available and
   the "Managed Configuration" flag was mis-configured. 

   These potential conflicts described above need to be addressed. This
   document proposes a report mechanism for hosts to report the
   conflicts to DHCPv6 servers. (The mis-configured "Managed
   Configuration" flag issue described above is not addressed in this
   document because there are no DHCPv6 servers available in that
   circumstance. Whether it needs to report the conflict to routers or
   some other servers such as network management systems needs further
 


B.Liu & S.Jiang        Expires September 8, 2011                [Page 4]

INTERNET DRAFT     draft-liu-ipv6-renum-conflicts-00       March 7, 2011


   study.)


2  Terminolog

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].


3  Conflict Report Mechanism 

   As analyzed above, while renumbering, hosts received address  
   configuration messages (either ND or DHCP protocol messages), if the 
    messages conflict with existing/previous configuration mechanism,  
   hosts report address configuration policy conflict information to the
   network. And then they accept the address configuration indication  
   from the network. 

   The conflicts can be outlined as two types:

      - Prefix conflict, which means prefixes in DHCPv6 and ND messages
        are different.

      - Address configuration method conflict, which means a host
        receives a new prefix comes from another address configuration
        protocol.

   There are several approaches of the mechanism as the following
   clauses.

3.1  Host behavior

   For the DHCPv6-configured hosts, it assumes that they will monitor
   the RA messages after being configured by DHCPv6. 

   For the SLAAC-configured hosts, it assumes that the hosts initially
   explored the DHCPv6 servers based on having already chosen DHCPv6 as
   high priority of address configuration protocol when it finds the
   "Managed Configuration" flag is set.


3.2  Conflict Report Trigger

   Rules for the hosts to trigger conflict reports are as the following:

      - Prefix conflict trigger, a host will trigger the report when it
        finds the prefixes are different in DHCPv6 and ND messages. 
 


B.Liu & S.Jiang        Expires September 8, 2011                [Page 5]

INTERNET DRAFT     draft-liu-ipv6-renum-conflicts-00       March 7, 2011


      - Address configuration method conflict trigger, a DHCPv6-managed
        host receives a new prefix comes from RA messages.


3.3  DHCPv6 Reconfiguration Conflict Options

   New DHCPv6 options could be defined respectively for the clients to
   report conflicts to servers and for servers to response according to
   analysis of the reported conflict details.

      - Option_ReconfigConflict_Report 

   It is possible to include this option into the renew message. The
   content of the option could be: 

     a) New available address prefix (prefix in RA e.g.). 
     b) Serious error of prefix conflict.

      - Option_ReconfigConflict_Response

      DHCPv6 server could response as the following possibilities
   according to information got from the option:

      a) Directly assigns new addresses to the hosts who report
         conflicts.
      b) Indicates hosts to make SLAAC according to RA messages
         received.
      c) Report the prefixes conflict to network management system.


3.4  Report processing by DHCPv6 server

   When a DHCPv6 server receives the conflict reports, it should analyze
   the report and decides whether to forward the report to relative
   network management systems or indicate what approach should be taken
   to the hosts through DHCPv6 messages defined in section 3.3, however,
   the analysis processing of DHCPv6 servers is not in the scope of this
   memo.










 


B.Liu & S.Jiang        Expires September 8, 2011                [Page 6]

INTERNET DRAFT     draft-liu-ipv6-renum-conflicts-00       March 7, 2011


4  Security Considerations

   This document doesn't provide additional security considerations for
   IPv6 site renumbering more than [RFC5887], [RFC4192] and other
   relative documents.

   For the conflict report mechanism, there is a potential threat that
   any malicious host can fake conflict reports to DHCPv6 servers which
   may disturb the network manager when the report is prefix conflict,  
   however, it cannot directly break the availability of the network.


5  IANA Considerations

   This document requests IANA to assign new DHCPv6 option number.(TBD)

6  Acknowledgements

   This document inherits various previous work. Thanks for Brian
   Carpenter, Randall Atkinson, Hannu Flinck, Fred Baker, Eliot Lear,
   Ralph Droms, Tim J. Chown, Mark K. Thompson, Alan Ford, and Stig
   Venaas.

7  References 

7.1  Normative References

   [RFC3315]   R. Droms, Bound, J., Volz, B., Lemon, T., Perkins, C.,
               and M. Carney, "Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol for
               IPv6(DHCPv6)", RFC 3315, July 2003.

   [RFC4861]   Narten, T., Nordmark, E., Simpson, W., and H.
               Soliman,"Neighbor Discovery for IP version 6 (IPv6)", RFC
               4861,September 2007.
   [RFC4862]   Thomson, S., Narten, T., and T. Jinmei, "IPv6 Stateless
               Address Autoconfiguration", RFC 4862, September 2007.

7.2  Informative References

   [RFC5887]   Carpenter, B., Atkinson, R., and H. Flinck,"Renumbering
               Still Needs Work", RFC 5887, May 2010.

   [RFC4192]   Baker, F., Lear, E., and R. Droms, "Procedures for
               Renumbering an IPv6 Network without a Flag Day", RFC
               4192, September 2005.

   [I-D.jiang-ipv6-site-renum-guideline]
               Jiang, S., and Liu B., "IPv6 Site Renumbering Guidelines
 


B.Liu & S.Jiang        Expires September 8, 2011                [Page 7]

INTERNET DRAFT     draft-liu-ipv6-renum-conflicts-00       March 7, 2011


               and Further Works", working in progress.

   [I-D.chown-v6ops-renumber-thinkabout] 
               Chown, T., and Thompson, M., "Things to think about when
               Renumbering an IPv6 network", September 2006.


Author's Addresses


   Bing Liu
   Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd
   Huawei Building, No.3 Xinxi Rd.,
   Shang-Di Information Industry Base, Hai-Dian District, Beijing 100085
   P.R. China
   Email: leo.liubing@huawei.com

   Sheng Jiang
   Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd
   Huawei Building, No.3 Xinxi Rd.,
   Shang-Di Information Industry Base, Hai-Dian District, Beijing 100085
   P.R. China
   Email: jiangsheng@huawei.com




























B.Liu & S.Jiang        Expires September 8, 2011                [Page 8]