 



Network Working Group                                            M. King
INTERNET-DRAFT                                                   M. Tebo
Intended Status: Proposed Standard                              W. Brown
Expires: October 2011                                          D. Silver
                                                               C. Louden
                                           Protiviti Government Services
                                                            P. Patterson
                                      Carillon Information Security Inc.
                                                            May 25, 2011



                 claimSigning Extended Key Usage (EKU)
                  draft-king-pkix-claimsigning-extn-01



Abstract

   This memo specifies an Extended Key Usage (EKU) X.509 certificate
   extension which indicates that the certificate holder is authorized
   to sign security tokens to assert claims, or attributes, about a
   principal.

   When an owner of a certificate that asserts the claimSigning EKU
   signs a claim, the owner is asserting that a statement about the
   principal is true. For example, a IdP secure token service (STS)
   would use an X.509 certificate containing the claimSigning EKU to
   sign SAML assertions containing an identifier and attributes about a
   user. This additional EKU value would further allow the
   differentiation of certificates used to identify a particular server
   from those used by the server to sign identity or attribute claims.


Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as
   Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."
 


King, et al.           Expires November 25, 2011                [Page 1]

INTERNET DRAFT      claimSigning Extended Key Usage         May 25, 2011


   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html

   This Internet-Draft will expire on October 14, 2011.

Copyright and License Notice

   Copyright (c) <year> IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors. All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document. Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document. Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.1  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Abstract Syntax Notation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  claimSigning Extended Key Usage Value  . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   4.  Using the claimSinging EKU in a Certificate  . . . . . . . . .  6
   5.  Implications for a Certification Authority . . . . . . . . . .  6
   6.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   7.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   8.  Copyright Notice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   9.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     9.1  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     9.2  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   Appendix A - ASN.1 Structures and OIDs . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9








 


King, et al.           Expires November 25, 2011                [Page 2]

INTERNET DRAFT      claimSigning Extended Key Usage         May 25, 2011


1  Introduction

   A Claim Signer is software or a service that packages and digitally
   signs statements about particular subjects (i.e., claims) in the form
   of security tokens.  The Claim Signer conveys that it is certified to
   issue claims by using a certificate that asserts the claimSigning 
   Extended Key Usage (EKU) X.509 certificate extension.  Claim Signing
   services are used in a number of applications.  Examples of these
   services include Backend Attribute Exchange (BAE), SAML and other
   assertion protocols.

   This memo documents an extended key usage (EKU) X.509 certificate
   extension [PROFILE] for specifying the applicability of a certificate
   to be used with a Claim Signing service.  As such, in addition to
   providing rules for processing certificates that assert the
   claimSigning EKU Object Identifier (OID), this memo also provides
   guidance to issuers of certificates for use with Claim Signing.


1.1  Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [KEYWORDS].

   Additionally, the following terms are defined:

   A Claim is a statement about a particular subject. Statements may
   include values that represent identity, attributes, keys, or other
   identifiers that are related to a particular subject. Claims do not
   include X.509 certificates signed by CAs when issuing user, device,
   or subordinate CA certificates, since those cases are covered by
   other key usage bits (namely keyCertSign and basicConstraints).

   A Signed Claim is a digitally signed claim about a particular subject
   where the signer is indicating the veracity of the claim.

   A Claim Signer is software or a service that packages and digitally
   signs claims in the form of security tokens.  The claim signer
   conveys the veracity of signed claims by using a certificate that
   asserts the claimSigning EKU.

   An Identity Provider (IdP) is a particular type of Claim Signer that
   signs on or more claims containing an assertion of identity, and
   possibly includes further attributes as claims that may be used by
   the consumer of that set of claims to make an authorization decision.


 


King, et al.           Expires November 25, 2011                [Page 3]

INTERNET DRAFT      claimSigning Extended Key Usage         May 25, 2011


2.  Abstract Syntax Notation

   All X.509 certificate [X.509] extensions are defined using ASN.1
   [X.680, X.690].




3.  claimSigning Extended Key Usage Value

   RFC 5280 [PROFILE] specifies the extended key usage (EKU) X.509
   certificate extension.  The EKU extension indicates one or more
   purposes for which the certificate may be used.  The EKU extension
   can be used in conjunction with the key usage extension, which
   indicates the intended purpose of the certified public key. The EKU
   extension syntax is repeated here for convenience:


        ExtKeyUsageSyntax ::= SEQUENCE SIZE (1..MAX) of KeyPurposeID

        KeyPurposeID ::= OBJECT IDENTIFIER


   This specification defines one KeyPurposeID value for use in
   transactions where Claim Signing is required. Inclusion of the Claim
   Signing value in the EKU indicates that the certificate is
   appropriate for use by an entity who intends to assert the veracity
   of a signed claim. 

        id-kp  OBJECT IDENTIFIER  ::=
           { iso(1) identified-organization(3) dod(6) internet(1)
             security(5) mechanisms(5) pkix(7) 3 }

        id-kp-claimSigning  OBJECT IDENTIFIER  ::=  { id-kp TBD }

   The EKU extension MAY, at the option of the certificate issuer, be
   either critical or non-critical.

   When a conformant Certification Authority (CA) includes this EKU
   value, it SHALL set the digitalSignature keyUsage extension bit. A
   conformant CA MAY also et the nonRepudiation bit in the keyUsage
   Extension. A conformant CA SHOULD NOT set the keyEncipherment,
   keyAgreement or dataEncipherment keyUsage extension bits.
   Furthermore, by declaring that this key pair is used for signing by
   issuing a Certificate with this EKU, a CA SHALL NOT escrow, or cause
   to be escrowed this Certificate.  

   If the claimSigning EKU extension value is asserted, then other
 


King, et al.           Expires November 25, 2011                [Page 4]

INTERNET DRAFT      claimSigning Extended Key Usage         May 25, 2011


   KeyPurposeId values SHALL NOT be asserted.

   Certificate-using applications MAY require the EKU extension to be
   present in a certificate, and they MAY require a particular
   KeyPurposeId value to be present (such as id-kp-claimSigning) within
   the EKU extension.










































 


King, et al.           Expires November 25, 2011                [Page 5]

INTERNET DRAFT      claimSigning Extended Key Usage         May 25, 2011


4.  Using the claimSinging EKU in a Certificate

   In order to determine whether the usage of a certificate is intended
   to serve as a claimSigning certificate only, implementations MUST
   perform the steps given below as a part of the certificate
   validation:

   The implementation SHOULD examine the Extended Key Usage value(s):


      If the certificate does not contain any EKU values (i.e., the 
      Extended Key Usage extension does not exist), it is a matter of
      local policy whether or not to accept the certificate for use as a
      claimSigning certificate.  Note that since certificates that do
      not follow this specification will not have the id-kp-claimSigning
      EKU value local policies might accept certificates for use as a
      claimSigning certificate to improve interoperability. 

      If the certificate contains the id-kp-claimSigning EKU value, then
      implementations of this specification SHOULD consider the
      certificate valid for the purposes of signing claims.  Otherwise
      the Relying Party may be exposed to the risks identified in the
      Security Considerations section below.

      If the certificate does not contain the id-kp-claimSigning EKU
      value, but does contain the id-kp-anyExtendedKeyUsage EKU value,
      it is a matter of local policy whether or not to consider the
      certificate acceptable for use as a claimSigning certificate.

      If the EKU extension exists, but does not contain any of the id-
      kp-claimSigning or id-kp-anyExtendedKeyUsage EKU values, it is a
      matter of local policy whether or not to accept the certificate
      for use as a claimSigning certificate. 


5.  Implications for a Certification Authority

      The procedures and practices employed by a conformant CA MUST
      ensure that the holder of the private key associated with the
      public key in the Certificate is authorized to sign claims within
      a particular community of interest before populating the
      certificate with the id-kp-claimSigning EKU value
6.  Security Considerations

      This memo defines an EKU X.509 certificate extension that conveys
      to Relying Parties that the certificate holder is certified to
      issue claims.  

 


King, et al.           Expires November 25, 2011                [Page 6]

INTERNET DRAFT      claimSigning Extended Key Usage         May 25, 2011


      The procedures and practices employed by the CA MUST ensure that
      the correct values for the EKU are inserted in each certificate
      that is issued. Relying parties may accept or reject a particular
      certificate for an intended use based on the information provided
      in the extension.  Incorrect representation of the information in
      the extension could cause the relying party to reject an otherwise
      appropriate certificate or accept a certificate that ought to be
      rejected.  Relying Party applications are encouraged to require
      this particular OID to be asserted in order to accept a signed
      claim as valid.

      Since the attribute assertions which are signed by the holders of
      Private keys which have corresponding Public Keys in Certificates
      which assert id-kp-claimSigning are used to provide an attestation
      of Identity, or a attestation of a particular attribute that is
      associated with an Identity, it is imperative that the Private
      Keys be kept using methods as strict as, or better than the
      assurance level of the identities which are being asserted.  It is
      for the reason that since the criteria for management of the
      private key of the server's Identity Certificate may be different
      from the requirements for the protection and management of the key
      used to sign attribute assertions may be different that the
      admonition in this document against using the same Certificate for
      both exists.

      Furthermore, since the server name itself (as opposed to the
      Identity Provider) may change over time, or even be deployed in a
      manner that disassociates the interface facing the Subscriber from
      the server signing the attribute assertion, as is the case in many
      "Reverse Proxy" situations, it is recommended from a key hygene
      point of view that the two functions be kept distinct.  This also
      has operational  impacts, in cases where the CA chooses to require
      two person control for the Private Key of an Identity Provider,
      but leaves the Device certificates somewhat less constrained.  In
      such a case, the Identity Provider which has needed to be
      restarted, or which has a failover may still display a secure
      interface (using the Device Certificate) indicating the issue to
      Relying Parties and Subscribers, while waiting for the conditions
      to be met for two person control of the Identity Provider.

      As the Private key corresponds to a Public Key in Certificate
      which asserts id-kp-claimSigning, and since this is, in fact, a
      signature function, good practice dictates that this key never be
      escrowed.  If any of the encryption key usages were to be asserted
      in the same certificate, this could lead to the private key being
      escrowed, and thus, be provably out of the control of the Identity
      Provider.  This could lead to questions about the veracity of
      claims originating from that Identity Provider.
 


King, et al.           Expires November 25, 2011                [Page 7]

INTERNET DRAFT      claimSigning Extended Key Usage         May 25, 2011


7.  IANA Considerations

      Certificate extended key usage values are identified by object
      identifiers (OIDs).  The OIDs used in this document were assigned
      from an arc delegated by the IANA.  No further action by the IANA
      is necessary for this document or any anticipated updates
      [RFC5513].

8.  Copyright Notice

      Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
      document authors.  All rights reserved.


9.  References

9.1  Normative References

   [KEYWORDS] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [PROFILE]  Cooper, D., Santesson, S., Farrell, S., Boeyen, S.,
              Housley, R., and W. Polk, "Internet X.509 Public Key
              Infrastructure Certificate and Certificate Revocation List
              (CRL) Profile", RFC 5280, May 2008.

   [X.509]    ITU-T.  Recommendation X.509: The Directory - 
              Authentication Framework.  2000.

   [X.680]    ITU-T Recommendation X.680: Information Technology -
              Abstract Syntax Notation One, 1997.

   [X.690]    ITU-T Recommendation X.690: Information Technology -
              Abstract Syntax Notation One Encoding Rules, 2002.


9.2  Informative References

   [RFC5513]  Farrel, A., "IANA Considerations for Three Letter
              Acronyms", RFC 5513, April 1 2009.








 


King, et al.           Expires November 25, 2011                [Page 8]

INTERNET DRAFT      claimSigning Extended Key Usage         May 25, 2011


Appendix A - ASN.1 Structures and OIDs

   BEGIN

   -- OID Arcs

   id-kp  OBJECT IDENTIFIER  ::=   { iso(1) identified-organization(3)
   dod(6) internet(1)     security(5) mechanisms(5) pkix(7) 3 }

   -- Extended Key Usage Values

   id-kp-claimSigning  OBJECT IDENTIFIER  ::=  { id-kp TBD }

   END

Authors' Addresses


   Matt King
   Protiviti Government Services 
   1640 King St., Suite 400
   Alexandria, VA 22314
   	
   Phone: 410-271-5624
   Email: Matthew.King@pgs.protiviti.com 


   Matt Tebo
   Protiviti Government Services 
   1640 King St., Suite 400
   Alexandria, VA 22314
   	
   Phone: 301-312-5852
   Email: Matt.Tebo@pgs.protiviti.com 


   Wendy Brown
   Protiviti Government Services 
   1640 King St., Suite 400
   Alexandria, VA 22314
   	
   Phone: 703-965-2990
   Email: Wendy.Brown@pgs.protiviti.com 





 


King, et al.           Expires November 25, 2011                [Page 9]

INTERNET DRAFT      claimSigning Extended Key Usage         May 25, 2011


   Dave Silver
   Protiviti Government Services 
   1640 King St., Suite 400
   Alexandria, VA 22314
   	
   Phone: 703-597-5114
   Email: Dave.Silver@pgs.protiviti.com 


   Chris Louden
   Protiviti Government Services 
   1640 King St., Suite 400
   Alexandria, VA 22314
   	
   Phone: 703-447-7431
   Email: Chris.Louden@pgs.protiviti.com


   Patrick Patterson
   Carillon Information Security Inc.
   356 Joseph Carrier
   Vaudreuil-Dorion, QC  J7V5V5
   Canada

   Phone: +1 514 485 0789
   Email: ppatterson@carillon.ca

























King, et al.           Expires November 25, 2011               [Page 10]
