


MULTIMOB Working Group                               Luis M. Contreras
Internet Draft                                     Carlos J. Bernardos
Intended status: Experimental                             Ignacio Soto
Expires: April 16, 2010                                           UC3M
                                                      October 15, 2009

               Multicast service delivery in PMIPv6 domains
                   draft-contreras-multimob-msd-00.txt


Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 16, 2010.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2009 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents in effect on the date of
   publication of this document (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info).
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.








Contreras, et al.       Expires April 15, 2010                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft       Multicast in PMIPv6 domains          October 2009


Abstract

   A new working group, Multimob, has been chartered for providing an
   implementation of multicast service distribution to multicast
   listeners as they move in currently defined Proxy Mobile IPv6
   (PMIPv6) domains according to RFC 5213 [1]. No protocol modifications
   or extensions are considered at this stage.

   Several proposals [2, 3, 4] have been already presented to face this
   issue. This contribution sums up some of the previous ideas extending
   them when necessary to overcome some limitations existing on such
   solutions.


Table of Contents


   1. Introduction.................................................2
   2. Conventions and terminology..................................3
   3. Overview.....................................................3
   4. Unicast and multicast service delivery integration...........4
   5. Local Mobility Anchor (LMA) operation........................5
   6. Mobile Access Gateway (MAG) operation........................5
      6.1. MAG operation as MLD proxy..............................5
      6.2. MAG operation as multicast router.......................5
   7. Multicast traffic hand-off process...........................6
      7.1. Newly-attached MN interrogation.........................6
      7.2. Multicast context transfer among MAGs...................7
      7.3. pMAG-assisted handover..................................8
         7.3.1. Multicast flow encapsulation......................11
         7.3.2. Multicast flow delivery to the MN from the nMAG...12
   8. Security Considerations.....................................12
   9. IANA Considerations.........................................12
   10. References.................................................12
      10.1. Normative References..................................12
      10.2. Informative References................................13
   11. Acknowledgments............................................13


1. Introduction

   A new working group, Multimob, has been chartered for providing an
   implementation of multicast service distribution to multicast
   listeners as they move in currently defined Proxy Mobile IPv6
   (PMIPv6) domains according to RFC 5213 [1]. No protocol modifications
   or extensions are considered at this stage.





Contreras, et al.       Expires April 15, 2010                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft       Multicast in PMIPv6 domains          October 2009


   This draft takes as starting point some existing contributions [3, 4,
   5] to define a comprehensive architecture for multicast traffic
   delivery in a PMIPv6 domain, introducing a new mechanism to allow
   fast handover of the multicast flow, thus minimising multicast
   service disruption when the multicast mobile listener moves across
   the network.



2. Conventions and terminology

   This document uses the terminology referring to PMIPv6 components as
   defined in [1].



3. Overview

   In currently defined PMIPv6 solution [1] two main entities, named
   Local Mobility Anchor (LMA) and Mobile Access Gateway (MAG), are in
   charge of managing both Mobile Node (MN) mobility and traffic
   delivery from/to the MN.

   The LMA plays a central role in the unicast traffic delivery from/to
   the MN due that it is responsible of guaranteeing that the MN is
   reachable through the PMIPv6 domain by means of announcing an
   available route towards the MN, and forwarding traffic to it. By
   contrast, it plays a passive role in the mobility process, just
   pointing out to the MAG which acts as next-hop router to reach the
   MN.

   On the other hand, the MAG's main role is to manage the MN node
   mobility within the PMIPv6 domain, notifying to the LMA the MN's
   current location as it moves within the PMIPv6 domain. Respect to the
   unicast traffic delivery, the MAG behaves as a passive element, just
   forwarding the MN's terminating traffic on the point-to-point link
   connecting both the MAG and the MN, or forwarding the traffic
   originated in the MN to the LMA as default router.

   The case for multicast traffic is slightly different to the unicast
   one. The IP destination address of multicast packets does not
   identify the receiver, so the LMA would need additional information
   to be able to forward the multicast flow to the MNs requiring such
   content. In order to manage multicast traffic terminated on an MN,
   the LMA would need to keep the multicast status for every MN
   subscribing to a content. Nevertheless, the MAG is the element placed
   as first-hop router for the MNs, and thus, the MAG is the element




Contreras, et al.       Expires April 15, 2010                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft       Multicast in PMIPv6 domains          October 2009


   which directly receives the MLD signalling messages coming from the
   MNs. It is the element better positioned in the network to maintain
   the MN multicast status.

   As consequence of that, in this draft the LMA is considered to manage
   unicast traffic terminating on the MN, whereas the MAG is considered
   to manage the multicast one, either if it plays the role of an MLD
   proxy or a fully-enabled multicast router.

   This draft takes as starting point some existing contributions [3, 4,
   5] to define a comprehensive architecture for multicast traffic
   delivery in a PMIPv6 domain, extending them in three ways:

   1. An integrated vision of multicast service delivery together with
      unicast standard process.

   2. The extension of the MAG role to also consider it to be a fully
      enabled multicast router.

   3. A new proposal for minimising multicast service disruption on the
      handover event between MAGs.



4. Unicast and multicast service delivery integration

   This draft considers that every MN demanding multicast services is
   previously registered in the PMIPv6 domain based on a unicast IP
   address as stated in [1]. This registration can be required for
   several purposes such as remote management, billing, etc.

   As the registration is required by the network before any multicast
   service is provided, any MLD message originated by the MN will be
   discarded until the registration process is finished. This fact also
   prevents the network from accepting any subscription request or leave
   sent by the MN during the handover process.

   In the same way, any subscription request or leave sent by the MN
   after a detachment procedure is initiated, will be discarded by the
   network, not being taken into account for multicast traffic
   management purposes.










Contreras, et al.       Expires April 15, 2010                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft       Multicast in PMIPv6 domains          October 2009


5. Local Mobility Anchor (LMA) operation

   As stated above, the LMA will not play any specific role in the
   multicast traffic management.



6. Mobile Access Gateway (MAG) operation

   As stated above, the MAG will play a central role in the multicast
   traffic management. The MAG will keep the multicast status of every
   MN connected to it, and it will handle the multicast traffic
   accordingly to the MLD messages received on each point-to-point link.

   Depending on the functionality deployed on the MAG, it is possible to
   consider the MAG as an MLD proxy or as a multicast router.



6.1. MAG operation as MLD proxy

   When the MAG operates as MLD proxy it is in charge of summarizing the
   MN's subscription requests and delivering them towards the multicast
   router that can be reached through the configured proxy's upstream
   interface.

   Conceptually, this scenario corresponds to the one described in
   Figure 1 of [5].

   In this draft, just one MLD proxy instance is considered to be
   running in the MAG, and as consequence, just one interface can be
   defined as upstream interface.

   The multicast router connected to the MLD proxy upstream interface
   could be any router in the network, even one of the routers acting as
   LMA. In such case, the upstream interface could be defined over the
   tunnel between the MAG and the LMA, once that tunnel has been set up.



6.2. MAG operation as multicast router

   When a MAG operates as multicast router, it will send PIM messages to
   build the multicast tree that distributes the content required by a
   certain MN, if such content is not being received yet on the MAG.






Contreras, et al.       Expires April 15, 2010                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft       Multicast in PMIPv6 domains          October 2009


   Some content (the most popular one according to audience metrics or
   estimations) could be permanently subscribed at MAG to minimize the
   signalling involved in the establishment and pruning processes of the
   multicast tree leafs reaching the MAG.

   One of the routers participanting in the multicast distribution tree
   can be one of the routers that acts as LMA in the PMIPv6 domain. In
   that case, the multicast distribution tree could be extended over the
   tunnel between MAG and LMA, once that tunnel has been set up.



7. Multicast traffic hand-off process

   As the MN moves and connects to different access networks with the
   same or different wireless access technology, the network should be
   able to guarantee the delivery of the traffic following the MN
   movement.

   In the case of the multicast traffic, as seen above, the MAG entities
   have the knowledge about the multicast status (group subscription) of
   the MNs attached to them. MAG nodes contain enough information to
   support the handover process minimising multicast service disruption.

   We describe below some alternatives [4, 5] to facilitate multicast
   service handover, including a new proposal.



7.1. Newly-attached MN interrogation

   This method, proposed in [4], is based on the fact that MAG entities
   running an MLD instance have the capability of interrogating mobile
   hosts to obtain multicast memberships. In this case, an MN entering a
   new access network under responsibility of a new MAG will be
   interrogated by the new MAG, which sends an MLD Query towards the MN.
   Once the MLD Query is received, the MN will provide information about
   active memberships it has, if any. The MAG will get in this way
   knowledge of the multicast status for this newly-attached MN.

   A number of pros and cons can be identified for this method.

   Pros:

   o  The MAG entity does not require any additional functionality as it
      already implements MLD capabilities.





Contreras, et al.       Expires April 15, 2010                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft       Multicast in PMIPv6 domains          October 2009


   o  The application of this method can be easily integrated within the
      MN registration process.





   Cons:

   o  Any new MN attaching the nMAG is interrogated, independently if it
      maintains or not an active multicast session at that time.

   o  The signalling process wastes resources over the air interface.



7.2. Multicast context transfer among MAGs

   This method, introduced in [5], proposes to trigger a context
   transfer process of the MN multicast status from the previous MAG
   (pMAG) to the new MAG (nMAG). As a previous step, the pMAG should
   predict the path the MN follows as it moves, to correctly identify
   the candidate nMAG to support the MN connection.

   A number of pros and cons can be identified for this method.

   Pros:

   o  There is no additional signalling process over the air interface.

   o  The context transfer method is an standardized process as per [2].

   Cons:

   o  The MAG entity requires new functionality to support multicast
      traffic handovers.

   o  As predictive method, there is no total guarantee of success (the
      multicast context could not reach nMAG in all cases).

   o  Coordination problems could arise in case of vertical handovers.










Contreras, et al.       Expires April 15, 2010                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft       Multicast in PMIPv6 domains          October 2009


7.3. pMAG-assisted handover

   This new proposal considers the fact that the MN keeps the same IP
   address in the PMIPv6 domain, thus the MN will be always reachable
   and traceable from the LMA as it moves from one wireless point of
   attachment to another.

   The pMAG maintains the multicast status of an MN reconnecting to a
   nMAG. Before the detachment process, the multicast traffic reaching
   the MN passes through the pMAG. So, once a pMAG receives a Proxy
   Binding Ack (PBA) message from the LMA confirming that the MN has
   been detached from its point-to-point link, the pMAG can be able to
   temporally forward via the LMA a copy of the multicast content within
   an unicast flow towards the new location of the MN, once it is
   registered again in some point of the network. In case the MN is not
   registered again, the copy will be silently discarded in the LMA
   until timer expiration.

   The timer duration has to be long enough to cover the registration
   process and the content subscription at the nMAG (triggered by
   periodic MLD reports from the MN). Once the timer expires, the pMAG
   deletes the MN multicast status state and stops the unicast flow that
   encapsulates the multicast content.

   Figure 1 presents the interaction between pMAG, LMA and nMAG.


























Contreras, et al.       Expires April 15, 2010                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft       Multicast in PMIPv6 domains          October 2009




                MN         pMAG        nMAG         MR          LMA

                |           |           |           |           |
   1)           |<--------------- Multicast Data ---|           |
                |           |           |           |           |
          MN detaches       |           |           |           |
                |  MN detachment event  |           |           |
                |           |           |           |           |
   2)           |           |---- Proxy Binding Update -------->|
                |           |           |           |           |
   3)           |           |<--- Proxy Binding Acknowledge ----|
                |           |           |           |           |
   4)           |           |-- Mcast flow encapsulation ------>|
                |           |           |           |           |
   5)           |           |           |-Proxy Binding Update->|
                |           |           |           |           |
   6)           |           |           |<--Proxy Binding Ack.--|
                |           |           |           |           |
   7)           |           |           |<- Mcast flow fwd -----|
                |           |           |           |           |
   8)           |<--- Multicast Data ---|           |
                |           |           |           |
                |           |           |-MLDReport>|
                |           |           |           |
                |           |           |           |->(PIM join)
                |           |           |           |
                |           |           |           |->(S,G)
                |           |           |           |
   9)           |<--------------- Multicast Data ---|
                |           |           |           |
                |           |           |           |


   Figure 1. pMAG-assisted handover

   Each step of the process is described as follows:

   1) A registered MN is receiving a multicast content which has been
      previously subscribed by standard MLD request from the MN to the
      currently serving MAG, pMAG. The pMAG keeps the multicast status
      state of the MN.

   2) The MN perceives a better radio link and decides to initiate a
      handover process over a radio access controlled by a new MAG,
      nMAG. As consequence, pMAG determines a detach event corresponding




Contreras, et al.       Expires April 15, 2010                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft       Multicast in PMIPv6 domains          October 2009


      to this MN, and updates the attachment status of this MN to the
      LMA by sending a Proxy Binding Update message. From this moment,
      pMAG would discard any new MLD Report message coming from the MN
      requesting new content subscription.

   3) The LMA confirms the reception of the detach process notification
      by sending a Proxy Binding Acknowledge message to the pMAG.

   4) After reception of the PBA message, the pMAG encapsulates the
      multicast flow being served to the MN prior to the detachment
      event, and temporally forwards it to the LMA. The reason for this
      is that the MN keeps its IP address through the PMIPv6 domain, and
      it will be always reachable through the LMA, as soon as the MN is
      registered again by the nMAG. During the time that the MN is not
      reachable by the LMA, the LMA will silently discard the
      encapsulated multicast flow sent by the pMAG.

      The encapsulation method is described later in this draft.

      A timer is set up by pMAG to control the duration of multicast
      flow forwarding via the LMA. The timer value must be at least the
      maximum time to cover the MN registration process at the MAG and
      the refreshment of the group membership by the MLD instance at the
      MN.

   5) The MN triggers an attachment process in a different MAG, nMAG.
      This nMAG signals the LMA with the new mobility status of the MN.

   6) The LMA confirms the new attachment, and configures the routing
      table accordingly to forward incoming traffic to the MN through
      the nMAG. At this time, any MLD messages coming from the MN are
      accepted by the nMAG.

   7) Once the MN is reachable again, the LMA forwards the encapsulated
      multicast traffic originally subscribed by the MN to the nMAG.

   8) The nMAG decapsulates the originally subscribed multicast flow and
      sends it over the point-to-point link connecting both the nMAG and
      the MN. With the information contained in the flow, the nMAG is
      able to build the multicast status of the MN. Additionally, in
      case the nMAG currently does not have a subscription to the
      required content, it can trigger a content subscription on behalf
      of the MN to set up the delivery tree to the nMAG.

      If the MN sends MLD messages to leave originally subscribed
      multicast content, the encapsulated multicast flow coming from the
      pMAG wil be silently discarded until timer expiration.




Contreras, et al.       Expires April 15, 2010                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft       Multicast in PMIPv6 domains          October 2009


   9) The delivery tree reaches nMAG. The multicast content is directly
      served by the multicast tree. The encapsulated multicast flow
      coming from the pMAG will be silently discarded until timer
      expiration.

   A number of pros and cons can be identified for this method.

   Pros:

   o  There is no additional signalling process over the air interface.

   o  The multicast traffic is sent towards the MN immediately after the
      new registration.

   Cons:

   o  The MAG entity require new functionality to support multicast
      traffic handovers.

   o  The network temporally supports more traffic.



7.3.1. Multicast flow encapsulation

   The originally subscribed multicast traffic has to be encapsulated
   from the pMAG to the LMA to forward it to the MN as it moves. The
   format of the tunnelled flow considered in this draft is the one
   already described in Figure 1 of reference [3], but with different
   addressing considerations. Briefly, the format proposed here is as
   follows:

   1. One external tunnel, with source address pMAG's Proxy-CoA, and
      destination address LMA Address (LMAA).

   2. One internal tunnel, with source address pMAG's Proxy-CoA, and
      destination address MN-HoA.

   3. The multicast flow being received by the MN, with source address
      the IP address of the source injecting the multicast content to
      the network, and destination address the multicast IP address of
      the group subscribed by the MN.

   Once these packets reach the LMA, if a routing entry already exists
   pointing out to the MN through the nMAG, the external tunnel
   addressing is modified accordingly: the source address is the LMAA,
   whereas the destination address is the nMAG's Proxy-CoA.




Contreras, et al.       Expires April 15, 2010                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft       Multicast in PMIPv6 domains          October 2009




7.3.2. Multicast flow delivery to the MN from the nMAG

   Here the same behaviour described in section 5 of reference [3] is
   proposed for the nMAG.

   After receiving the forwarded original multicast flow from pMAG, the
   nMAG will analyze the internal tunnel header. In case the source
   address is a Proxy-CoA address of any neighbouring MAG in the domain,
   and the destination address is the one of the MN, MN-HoA, the nMAG
   will determine that a second tunnel exists. The nMAG will remove the
   internal header and will deliver the original multicast content as is
   (with multicast source and group addresses) to the MN on the point-
   to-point link.

   In this way, the MN is guaranteed to receive the original subscribed
   multicast flow as before the handover process.

   This mechanism implies that any MAG within a PMIPv6 domain has to be
   aware of the Proxy-CoA addresses of the neighbouring MAGs in the
   domain, to be able to determine the existence of the second
   (internal) tunnel. The maximum number of IP addresses to take into
   account would be then equal to the number of MAGs in the domain.



8. Security Considerations

   None.



9. IANA Considerations

   This document makes no request of IANA.



10. References

10.1. Normative References

   [1]   S. Gundavelli, K. Leung, V. Devarapalli, K. Chowdhury, and B.
         Patil, "Proxy Mobile IPv6", RFC 5213, Augurst 2008.






Contreras, et al.       Expires April 15, 2010                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft       Multicast in PMIPv6 domains          October 2009


   [2]   J. Loughney, M. Nakhjiri, C. Perkins, and R. Koodli, "Context
         Transfer Protocol (CXTP)", RFC 4067, July 2005.

10.2. Informative References

   [3]   S. Krishnan, B. Sarikaya and TC. Schmidt, "Proxy Mobile IPv6
         Basic Multicast Support Solution", draft-krishnan-multimob-
         pmip6basicmcast-solution-00, (work in progress), July 2009.

   [4]   TC. Schmidt, M. Waehlisch, B. Sarikaya, and S. Krishnan, "A
         Minimal Deployment Option for Multicast Listeners in PMIPv6
         Domains",   draft-schmidt-multimob-pmipv6-mcast-deployment-01,
         (work in progress), June 2009.

   [5]   S. Jeon, Y. Kim, and J. Lee, "Mobile Multicasting Support in
         Proxy Mobile IPv6", draft-sijeon-multimob-mms-pmip6-00, (work
         in progress), July 2009.



11. Acknowledgments

   The research of Carlos J. Bernardos leading to these results has
   received funding from the European Community's Seventh Framework
   Programme (FP7/2007-2013) under grant agreement n. 214994 (CARMEN
   project), and from the Ministry of Science and Innovation of Spain,
   under the QUARTET project (TIN2009-13992-C02-01).



Authors' Addresses

   Luis M. Contreras
   Universidad Carlos III de Madrid
   Av. Universidad, 30
   Leganes, Madrid  28911
   Spain

   Email: luisc@it.uc3m.es












Contreras, et al.       Expires April 15, 2010                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft       Multicast in PMIPv6 domains          October 2009


   Carlos J. Bernardos
   Universidad Carlos III de Madrid
   Av. Universidad, 30
   Leganes, Madrid  28911
   Spain

   Email: cjbc@it.uc3m.es


   Ignacio Soto
   Universidad Carlos III de Madrid
   Av. Universidad, 30
   Leganes, Madrid  28911
   Spain

   Email: isoto@it.uc3m.es



































Contreras, et al.       Expires April 15, 2010                [Page 14]

