


Network Working Group                                           S. Jeong
Internet-Draft                                                 M-K. Shin
Intended status: Informational                                      ETRI
Expires: January 14, 2011                                       T. Egawa
                                                                     NEC
                                                               H. Otsuki
                                                                    NiCT
                                                           July 13, 2010


                Network Virtualization Problem Statement
               draft-shin-virtualization-meta-arch-02.txt

Abstract

   This document analyzes and discusses the problem space of supporting
   network virtualization in the networks.  Furthermore, some key
   requirements for enabling network virtualization in the networks are
   investigated and described.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 14, 2011.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must



Jeong, et al.           Expires January 14, 2011                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft          Network Virtualization PS              July 2010


   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
     1.1.  Definition of Network Virtualization and Virtual
           Networks  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
     1.2.  Effectiveness of Virtual Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   2.  Problem Statement for Network Virtualization  . . . . . . . . . 5
   3.  Requirements for Network Virtualization . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   4.  Applicability and Use Cases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   5.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
   6.  Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
   7.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9

































Jeong, et al.           Expires January 14, 2011                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft          Network Virtualization PS              July 2010


1.  Introduction

   The main objectives of virtualization are to create multiple logical
   instances of the resources that can coexist, to separate the uses of
   the logical instances, and to simplify the use of the underlying
   resources by abstracting the characteristics and interacting with the
   resources with limited abstracted knowledge.

   The followings list the benefits of virtualization.

   o  Partitioning: Multiple applications or operating systems can be
      simultaneously supported within a single physical resource.
      Multiple physical resources can be consolidated into virtual
      resources on either a scale-up or scale-down architecture.  A
      typical example is to construct a uniform pool by aggregating
      multiple computing resources and to allocate the resources to
      virtual resources in a controlled manner.

   o  Isolation: Virtual resources can be completely isolated from the
      physical resource or other virtual resources in the physical
      resource.  Even though a virtual resource crashes, the others are
      not affected.  Data in one virtual resource do not leak across
      virtual resources and applications can only communicate over
      configured network connections.  Unauthorized accesses to other
      virtual resources are prohibited.

   o  Abstraction: The detailed information of the physical resource can
      be abstracted so that other systems, applications, or users access
      the capabilities of resources by using abstracted interfaces.
      These interfaces can guarantee compatibility for accessing the
      virtual resources and provide an efficient control of the virtual
      resources.

   The virtualization technology has been extensively studied for
   decades from desktop virtualization, application virtualization,
   system virtualization, link virtualization to storage virtualization.
   All the virtualization technologies above have relationship with
   network virtualization technology, but from the simplified view the
   network elements may be seen as systems with links.  Thus, the
   network virtualization would be expected to be realized on the basis
   of traditional virtualization technologies, especially system and
   link virtualization.  The system virtualization is the ability to run
   an entire virtual system with its own guest OS over another OS or
   over a bare-machine.  So, it allows multiple virtual systems with
   heterogeneous guest OSes to run in isolation on the same physical
   system.  Each virtual system has its own set of virtual hardware and
   can be accessed independently.  Thus, each virtual system can
   participate in constructing and providing independent virtual



Jeong, et al.           Expires January 14, 2011                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft          Network Virtualization PS              July 2010


   networks.  The virtual system can utilize consistent, normalized set
   of hardware regardless of the characteristics of physical hardware
   specification.

   The advantages of system virtualization are as follows.  These
   advantages can be applied to network virtualization.

   o  Since several virtual systems share a single set of hardware, it
      is possible to achieve better resource utilization and to lower
      hardware cost.

   o  Secure environment can be provided among virtual systems because
      each system is isolated from the others.

   o  System virtualization can provide normalized set of interfaces and
      make it easier to provision virtual systems.  Also, it support
      seamless migration of virtual systems by setting up a virtual
      system using a pre-existing template and shifting virtual system
      from one physical system to another to balance workloads or
      improve efficiency.

   This document analyzes and discusses the problem space of supporting
   virtual networks in the network infrastructures by using network
   virtualization technology.  Furthermore, some high level requirements
   for realizing network virtualization are investigated and described.

1.1.  Definition of Network Virtualization and Virtual Networks

   Network virtualization is the technology that enables the creation of
   logically isolated network partitions over shared physical network
   infrastructures so that multiple heterogeneous virtual networks can
   simultaneously coexist over the shared infrastructures.  Also,
   network virtualization allows the aggregation of multiple resources
   and makes the aggregated resources appear as a single resource [2].

   A virtual network is a logical partition of a physical or logical
   network and its capability is the same as or subset of the network.
   Also, the virtual network may expand its capability by aggregating
   the capabilities of multiple networks.  From the user's point of
   view, the virtual network can be seen as a non-virtualized network.

   The key components of virtual networks include traditional network
   elements, such as hosts, routers, links, etc.  In addition to them,
   methods for creating and managing the virtual networks are also
   included.  The virtual network management methods create logical
   partitions in the components and connect those partitions in order to
   construct a virtual network.  The virtual network can be connected
   with non-virtualized components.  Users can see the virtual network



Jeong, et al.           Expires January 14, 2011                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft          Network Virtualization PS              July 2010


   as a non-virtualized dedicated network, so they can perform any
   actions such as deploy new services, network architectures, etc. as
   if they own the dedicated network.

1.2.  Effectiveness of Virtual Networks

   Virtual networks can be used for the same purposes as non-virtualized
   networks without interfering the operation of other virtual networks
   while sharing the key components among virtual networks.  Therefore,
   the coexistence of multiple virtual networks is possible.

   The virtual networks over physical infrastructure are completely
   isolated each other, so different virtual networks may use different
   network technologies, for example, different protocols and packet
   formats or even defining a new layering architecture can be supported
   on each virtual network without interfering the operation of other
   virtual networks.  In other words, each virtual network can provide
   the corresponding user group with full network services similar to
   those provided by a traditional non-virtualized network.  From the
   users' perspective, each user accesses a dedicated network
   independently.  Also, network virtualization can reduce the total
   cost by increasing the utilization of resources [1].


2.  Problem Statement for Network Virtualization

   Network virtualization allows multiple heterogeneous virtual networks
   that are isolated and independently manageable to coexist over shared
   physical infrastructures.  Since each virtual network can utilize
   different network architectures, the shared network infrastructure
   may support the architecture of multiple architectures.  For example,
   by utilizing network virtualization technology, different virtual
   networks can provide different end-to-end packet delivery systems and
   may use different protocols and packet formats [1].  This may provide
   a way to de-ossify the current network architectures.

   As discussed in the previous section, network virtualization has
   three typical characteristics, partitioning, isolation, and
   abstraction.  Although the current virtual network technologies, for
   example, VPNs support partitioning and isolation capabilities but the
   supported capabilities may not complete and possibly need more
   improvement.  Similarly, there are other technologies that support
   some of network virtualization characteristics, but these
   technologies are not complete from the view point of virtual network
   and network virtualization definition.

   The followings investigate the problem spaces for network
   virtualization.



Jeong, et al.           Expires January 14, 2011                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft          Network Virtualization PS              July 2010


   o  Performance: Virtualization is typically realized by adopting
      virtualization layer in the physical resources, so network
      virtualization also can require virtualization layer for creating
      and managing the virtual networks.  Therefore, the performance of
      the virtual networks may not be as good as the non-virtualized
      network and how to reduce the performance degradation is a
      challenge.

   o  Isolation: Multiple virtual networks coexist over the key
      components of virtual networks, so isolation among the virtual
      networks is the challenge.  The isolation includes various aspects
      such as security isolation, performance isolation, etc.  Since
      multiple virtual networks exist over shared physical
      infrastructures, unexpected behavior of a virtual network may
      affect other coexisting services and may cause security problems,
      performance degradation of other services, and so on.  How to
      guarantee isolation of virtual networks by creating isolated
      virtual network environments between users belonging to separate
      groups is a key challenge.

   o  Flexibility: After creating a virtual network based on user's
      requirements, the requirements can be changed.  In that case, it
      will be necessary to modify the capability of the virtual network.
      The update of virtual network's capability may be done dynamically
      and without interrupting the operation of the current virtual
      network.

   o  Scalability: How many virtual networks can be simultaneously
      existed or how many key components can be connected and managed
      are problems.

   o  Aggregation: One of features of network virtualization is to offer
      logical resources encompassing the physical capability of the
      resources by aggregating multiple resources into single resource.
      Supporting the aggregation is a one of the challenges.

   o  Management: Since each virtual network can be separately
      configured and managed, how to provide independent management
      functions for each virtual network is a challenge.  Also, the
      management functions need to collaborate with the management for
      the physical infrastructures.


3.  Requirements for Network Virtualization

   The following list discusses high level requirements, which need to
   be supported by the network to provide network virtualization
   features.



Jeong, et al.           Expires January 14, 2011                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft          Network Virtualization PS              July 2010


   o  Network virtualization should simulataneously support the multiple
      virtual networks over shared network infrastructures.

   o  network virtualization should provide methods to aggregatie
      multiple resources into single logical resource.

   o  Virtual networks can be multiplexed over a shared network
      infrastructure.  However, this can be liable to restrict network
      performance and cause instability due to interference by other
      virtual networks.  The network virtualization should be capable of
      providing the complete isolation among virtual networks.

   o  The virtual network may want to avoid complex physical network
      operations that are fully dependent on the types of network layers
      and equipment vendors.  To disengage the virtual network from the
      complexity of the physical network, the network virtualization
      should be capable of abstracting the physical network information
      and provides the standardized interfaces for resource control to
      the virtual networks.

   o  Since there exist multiple virtual networks in the shared network
      infrastructure, those virtual networks will be managed by
      management systems.  Network virtualization should provide
      standardized interfaces to such management systems in order to
      realize an efficient control of a virtual networks.

   o  When combined with programmability feature in network elements,
      users of virtual networks can program the network elements on any
      layers from physical layer to application layer according to
      users' requirements.  It can realize virtual networks with
      programmable network elements, so that users can perform
      experimentation on any layers.Therefore, virtual networks may be
      capable of supporting programmability.

   o  It is known that some of emerging network services will require
      extremely high bandwidth, for example more than hundreds Gbps with
      low latency and jitter.  However, it may not be possible to
      satisfy such high end requirements with the current network and
      transport layer technologies.  Thus, each virtual network may be
      capable of directly utilizing lower-layer transmission
      technologies in order to guarantee required bandwidth for
      services.

   o  Since today's network application traffic tends to indicate more
      and more unpredictable variations, each virtual network would
      require methods to adjust available bandwidth according to traffic
      demand changes.




Jeong, et al.           Expires January 14, 2011                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft          Network Virtualization PS              July 2010


   o  Users may dynamically request new capability that is not supported
      by the current virtual network configuration.  Thus, the network
      virtualization should offer a method that the virtual networks are
      capable of easily and rapidly creating their own network
      topologies and dynamically reconfiguring them.

   o  To support diverse network services, the virtual network should
      retain the capability of customizing network control and
      operations independent from those in the physical network or other
      virtual networks.

   o  Considering the utility of customers, each virtual network should
      be capable of using physical network resources and constructing a
      network topology.  However, one possible problem is that some
      abnormal virtual networks may occupy most of the resources, which
      deteriorates other virtual network performance due to network
      resource exhaustion.  So, the network virtualization should
      provide the capability to regulate the upper limit of resource
      consumption by each virtual network in order to maintain the
      overall utility and performance.


4.  Applicability and Use Cases

   This section describes the applicability of network virtualization.
   The applicability of network virtualization may be classified into
   two broad categories according to the characteristics of
   virtualization; namely isolation and aggregation [2].

   [Note] This section will be refined in the next version of this
   document.

   From the view point of isolation, network virtualization enables the
   complete isolation between each logical network partition.  Typical
   use case of this category is that it is possible to create new
   business model by separating the conventional Internet service
   provider's role into network provider and service provider.  The
   network provider creates customized logical network partitions
   according to the service providers' requirements, such as network
   bandwidth, the number and functional capability of network elements
   in the logical network partitions, total cost, and so on.  The
   service provider can provide various services and applications for
   users without the burden of building its own network infrastructure.
   Moreover, the service provider can safely test an innovative pilot
   service or application that requires special features of network
   without affecting other existing services.  From the perspective of
   network providers, they can increase the hardware utilization ratio
   and can reduce the operational cost of network infrastructure.  From



Jeong, et al.           Expires January 14, 2011                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft          Network Virtualization PS              July 2010


   the viewpoint of service providers, it is possible to reduce the cost
   for building network infrastructure.  Also, they can utilize the
   flexibility for the creation of network and application services.

   The second applicability is aggregation.  In the computing field, it
   is common to logically aggregate multiple computing resources into a
   single resource in order to support applications or services that
   require very high performance exceeding single resource's capability.
   Building a high performance computing node by clustering many smaller
   nodes would be the typical use case of resource aggregation.  Similar
   to this use case, network virtualization can allow building a logical
   network element whose capability is hard to be supported by a single
   one.  The logical network element can support various functions and
   can easily expand its capability by aggregating multiple network
   elements.


5.  Security Considerations

   TBD


6.  Acknowledgments

   This version of the problem statement reflects the discussion results
   of the following people.  Many thanks to Takashi Kurimoto, Takashi
   Miyamura, Alex Galis for their comments.


7.  Informative References

   [1]  Mosharaf, N. and R. Boutaba, "Network Virtualization: State of
        the Art and Research Challenges", IEEE Communications Magazine ,
        July 2009.

   [2]  Jeong, S. and H. Otsuki, "Framework of Network Virtualization",
        ITU-T Focus Group on Future Networks , January 2010.

   [3]  Mosharaf, N. and R. Boutaba, "A Survey of Network
        Virtualization", Computer Networks , April 2010.











Jeong, et al.           Expires January 14, 2011                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft          Network Virtualization PS              July 2010


Authors' Addresses

   Sangjin Jeong
   ETRI
   138 Gajeongno, Yuseong
   Daejeon,   305-700
   Korea

   Phone: +82 42 860 1877
   Email: sjjeong@etri.re.kr


   Myung-Ki Shin
   ETRI
   138 Gajeongno, Yuseong
   Daejeon,   305-700
   Korea

   Phone: +82 42 860 4847
   Email: mkshin@etri.re.kr


   Takashi Egawa
   NEC Corporation
   1753 Shimonumabe
   Nakahara-Ku, Kawasaki
   Kanagawa,   211-8666
   Japan

   Phone: +81 44 431 7770
   Email: t-egawa@ct.jp.nec.com


   Hideki Otsuki
   NiCT
   4-2-1 Nukui-Kitamachi
   Koganei
   Tokyo,   184-8795
   Japan

   Phone: +81 42 327 6931
   Email: hideki.otsuki@nict.go.jp









Jeong, et al.           Expires January 14, 2011               [Page 10]


