


IETF                                                           A. Cooper
Internet-Draft                                    Center for Democracy &
Intended status: Informational                                Technology
Expires: August 17, 2010                               February 13, 2010


                          IETF Privacy Policy
                     draft-cooper-privacy-policy-00

Abstract

   This document proposes to serve as the IETF's privacy policy.  This
   policy applies to data collected in conjunction with IETF activities
   and on public IETF-related web sites.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 17, 2010.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect



Cooper                   Expires August 17, 2010                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft             IETF Privacy Policy             February 2010


   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the BSD License.


1.  Introduction

   In keeping with the goals and objectives of this standards body, the
   IETF is committed to the highest degree of respect for the privacy of
   IETF participants and site visitors.  This policy applies to data
   collected in conjunction with IETF activities, whether online or in
   person, and on public web sites hosted on ietf.org, iab.org,
   iesg.org, rfc-editor.org, and irtf.org (known hereafter as "IETF-
   related web sites").  This policy explains how the IETF applies the
   Fair Information Practices -- a widely accepted set of privacy
   principles [1] -- to the data we collect.

   [Note: This document is meant to be a strawman proposal for a public-
   facing privacy policy that any visitor to IETF-related web sites can
   read and understand.  The policies described are a combination of
   observations about the data the IETF collects, language from the ISOC
   privacy policy, and examples of good policies from other
   organizations.  The document was drafted without direct knowledge of
   the server log practices on ietf.org and the other domains, but
   instead based on common web server practices.  The text of this
   document should be modified to reflect actual IETF practices should
   they differ from common practices.

   The hope is that this document will generate discussion within the
   community and attention from those who know more about what the
   IETF's privacy practices actually are.  It is not clear that the RFC
   model is the best model for a document like this, but hopefully by
   starting this way we can generate a good discussion.]


2.  Information that is automatically collected on IETF-related web
    sites

   Several different kinds of information are automatically collected
   when you visit IETF-related web sites:

   o  Internet Protocol (IP) address: The address of your computer on
      the Internet.  Your IP address gets transmitted whenever you
      communicate online or visit web sites so that the content you are
      accessing can be delivered to you.





Cooper                   Expires August 17, 2010                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft             IETF Privacy Policy             February 2010


   o  Browser type and operating system: The name and version number of
      your web browser (for example, Internet Explorer 7 or Firefox
      3.5.3) and operating system (for example, Windows XP or Mac OS X).

   o  Cookie: A piece of information that your browser can record after
      visiting a web site.  We use cookies on www.ietf.org,
      tools.ietf.org, and [fill in other subdomains as appropriate].

   o  URL of the page that directed you to our site: If you arrive at an
      IETF-related web site through a link on another web site -- a
      search engine or a blog, for example -- our web servers will
      record the address of the web page that referred you to our site.
      If you arrive at our web site by clicking on a search result
      returned by a search engine, our servers may (depending on the
      search engine) record the search terms that you used.

   o  Whether you have bookmarked our web site(s) on your web browser.
      This information is only reported for Internet Explorer users.
      [Note: This is true for other organizations' privacy policies, but
      not sure if it belongs here.]

   o  The web page(s) within our site(s) that you visit, the web page
      you visit first on one of our sites (the entry page), and the web
      page you visit last on one of our sites (the exit page)

   o  Bandwidth used: The total number of bytes downloaded when you
      browse one of our sites

   o  Amount of time you spend during a visit to one of our sites

   o  Time and date of your site visit

   [Note: Is the list above correct?  What else gets collected
   automatically?]

   This individualized, non-aggregated data is stored in log files that
   we will delete every [X] days.  We may occasionally examine these
   individualized log files for troubleshooting and security purposes.
   [Note: Is this true?  What else is done with this data?]

   We use persistent cookies on www.ietf.org to record your preference
   about how you like to view the web site.  These cookies have a [fill
   in expiration period] lifetime.  We use persistent cookies on
   tools.ietf.org for [fill in purposes].  These cookies have a [fill in
   expiration period] lifetime.






Cooper                   Expires August 17, 2010                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft             IETF Privacy Policy             February 2010


3.  Information you can choose to share with the IETF

   You can choose to share information with the IETF in a number of
   ways:

   Searching on IETF-related web sites:
   The search terms you enter on IETF-related web sites are used only to
   provide you with search results.

   Making an IETF Contribution:
   As defined in [2], an "IETF Contribution" is any submission to the
   IETF intended by the contributor for publication as all or part of an
   Internet-Draft or RFC (with limited exceptions) and any statement
   made within the context of an IETF activity.  Such statements include
   oral statements in IETF sessions, as well as written and electronic
   communications made at any time or place which are addressed to the
   IETF.  All IETF Contributions are public information that we may
   indefinitely retain and post publicly.

   Signing up for a mailing list:
   When you sign up for an IETF mailing list, you must provide an email
   address, and you may optionally provide your name and a password.  We
   use this information only to deliver list mail to you and to
   administer the mailing lists.

   Registering to attend a meeting or social event:
   When you register to attend an IETF meeting or an IETF social event,
   we ask you for certain information about yourself, commonly including
   your name, affiliation, address, email address, phone number, t-shirt
   size, dietary restrictions, profile URL, and credit card information.
   We use this information to register you for the meeting and to
   process your payment.  [Note: What else is this information used for?
   With whom is it shared?  Is it appropriate to include the social
   event registration in this item, or is that information sometimes
   collected and processed by the sponsor?]

   Attending a meeting:
   When you attend a working group session at an IETF meeting, you are
   required to provide your name and email address on a form known as a
   "blue sheet" (which often but not always is blue).  The blue sheets
   serve as the official attendance record for working group sessions,
   and such records are required by [3] in support of an open Internet
   standards process.  To the extent [3] is revised to require practices
   in conflict with this privacy policy, this policy must be revised at
   the same time as [3].  We may also from time to time experiment with
   other ways of collecting attendance information (such as the RFID
   experiment conducted at IETF 76 [4]).  The policies surrounding the
   data collection and use involved in these experiments will always be



Cooper                   Expires August 17, 2010                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft             IETF Privacy Policy             February 2010


   announced well in advance and linked from this policy.

   Submitting or updating an Intellectual Property Rights (IPR)
   disclosure:
   When you submit or update an IPR disclosure (per [2]), we ask you for
   certain information about yourself, including your name, address,
   telephone number, and email address.  We use this information only as
   described in [2] to handle IPR issues.

   Using IETF tools:
   The IETF hosts several tools [5] on its web site -- including
   rfcdiff, idnits, and idspell -- that take Internet-Drafts or
   potential Internet-Drafts as input.  We use these inputs only for the
   purpose of providing the tools.

   [Note: What is missing from this list?]

   Working group chairs, IESG members, and IAB members have many
   additional opportunities to share information with the IETF which are
   not covered by this policy.  [Note: Should those be documented here
   and covered by this policy?  Or should they be documented elsewhere
   and linked from here?]


4.  Data disclosure

   The IETF does not sell, rent, or exchange any information that we
   collect about our participants or site visitors.  However, we will
   disclose information under the following circumstances:

   All IETF Contributions are public information and are usually
   disclosed at the time the Contributions are made.

   We may disclose to our payment processor [Note: Who is this?] the
   payment information you provide to us when you register to attend an
   IETF meeting in order to process your payment.

   For all of the information we retain, we will comply with lawful
   requests from law enforcement and civil litigants that follow
   appropriate legal standards and procedures.  If the law or a lawful
   order requires us to disclose information about your activities, we
   will (unless prohibited by law from doing so) attempt to contact you
   prior to such disclosure, and attempt to disclose to you the fact
   that we have submitted information to legal authorities or civil
   litigants (including disclosing which information we have submitted).
   We will object to disclosure requests that we believe are improper.





Cooper                   Expires August 17, 2010                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft             IETF Privacy Policy             February 2010


5.  Data retention

   All log files of automatically collected data about our site visitors
   are deleted every [X] days.  [Note: Some information about log file
   back-ups and the retention of search terms should be inserted here.]
   Aggregated data about visitors to our web site which cannot be linked
   back to individual visitors may be retained permanently.

   Meeting registration information other than credit card information
   is permanently retained.  Credit card processing records are retained
   for 18 months.  [Note: This is how the policy appears based on the
   IETF Trust Records Retention and Management Policy.]

   Blue sheets are permanently retained.

   IPR Disclosures are permanently retained.

   IETF Tools inputs are [fill in the correct policy].

   More information about IETF data retention policies can be found in
   the IETF Trust Records Retention Policy [6].


6.  Security Considerations

   Online transactions of a sensitive nature, such as those involving
   credit card numbers, are protected by secure browser connections.
   Our site supports the use of secure socket layer (SSL) encryption
   technology to encrypt your information prior to transmission over the
   Internet.

   [Note: This is derived from ISOC's policy.  Does the IETF have the
   same policy?  Is there more to say here?]


7.  Changes to the privacy policy

   If we make substantial changes to this privacy policy, we will post a
   prominent notification on www.ietf.org and we will send a notice to
   the IETF-Announce mailing list about the changes.  You can sign up
   for that mailing list at [7].


8.  Your privacy questions

   Feel free to contact us at [insert appropriate email address] to ask
   us to disclose to you any information we have about you.  You have
   the right to correct, update, or delete information that we may have



Cooper                   Expires August 17, 2010                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft             IETF Privacy Policy             February 2010


   about you, except to the extent that such alteration or deletion
   would be contrary to the purpose and terms of [2] or [3].

   If you have any concerns about this policy, please contact [insert
   appropriate email address].

   [Note: This is derived from CDT's privacy policy and is offered as an
   example of a policy that the IETF could have.]


9.  IANA Considerations

   This document makes no request of IANA.


10.  Acknowledgements

   I would like to thank Fred Baker and John Morris for their reviews of
   this document.


11.  Informative References

   [1]  Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, "OECD
        Guidelines on the Protection of Privacy and Transborder Flows of
        Personal Data",  http://www.oecd.org/document/18/
        0,3343,en_2649_34255_1815186_1_1_1_1,00.html, 1980.

   [2]  Bradner, S., "Intellectual Property Rights in IETF Technology",
        BCP 79, RFC 3979, March 2005.

   [3]  Bradner, S., "IETF Working Group Guidelines and Procedures",
        BCP 25, RFC 2418, September 1998.

   [4]  Internet Engineering Task Force, "RFID Tagging Experiment at
        IETF 76",  http://www.ietf.org/EbluesheetInformation.html, 2009.

   [5]  Internet Engineering Task Force, "IETF Tools",
         http://tools.ietf.org/tools/, 2009.

   [6]  IETF Trust, "IETF Trust Records Retention and Management
        Policy",  http://trustee.ietf.org/docs/
        IETF_Trust_Records_Retention_Policy_(Complete_Final).pdf, 2007.

   [7]  Internet Engineering Task Force, "IETF-Announce Info Page",
         https://www.ietf.org/mailman/listinfo/IETF-Announce.





Cooper                   Expires August 17, 2010                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft             IETF Privacy Policy             February 2010


Author's Address

   Alissa Cooper
   Center for Democracy & Technology
   1634 I Street NW, Suite 1100
   Washington, DC
   USA

   Email: acooper@cdt.org










































Cooper                   Expires August 17, 2010                [Page 8]


