


ABFAB                                                           A. Perez
Internet-Draft                                      University of Murcia
Intended status: Informational                                J. Howlett
Expires: September 6, 2012                                         Janet
                                                           March 5, 2012


          Options for Abfab-based Kerberos pre-authentication
             draft-perez-abfab-kerberos-preauth-options-00

Abstract

   Kerberos is widely used for authentication within organisations.  It
   is not, however, commonly used for authentication between domains or
   realms ("cross-realm operation").  Abfab is a new architecture, based
   on the AAA framework, that provides a mechanism for federating
   authentication between realms.

   AAA protocols are already widely used for federating authentication
   for network access scenarios today.  It has been proposed that Abfab
   could be used to provide a mechanism yielding cross-realm
   functionality for Kerberos.  This document discusses two alternative
   approaches with the aim of informing and facilitating discussion.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 6, 2012.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2012 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents



Perez & Howlett         Expires September 6, 2012               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft        Abfab-based Kerberos pre-auth           March 2012


   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Kerberos pre-authentication using GSS-API and an EAP
       mechanism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
     2.1.  EAP pre-authentication  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
     2.2.  GSS-API pre-authentication  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   3.  Kerberos pre-authentication using an EAP mechanism  . . . . . . 5
   4.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   5.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5

































Perez & Howlett         Expires September 6, 2012               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft        Abfab-based Kerberos pre-auth           March 2012


1.  Introduction

   Kerberos [RFC4120] is a widely deployed system for authentication,
   being integrated in multiple operating systems and network
   applications.  However, Kerberos is typically only used to manage
   authentication within the scope of a single realm (typically
   corresponding to a single organisation).  While often supported by
   implementations, Kerberos cross-realm operation is used relatively
   infrequently.

   The Abfab architecture [I-D.lear-abfab-arch] describes an access
   management model that enables the application of federated identity
   within a broad range of use cases.  This is achieved by building on
   proven technologies and widely deployed infrastructures.  Some of
   these use cases are described in [I-D.ietf-abfab-usecases].

   This draft considers two new alternative approaches to typical
   Kerberos cross-realm operation that build on the Abfab architecture.
   This follows previous discussion about the respective advantages and
   disadvantages of both approaches.

   The goal of this document is to describe these approaches in the
   expectation that this will facilitate and inform further discussion.

2.  Kerberos pre-authentication using GSS-API and an EAP mechanism

   The following figure depicts this approach and its interfaces.  Two
   organisations, the user organisation and the resource organisation,
   are connected using a AAA infrastructure.  The user organization has
   a Kerberos infrastructure deployed to authenticate access to its
   local services, which is also connected to the AAA infrastructure.
   Finally, the end user (EU) interacts with the user organisation's KDC
   to obtain a TGT using the Kerberos protocol.

   To do: figure

   The KDC acts as an EAP authenticator between the EAP peer (end user)
   and the EAP server (user organization AAA server).  Using the
   Kerberos pre-authentication interface, EAP frames are exchanged
   between these actors until the authentication process is completed.
   If the authentication is sucessful, the end user is provided with the
   a TGT as usual.

   Two alternative approaches for binding EAP frames to this exchange
   have been proposed.






Perez & Howlett         Expires September 6, 2012               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft        Abfab-based Kerberos pre-auth           March 2012


2.1.  EAP pre-authentication

   In this approach, Kerberos itself becomes an EAP lower-layer.  The
   most straightforward way to approach this is to define a new EAP-
   based FAST factor.  This FAST factor transports EAP packets between
   the EU and the KDC, following the multi round-trip procedure
   described in RFC6113 [RFC6113] (i.e. returning
   MORE_PREAUTH_DATA_REQUIRED error code).

   This alternative is very simple, as EAP interfaces directly with
   Kerberos, making the architecture more straightforward.  It requires
   the definition of the FAST factor in such a way that implements
   RFC4137 [RFC4137], which defines the interface between EAP and the
   EAP lower-layer.

2.2.  GSS-API pre-authentication

   In this alternative GSS-API is used by the Kerberos client and the
   KDC to perform pre-authentication.  Hence, a pre-authentication
   mechanism based on the transport of GSS-API tokens is required, such
   as that proposed by [I-D.perez-krb-wg-gss-preauth].  Such a pre-
   authentication mechanism provides a generic framework where any GSS-
   API mechanism can be executed, without further modification to the
   Kerberos infrastructure.

   This alternative introduces an additional layer, the GSS-API, between
   EAP and Kerberos.  The addition of this layer implies a higher
   complexity of the model, but it also comes with several advantages.
   The first one is the flexibility it provides.  Defining a generic
   GSS-preauth not only allows performing EAP pre-authentication, but it
   can be used for any other existing GSS mechanism, and for those to be
   defined in the future.  This implies that using this alternative
   would serve to integrate Kerberos into any existing federation, not
   only those based on AAA, just by using a different GSS mechanism
   instead of GSS-EAP.

   Besides, from an design point of view, this alternative takes
   advantage of the definition and implementation efforts put on the
   GSS-EAP mechanism of the ABFAB WG and the Moonshot project.  That
   mechanism has already carefully implemented the interfaces defined
   for an EAP lower-layer.

   Finally, as discussed in [I-D.perez-krb-wg-gss-preauth], using this
   proposal may simplify the generation of the PA-PX-COOKIE, as instead
   of serializing the whole EAP state machine on each round-trip, it
   could be possible to exchange GSS-API context handlers.





Perez & Howlett         Expires September 6, 2012               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft        Abfab-based Kerberos pre-auth           March 2012


3.  Kerberos pre-authentication using an EAP mechanism

4.  Security Considerations

   To do

5.  Informative References

   [I-D.lear-abfab-arch]           Howlett, J., Hartman, S., Tschofenig,
                                   H., and E. Lear, "Application
                                   Bridging for Federated Access Beyond
                                   Web (ABFAB) Architecture",
                                   draft-lear-abfab-arch-02 (work in
                                   progress), March 2011.

   [I-D.ietf-abfab-usecases]       Smith, R., "Application Bridging for
                                   Federated Access Beyond web (ABFAB)
                                   Use Cases",
                                   draft-ietf-abfab-usecases-01 (work in
                                   progress), July 2011.

   [I-D.perez-krb-wg-gss-preauth]  Perez-Mendez, A., Pereniguez-Garcia,
                                   F., Lopez-Millan, G., and R. Lopez,
                                   "GSS-API pre-authentication for
                                   Kerberos",
                                   draft-perez-krb-wg-gss-preauth-01
                                   (work in progress), January 2012.

   [RFC4120]                       Neuman, C., Yu, T., Hartman, S., and
                                   K. Raeburn, "The Kerberos Network
                                   Authentication Service (V5)",
                                   RFC 4120, July 2005.

   [RFC4137]                       Vollbrecht, J., Eronen, P., Petroni,
                                   N., and Y. Ohba, "State Machines for
                                   Extensible Authentication Protocol
                                   (EAP) Peer and Authenticator",
                                   RFC 4137, August 2005.

   [RFC6113]                       Hartman, S. and L. Zhu, "A
                                   Generalized Framework for Kerberos
                                   Pre-Authentication", RFC 6113,
                                   April 2011.








Perez & Howlett         Expires September 6, 2012               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft        Abfab-based Kerberos pre-auth           March 2012


Authors' Addresses

   Alejandro Perez Mendez
   University of Murcia

   EMail: alex@um.es


   Josh Howlett
   Janet

   EMail: josh.howlett@ja.net







































Perez & Howlett         Expires September 6, 2012               [Page 6]

