A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3283

        Title:      Guide to Internet Calendaring
        Author(s):  B. Mahoney, G. Babics, A. Taler
        Status:     Informational
        Date:       June 2002
        Mailbox:    bobmah@mit.edu, georgeb@steltor.com,
                    alex@0--0.org 
        Pages:      16
        Characters: 31768
        Updates/Obsoletes/SeeAlso:  None

        I-D Tag:    draft-ietf-calsch-inetcal-guide-02.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3283.txt


This document describes the various Internet calendaring and
scheduling standards and works in progress, and the relationships
between them.  Its intent is to provide a context for these
documents, assist in their understanding, and potentially aid in the
design of standards-based calendaring and scheduling systems.  The
standards addressed are RFC 2445 (iCalendar), RFC 2446 (iTIP), and
RFC 2447 (iMIP).  The work in progress addressed is "Calendar Access
Protocol" (CAP).  This document also describes issues and problems
that are not solved by these protocols, and that could be targets for
future work.

This document is a product of the Calendaring and Scheduling Working
Group of the IETF.

This memo provides information for the Internet community.  It does
not specify an Internet standard of any kind.  Distribution of this
memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.