


6man Working Group                                           T. Macaulay
Internet-Draft                                               Bell Canada
Intended status: Standards Track                       February 14, 2012
Expires: August 17, 2012


                          IPv6 packet staining
                  draft-macaulay-6man-packet-stain-00

Abstract

   This document specifies the application of security staining on an
   IPv6 datagrams and the minimum requirements for IPv6 nodes staining
   flows, IPv6 nodes forwarding stained packets and interpreting stains
   on flows.

   The usage of the packet staining destination option enables proactive
   delivery of security intelligence to IPv6 nodes such as firewalls and
   intrusion prevention systems, and end-points such servers,
   workstations, mobile and smart devices and an infinite array of as-
   yet-to-be-invented sensors and controllers.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 17, 2012.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2012 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents



Macaulay                 Expires August 17, 2012                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft            IPv6 Packet Staining             February 2012


   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Conventions used in this document  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   3.  Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     3.1.  Packet Staining Benefits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     3.2.  Implementation and support models  . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     3.3.  Use cases  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   4.  Requirements for staining IPv6 packets . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   5.  Packet Stain Destination Option (PSDO) . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   6.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   7.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   8.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   9.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10





























Macaulay                 Expires August 17, 2012                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft            IPv6 Packet Staining             February 2012


1.  Introduction

   From the viewpoint of the network layer, a flow is a sequence of
   packets sent from a particular source to a particular unicast,
   anycast, or multicast destination.  From an upper layer viewpoint, a
   flow could consist of all packets in one direction of a specific
   transport connection or media stream.  However, a flow is not
   necessarily 1:1 mapped to a transport connection.

   Traditionally, flow classifiers have been based on the 5-tuple of the
   source and destination addresses, ports, and the transport protocol
   type.  However, as the growth of internetworked devices continues
   under IPv6, security issues associated with the reputation of the
   source of flows are becoming a critical criterion associated with the
   trust of the data payloads and the security of the destination end-
   points and the networks on which they reside.

   The usage of security reputational intelligence associated with the
   source address field and possibly the port and protocol [REF1]
   enables packet-by-packet IPv6 security classification, where the IPv6
   header extensions in the form of Destination Options may be used to
   stain each packet with security reputation information such that the
   network routing is unaffected, but intermediate security nodes and
   endpoint devices can apply policy decisions about incoming
   information flows without the requirement to assemble and treat
   payloads at higher levels of the stack.

   IPv6 packet staining support consists of labeling datagrams with
   security reputation information through the addition of an IPv6
   destination option in the packet header by packet manipulation
   devices (PMDs) in the carrier or enterprise network.  This
   destination option may be read by in-line security nodes upstream
   from the packet destination, as well as by the destination nodes
   themselves.


2.  Conventions used in this document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].


3.  Background

   Internet based threats in the form of both malicious software and the
   agents that control this software (organized crime, spys,
   hackitivits) have surpassed the abilities of signature-based security



Macaulay                 Expires August 17, 2012                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft            IPv6 Packet Staining             February 2012


   systems; whether they be on the enterprise perimeter, within the
   corporate network, on the endpoint point or in-the-cloud (internet-
   based service).  Additionally, the sensitivity of IP network
   continues to grow as new generation of smart devices is appearing on
   the networks in the form of broadband mobile devices, legacy
   industrial control devices, and very low-power sensors.  This diverse
   collections of IP-based assets is coming to be known as the Internet
   of Things (IOT).

   In response to the accelerating threats, the security vendor
   community have integrated their products with proprietary forms of
   security reputation intelligence.  This intelligence is about IP
   addresses and domains which have been observed engaged in attack-
   behaviours such as inappropriate messaging and traffic volumes,
   domain management, Botnet command-and-control channel exchanges and
   other indicators of either compromise or malicious intent.  [REF 1]
   IP address may also end up on a security reputation list if they are
   identified as compromised through vendor-specific signature-based
   processes.  Security reputation intelligence from vendors is
   typically made available to perimeter and end-point products through
   proprietary, internet-based queries to vendor information bases.

   This system of using proactive, security reputation intelligence has
   many benefits, but also several weakness and scaling challenges.
   Specifically, existing intelligence systems are:
   1.  subject to direct attack from the internet on distribution
       points, for instance
   2.  are proprietary to vendor devices
   3.  require fat-clients consuming both bandwidth and CPU, and
   4.  introduces flow latency while queries are sent, received and
       processed
   5.  introduces intelligence latency as reputation lists will be
       inevitably cached and only periodically refreshed given the
       number and range of vendor-specific processing elements

3.1.  Packet Staining Benefits

   In contrast to the challenges of current security reputation
   intelligence systems, packet staining has the following strengths
   1.  packet staining can occur transparently in the network,
       presenting no attack surface
   2.  packet staining uses standardized, public domain IPv6
       capabilities
   3.  security rules can be easily applied in hardware or firmware
   4.  reading packet stains introduces little to no latency
   5.  near-real-time threat intelligence distribution systems can be
       implemented can be implemented out of band in PMDs using a
       standardized packet staining method allowing multiple



Macaulay                 Expires August 17, 2012                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft            IPv6 Packet Staining             February 2012


       intelligence sources (vendor sources) to be aggregated and
       applied in an agnostic (cross-vendor) manner.

3.2.  Implementation and support models

   Packet staining may be accomplished by different entities including
   carriers, enterprises and third-party value-added service providers.

   Carriers or service providers may elect to implement staining centres
   at strategic locations in the network to provide value-added services
   on a subscription basis.  Under this model, subscribers to a security
   staining service would see their traffic directed through a staining
   centre where Destination Options are added to the IPv6 headers and
   IPv4 traffic is encapsulated within IPv6 tunnels, with stained
   headers.

   Carriers or service providers may elect to stain all IPv6 traffic
   entering their network, and allow subscribers to process the stains
   at their own discretion.

   If such upstream, network-based staining services are inappropriate
   or unavailable, Enterprise data centre managers / cloud computing
   service providers may elect to deploy IPv6 staining at the perimeter
   into the internal network, tunnelling all IPv4 traffic, and allow
   data centre/cloud service users to process stains at their
   discretion.

   Enterprise may wish to deploy IPv6 on internal networks, and stain
   all internal traffic whereby security nodes and end-points may apply
   corporate security policy related to reputation.

3.3.  Use cases

   The following are example use-cases for a security technique based
   upon a packet staining system.

   Organization Perimeter Use-case Traffic to a subscriber is routed
   through a PMD in the carrier network configured to stain (apply
   Destination Options extensions) all packets to the subscriber (TM)s
   IP-range, which have entries in the threat intelligence information
   base.  The PMD accesses the information base from a locally cached
   file or other method not defined in this draft.  Packets from sources
   not in the information base pass through the PDM unchanged.  Packets
   from sources in the information base have a Destinations Option added
   to the datagram header.  The Destination Options contains reputation
   from the information base.  The format of the destination option is
   discussed later in this draft.  IPv6 perimeter devices such as
   firewalls, web proxies or security routers on the perimeter of the



Macaulay                 Expires August 17, 2012                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft            IPv6 Packet Staining             February 2012


   subscriber network look for Destination Options on incoming packets
   with reputation stains.  If a stain is found, the perimeter device
   applies the organization policy associated with the reputation
   indicated by the stain.  For instance, drop the packet, quarantine
   the packet, issue alarms, or pass the packets and associated flow to
   specially hardened extra-net authentication systems, or do nothing.

   IPv4 support Use-case" IPv4 header fields and options are not
   suitable for packet staining; however, there is a clear security
   benefit to supporting IPv4 flows.  IPv4 traffic to a subscriber is
   routed through a PMD in the carrier network configured to encapsulate
   the IPv4 traffic in an IPv6 tunnel.  The PMD applies a stain
   (Destination Options extension) to the IPv6 tunnel as per the
   Perimeter Use-case above.  Subscriber perimeter devices such as
   firewalls, web proxies or security routers are configured to support
   both native IPv6 flows and IPv6 tunnels contain legacy IPv4 flows.
   Perimeter devices look for Destination Options on incoming IPv6
   packets with reputation stains.  If a stain is found, the perimeter
   device applies the organization policy associated with the reputation
   indicated by the stain to the IPv4 packet within the IPv6 tunnel.  In
   this manner IPv4 support may be transparent to end-users and
   applications.

   IPv6 end-point use-case" IPv6 end-points may make use of reputation
   stains by processing Destination Options before engaging in any
   application level processing.  In the case of certain classes of
   smart device, remote and mobile sensors, reputation stains may be a
   critical form of security when other mitigations such as signature
   bases and firewalls are too power and processor intensive to support.

   URL-specific stains" it is a common occurrence to see large public
   content portals with millions of users sharing dozens of addresses.
   Frequently, malicious content will be loaded to such sites.  This
   content represents a very small fraction of the otherwise legitimate
   content on the site, which may be under the direct control of
   entirely separate entities .  Degrading the reputation of IP
   addresses used by these large portals based on a very small amount of
   content is problematic.  For such sites, reputation stains should
   have the ability to include the URL of malicious content, such that
   the reputation of the only specific portions of these large portals
   is degraded according to threat evidence, rather than the entire IP
   address, CIDR block, ASN or domain name.


4.  Requirements for staining IPv6 packets






Macaulay                 Expires August 17, 2012                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft            IPv6 Packet Staining             February 2012


   1.  The default behaviour of a security node MUST be to leave a
       packet unchanged (apply no stain).
   2.  Reputation stains may be inserted or overwritten by security
       nodes in the path.
   3.  Reputation stains may not be applied by the sender/source of the
       packet.
   4.  The reputation staining mechanism needs to be visible to all
       stain-aware nodes on the path.
   5.  The mechanism needs to be able to traverse nodes that do not
       understand the reputation stains.  This is required to ensure
       that packet-staining can be incrementally deployed over the
       Internet.
   6.  The presence of the reputation staining mechanism should not
       significantly alter the processing of the packet by nodes, unless
       policy is explicitly configured.  This is required to ensure that
       stained packets do not face any undue delays or drops due to a
       badly chosen mechanism.
   7.  A PMD should be able to distinguish a trusted stain from an
       untrusted stain, through mechanism such as digital signatures or
       intrinsic trust among network elements.
   8.  A staining node MAY apply more specific and selective staining
       services according to subscriptions.  Staining nodes SHOULD
       support different reputation taxonomies to support different
       subscribers and/or interoperability with other staining entities,
       and have the ability to stain flows to different subscriber
       sources according to different semantics.


5.  Packet Stain Destination Option (PSDO)

   The Packet Stain Destination Option (PSDO) is a destination option
   that can be included in IPv6 datagrams that are inserted by PMDs in
   order to inform packet staining aware nodes on the path, or
   endpoints, that the PSDO has an alignment requirement of (none).

    0                   1                   2                   3
    0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
                                   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
                                   |  Option Type  | Option Length |
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
   |S|U|                        Stain Data                         |
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+

             Figure 1: Packet Stain Destination Option Layout







Macaulay                 Expires August 17, 2012                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft            IPv6 Packet Staining             February 2012


   Option Type

      8-bit identifier of the type of option. The option identifier
      for the reputation stain option will be allocated by the IANA.

   Option Length

      8-bit unsigned integer.  The length of the option (excluding
      the Option Type and Option Length fields).

   S Bit

      When this bit is set, the reputation stain option has been signed.

   U Bit

      When this bit is set, the reputation stain option contains a
      malicious URL.

   Stain Data

      Contains the staining data.



6.  Acknowledgements

   The author wishes to achknowledge the guidance and support of Suresh
   Krishnan from Ericsson's Montreal lab.  The author also wishes to
   credit Chris Mac-Stoker from NIKSUN for his substantial contributions
   to the early stages of the packet staining concept.


7.  Security Considerations

   Some implementation may elect to no apply digital signature to
   reputation stains in the Destination Option, in which case the stain
   is not protected in any way, even if IPsec authentication [RFC4302]
   is in use.  Therefore an unsigned reputation stain can be forged by
   an on-path attacker.  Implementers are advised that any en-route
   change to an unsigned security reputation stain value is
   undetectable.  Therefore packet staining use the Destination Options
   extension without digital signatures requires intrinsic trust among
   the network elements and the PMD, and the destination node or
   intervening security nodes such as firewalls or IDS services.  For
   this reason, receiving nodes MAY need to take account of the network
   from which the stained packet was received.  For instance, a multi-
   homed organization may have some service providers with staining



Macaulay                 Expires August 17, 2012                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft            IPv6 Packet Staining             February 2012


   services and others that do not.  A receiving node SHOULD be able to
   distinguish which source from which stains are expected.  A receiving
   node SHOULD by default ignore any reputation stains from sources
   (networks or devices) that have not been specifically configured as
   trusted.

   The reputation intelligence of IP source addresses, ASNs, CIDR blocks
   and domains is fundamental to the application of reputation stains
   within packet headers.  Such reputation information can be seeded
   from a variety of open and closed sources.  Poorly managed or
   compromised intelligence information bases can result in denial of
   service against legitimate IP addresses, and allow malicious entities
   to appear trustworthy.  Intelligence information bases themselves may
   be compromised in a variety of ways; for instance the raw information
   feeds may be corrupted with erroneous information, alternately the
   intelligence reputation algorithms could be flawed in design or
   corrupted such that they generate false reputation scores.  Therefore
   seed intelligence SHOULD be sourced and monitored with demonstratable
   diligence.  Similarly, reputation algorithms should be protected from
   unauthorized change with multi-layered access controls.

   The value of reputation stains will be directly proportional to the
   trustworthiness, reliability and reputation of the intelligence
   source itself.  Operators of security nodes SHOULD have defined and
   auditable methods upon which they select and manage the source of
   reputation intelligence and the packet staining infrastructure
   itself.


8.  IANA Considerations

   This document defines a new IPv6 destination option for carrying
   security reputation packet stains.  IANA is requested to assign a new
   destination option type (TBA1) in the Destination Options registry
   maintained at http://www.iana.org/assignments/ipv6-parameters 1)
   Signed Security Reputation Option, 2) Unsigned Security Reputation
   Option 3) Signed Security Reputation Option with malicious URL 4)
   Unsigned Security Reputation Option with malicious URL The act bits
   for this option need to be 10 and the chg bit needs to be 0.


9.  Normative References

   [REF1]     Macaulay, T., "Upstream Intelligence: anatomy,
              architecture, case studies and use-cases.", Information
              Assurance Newsletter, DOD , Aug to Feburary 2010 to 2011.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate



Macaulay                 Expires August 17, 2012                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft            IPv6 Packet Staining             February 2012


              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC2460]  Deering, S. and R. Hinden, "Internet Protocol, Version 6
              (IPv6) Specification", RFC 2460, December 1998.


Author's Address

   Tyson Macaulay
   Bell Canada
   160 Elgin Floor 5
   Ottawa, Ontario
   Canada

   Email: tyson.macaulay@bell.ca




































Macaulay                 Expires August 17, 2012               [Page 10]

