


6man Working Group                                           T. Macaulay
Internet-Draft                                  2Keys Security Solutions
Intended status: Informational                                D. McMahon
Expires: December 1, 2012                                    Bell Canada
                                                                E. Doron
                                                                 Radware
                                                               P. Jungck
                                                             Cloudshield
                                                            May 30, 2012


          Internet reputation intelligence: Problem Statement
             draft-macaulay-6man-reputation-intelligence-00

Abstract

   This draft represent the initial public discussion of the value of
   proactive, reputation intelligence on the Internet and some of the
   challenges associated with these services that may be partially
   addressed through novel use of IPv6 features and functions.

   This document is intended to outline the concept of Internet
   reputation intelligence, the benefits it brings to network elements
   and endpoints.  This draft also addresses the challenges associated
   with legacy security systems based on threat-signatures, and some of
   the current weaknesses of reputation management systems.

Status of this Memo

   By submitting this Internet-Draft, each author represents that any
   applicable patent or other IPR claims of which he or she is aware
   have been or will be disclosed, and any of which he or she becomes
   aware will be disclosed, in accordance with Section 6 of BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 1, 2012.






Macaulay, et al.        Expires December 1, 2012                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft      Internet reputation intelligence            May 2012


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Conventions used in this document  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   3.  Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     3.1.  Use cases  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   4.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   5.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   6.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     6.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     6.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   Intellectual Property and Copyright Statements . . . . . . . . . . 11






































Macaulay, et al.        Expires December 1, 2012                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft      Internet reputation intelligence            May 2012


1.  Introduction

   Threats on the public Internet in forms such as malware (malicious
   software) and phishing have reached new levels of efficiency and
   effectiveness, where vulnerabilities are routinely discovered and
   exploited faster than vendors can release patches.  Similarly, the
   time between system penetration (when the attack succeeds), and
   exploitation (when the asset is utilized in a manner unauthorized by
   the owner) can be very small.

   This situation is creating a major burden for risk managers.  On the
   business side, increased vulnerabilities and associated system
   exploitations lead to increased regulation and legislative sanctions.
   On the technical side, ever more security tools, products and vendors
   are required to keep even basic IT services "reasonably" secure,
   raising overall costs and complexity.

   Security resources inside organizations are frequently overworked,
   and are often limited to reactive measures.  Enterprises are looking
   towards a variety of service-providers (carriers, ISPs, managed
   security service providers - MSSPs) to provide them with proactive
   capabilities.  Some service providers now create and maintain
   reputation information, and use existing trusted, business
   relationships with organizations to deliver this intelligence through
   novel a variety of means; the challenge becomes the effective and
   efficient delivery of this intelligence.

   IPv6 may offer some useful abilities to deliver reputational
   information in-band, in near-real-time, through the use of features
   such as the flow label or headers extensions.  IPv6 headers may be
   formatted with reputation scores such that network elements or end-
   points could read the reputations and apply organizational security
   policy on inbound or outbound packets and flows.


2.  Conventions used in this document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in .


3.  Background

   Internet based threats in the form of malware and the agents that
   control this software (organized crime, spies, hacktivists) have
   surpassed the abilities of signature-based security systems to remain
   up to date and provide timely mitigations.  Whether they be: on the



Macaulay, et al.        Expires December 1, 2012                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft      Internet reputation intelligence            May 2012


   enterprise perimeter in elements such as firewalls and proxies, in
   elements such as Intrusion Detection Services (IDS) within the
   organizational network, at the endpoint points in the form of anti-
   virus or host-IDS, or as managed services in the form of anti-virus/
   spam "in the cloud", a signature-based system needs supplementary
   support from reputation-based systems.

   Signature-based security systems all rely upon malware being
   detected, isolated, dissected, and templated into unique hash-
   identifiers or regular expression filters, which are then distributed
   far and wide as information-bases containing hundreds of thousands if
   not millions of malware "signatures".  In order to utilize these
   signature bases, perimeter, network or end-point security elements
   must typically assemble data payloads and hash the contents looking
   for matches with the signature base.  Some security systems try to
   enhance or supplement signature-based approach with heuristic-based
   analysis, looking for patterns in network traffic or packet contents
   as indicators of malware or malicious activity.  Signature-based
   systems are highly effective for known malware, but they don't know
   what they don't know.  Meanwhile, heuristic based systems make
   intelligence guesses, but are subject to desensitizing false-
   positives.  All these systems represent resource-intensive
   infrastructure and administration.

   The sensitivity of IP networks continues to grow as a new generation
   of "smart" devices is enabled with Internet Protocol.  These devices
   include those using both fixed line and wireless networks for remote
   operation and networking highly dispersed devices.  The range of
   these devices makes this situation new and exceptional in a security
   context: control devices and sensors represent the interface between
   the logic world of networks and software applications, and the
   physical world where affects are kinetic in nature.  This diverse
   collections of IP-based assets is coming to be known as the Internet
   of Things (IOT).  In response to the accelerating threats and
   elevating consequences associated with incidents, the security vendor
   community and various non-profit entities have developed products and
   services integrated with forms of reputation intelligence.  This
   intelligence enables proactive security controls to supplement
   signature-based and heuristic systems, and better protect logical
   systems.

   Reputation intelligence typically consists of IP addresses and
   domains (associated with IP addresses through DNS), which have been
   observed engaged in either attack or victim-behaviours such as:
   inappropriate messaging and traffic volumes, suspicious domain name
   management, Botnet command-and-control traffic, attempts to send or
   relay malware and other indicators of either malicious intent or
   compromise.[REF 2] IP addresses may also end up on a security



Macaulay, et al.        Expires December 1, 2012                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft      Internet reputation intelligence            May 2012


   reputation list if they are identified as compromised through vendor-
   specific signature-based processes.  The proactive element of the
   reputation intelligence lies in the ability for hosts to be
   forewarned of the reputation of addresses on the Internet.  The
   overall effect is a new layer of security which can be applied
   within, on, or beyond the organizational perimeter.  For instance,
   security managers could configure perimeter access control services
   to escalate authentication based on reputation, or instruct upstream
   service providers or carriers to not route packets below a certain
   reputation to organizational gateways.

   Security reputation intelligence can be derived from a multiple
   sources.  It can come from security vendors or other analytics
   organizations who trace active malware attack-vectors and publish
   them to open and closed subscriber-lists.  Another reputation source
   is security or network-management infrastructure within a carrier or
   service provider network, or vendor security products located on
   customer premises.  In these instances reputation may be learnt
   through analytics aggregated on ambiguous data from many devices
   after attacks.

   At this time, security reputation intelligence from closed and open
   sources is typically made available to perimeter and end-point
   products through both standards-based and proprietary queries to on-
   line information bases.  In many cases, this reputation intelligence
   is distributed over the open Internet and relies on subscriber "pull"
   requests for batched downloads of large or incremental info-bases, or
   individual queries on source IPs attempting to connect to a given
   host.  [REF 3]

   This system of using proactive, security reputation intelligence has
   many benefits, specifically:
   1.  provides an additional layer of security based on empirical
       observations otherwise beyond the visibility of most
       organizations
   2.  is proactive in natures, allowing threats to be managed at the
       network level before the payload is delivered at the application
       level
   3.  facilitates the conservation of application-layer security and
       associated resource (processing, storage, licensing,
       administration, power)
   4.  is flexible, and can be applied at different locations in the
       subscriber infrastructure, from upstream of the perimeter to deep
       in the internal network
   5.  is applicable to a variety of different communications elements
       and end-points, from organizational messaging infrastructure to
       remote, embedded sensors and controllers




Macaulay, et al.        Expires December 1, 2012                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft      Internet reputation intelligence            May 2012


   Conversely, proactive, reputation intelligence has current
   challenges.  Specifically:
   1.  the "pull" distribution model is subject to direct attack/denial
       of service at Internet distribution points
   2.  is often proprietary to vendor products and not interoperable,
       requiring independent administration of elements
   3.  can create network-layer processing overhead on communications
       elements and endpoints
   4.  introduces flow latency while reputation queries are sent,
       received and processed
   5.  introduces intelligence latency as reputation lists will be
       inevitably cached and periodically refreshed by subscribers

3.1.  Use cases

   The following are example use-cases for a security controls based
   upon proactive reputation intelligence systems.

   Cloud-based (Upstream) Use-case: Traffic to a user (a subscriber) of
   reputation intelligence is routed through a proxy-type device off
   premises (in the service-provider "cloud") configured to compare
   source IPs of flows to the reputation intelligence.  The proxy-type
   device applies a policy established by the subscriber.  For instance,
   according to reputation score, drop the packets, quarantine the
   packet for more inspection, issue alarms, or pass the packets and
   associated flows to escalated-authentication systems, or do nothing.

   Perimeter-based (subscriber-premises) Use-case: Security elements on
   the subscriber perimeter or within the DMZ such as firewalls, IDS,
   proxies, DNS, SMTP server and other assets are enabled to compare
   source IPs of flows to reputation intelligence.  The security element
   applies a policy established by the subscriber according to the
   reputation score.  For instance, drop the packets, quarantine the
   packet for more inspection, issue alarms, or pass the packets and
   associated flows to escalated-authentication systems, or do nothing.

   Internal network (subscriber-premises) Use-case: The objective is to
   detect outbound communications to sites with a degraded reputation,
   potentially indicating that the internal device has been compromised.
   Security elements inside the subscriber enterprise such as zone-
   firewalls, routers, IDS, proxies, DNS, SMTP servers and other assets
   are enabled to compare destination IPs of flows to reputation
   intelligence.  For instance, a vulnerable internal device is
   attempting to download a botnet malware payload from a known malware
   drop-site domain (IE, malware.example.com); in response, the internal
   security element may drop the packets, quarantine the packet for more
   inspection, or issue alarms.




Macaulay, et al.        Expires December 1, 2012                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft      Internet reputation intelligence            May 2012


   End-point Use-case: Subscriber end-points, such as desktops, servers,
   phones, physical security (door strikes, cameras), automation and
   control devices, environmental sensors and other elements are enabled
   with reputation intelligence.  These elements compare source or
   destination IPs of flows to reputation intelligence.  The subscriber
   end-point applies a policy established by the subscriber according to
   reputation score and possibly differentiated by the type of end-
   point.  Given that end-points may be very simple or low-power
   devices, using the appropriate intelligence delivery systems may make
   the policy-enforcement options comparably simple; for instance, drop
   the packets.

   Coarse-grade refinement: Organizations which possess independent
   reputation capabilities may choose to also procure upstream or cloud-
   based reputation services, which are used as adjuncts.  For instance,
   an organization operating a global network for internal
   communications supporting thousands of servers and desktops will have
   access to an internal reputation and intelligence base with unique
   reputational insights.  Such organizations may wish to receive
   reputation intelligence from a third party to support further
   processing on the perimeter, the internal network and/or end-points.


4.  Security Considerations

   The creation of a reputation intelligence is complex, and requires
   the ability to collect large volumes of ambiguous network, sensor and
   end-point system information.  This information must then be
   normalized, aggregated, weighted and correlated using sophisticated
   intelligence algorithms.  The first task of collecting information is
   hard, but already accomplished by many carriers, service providers
   and vendors as part of existing operations.  It is the development
   and application of intelligence algorithms to the large, ambiguous
   data sets that creates reputation intelligence and adds novel and
   unique value, and a proactive security potential.

   Reputation intelligence algorithms are necessarily used by all
   suppliers of reputation information to create some sort of relative
   score or degree of positive or negative reputation.  Frequently,
   reputation algorithms are unpublished.  As a result, the quality of
   the intelligence can be difficult to assess and compare.  For
   instance, the following elements could be considered as functions
   within a reputation algorithm that may influence the accuracy of the
   intelligence:
   o  A function to account for large Internet portals with many,
      independent URLs with good reputations, but also some proportion
      of dangerous (bad reputation) URLs sharing the same IP address




Macaulay, et al.        Expires December 1, 2012                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft      Internet reputation intelligence            May 2012


   o  A function to account for the distance in time between the last
      observed suspicious or illicit behavior and the present
   o  A function to account for the reputations of adjacent IP addresses
      or domains
   o  A function to account for the original, per-processed source of
      the intelligence (open source, closed source, domain of control,
      uncontrolled domain)
   o  A function to account for the volume or velocity of suspicious or
      illicit behavior (IE.  High spam rate or low n' slow data
      exfiltration)
   o  A function to account for the duration of suspicious or illicit
      behaviour (IE.  Sustained spam or infrequent beaconing)
   o  A function to account for lifetime of domain to source IP
      associations (IE.  Newly minted domain names or previously un-
      observed/un-assigned addresses
   o  A function to account for the proportion of traffic from this
      source which is benign versus demonstrably illicit
   o  A function to account of the nature of the suspicious or illicit
      behavior (automated port scanning versus malware-drop)
   o  other?

   Even given the assumption that reputation algorithms among suppliers
   of reputation intelligence are somehow comparable, the issue of
   common scales effects interoperation and security management.  For
   instance, reputation scores can be expressed in many manners:
   o  As a positive or negative score above or below a benign score or a
      score for which no reputation information is available
   o  A negative score relative to a completely trusted class of IP
   o  A positive score relative to the least trusted IP addresses
   o  as a quantitative metric
   o  as a qualitative metric

   Some reputation systems will start with un-processed activity logs
   under the direct control of the intelligence supplier but also logs
   submitted from a variety of sources.  The degree to which the input
   sources of intelligence are controlled has a baring on the potential
   resistance of the intelligence to poisoning (injected with mis-
   information to ruin good reputations and make bad reputations appear
   better).  For instance, a (presumably open-source) volunteer-
   maintained form of reputation intelligence may be more prone to
   poisoning than a carefully authenticated, closed-source of reputation
   intelligence.  Similarly, reputation intelligence derived from
   sources physically outside the domain of control of the service
   provider is more susceptible to poisoning than intelligence from
   sources that control physically and logically control the log and
   data sources.

   Finally, under certain circumstances the management or application of



Macaulay, et al.        Expires December 1, 2012                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft      Internet reputation intelligence            May 2012


   reputation intelligence may come with some form of legal or
   regulatory burden.  As a result, the calculation of reputation
   intelligence may need to be distinct from the delivery of reputation
   intelligence and yet again from the enforcement, in order to mitigate
   legal or regulatory risks.


5.  Acknowledgements

   The authors wish to acknowledge the guidance and support of Michael
   Richardson.


6.  References

6.1.  Normative References

   [REF1]  Bradner, S., Ed., "The Internet Standards Process - Revision
           3", October 1996.

6.2.  Informative References

   [REF2]  Macaulay, T., Ed., "Upstream Intelligence: anatomy,
           architecture, case studies and use-cases.", Information
           Assurance Newsletter, DOD , Aug to Feburary 2010 to 2011.

   [REF3]  Wikipedia, W., "Reputation Black List (RBLS)", May 2012.


Authors' Addresses

   Tyson Macaulay
   2Keys Security Solutions
   1550 Laperriere Ave - Suite 202
   Ottawa, Ontario
   Canada

   Email: tmacaulay@2keys.ca


   David McMahon
   Bell Canada
   160 Elgin Street - Floor 5
   Ottawa, Ontario
   Canada

   Email: dave.mcmahon@bell.ca




Macaulay, et al.        Expires December 1, 2012                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft      Internet reputation intelligence            May 2012


   Ehud Doron
   Radware

   Email: ehudd@Radware.com


   Peder Jungck
   Cloudshield

   Email: peder@cloudshield.com









































Macaulay, et al.        Expires December 1, 2012               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft      Internet reputation intelligence            May 2012


Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) The IETF Trust (2012).

   This document is subject to the rights, licenses and restrictions
   contained in BCP 78, and except as set forth therein, the authors
   retain all their rights.

   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND
   THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS
   OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF
   THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.


Intellectual Property

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr.

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at
   ietf-ipr@ietf.org.











Macaulay, et al.        Expires December 1, 2012               [Page 11]

