


Network Working Group                                            J. Weil
Internet-Draft                                        Cox Communications
Intended status: Informational                              V. Kuarsingh
Expires: January 7, 2011                           Rogers Communications
                                                               C. Donley
                                                               CableLabs
                                                            July 6, 2010


             IANA Reserved IPv4 Prefix for IPv6 Transition
              draft-weil-opsawg-provider-address-space-00

Abstract

   This document specifies the use of a Reserved IANA allocation for the
   purpose of dual-stack deployment post IPv4 exhaustion.  Service
   providers are in the process of implementing IPv6 support by
   providing dual-stack IPv4 and IPv6 services to their end-users.  One
   method for continued support of the IPv4 Internet post IANA IPv4
   depletion is through the use of a carrier-provided NAT444
   infrastructure.  This document details the use of an IANA reserved
   block for this purpose.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 7, 2011.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of



Weil, et al.             Expires January 7, 2011                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                isp-v4-prefix                    July 2010


   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Dual-Stack Home Gateway Transition Scenarios . . . . . . . . .  5
     3.1.  Legacy IPv4-only Home Gateway  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     3.2.  Dual-Stack Home Gateway  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   4.  Transition Address Requirements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     4.1.  Benefits of a Single Large Allocation  . . . . . . . . . .  6
   5.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   6.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   7.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11






























Weil, et al.             Expires January 7, 2011                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                isp-v4-prefix                    July 2010


1.  Introduction

   The majority of large network service providers are planning or are
   in the process of transitioning from IPv4 to IPv6 in repines to the
   upcoming depletion of the IPv4 address pool.  For large networks this
   transition represents a multi-year project that will impact services
   and sectors in the network at various stages in the plan.  Many of
   the strategies for the transition including dual-stack and a number
   of translation protocols require a large amount of dedicated or
   private IPv4 addresses for effective deployment in larger provider
   networks.  This becomes increasingly more challenging the closer the
   IANA global pool nears depletion, as is compounded by the fact that a
   number of these providers are nearing or have depleted the use of the
   Private RFC1918 address space.

   It is imperative that address space requirements for these transition
   strategies is reserved quickly for this purpose.  This document
   specifies a requirement to IANA to reserve a portion of the remaining
   unallocated space to for the enablement of a clean transition
   strategy in large service provider networks.































Weil, et al.             Expires January 7, 2011                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                isp-v4-prefix                    July 2010


2.  Motivation

   Deploying IPv6 into service provider core and metro networks is a
   fairly straightforward task.  The hardware that exists in this
   portion of the network generally requires new software only to route
   and forward both IPv4 and IPv6 datagrams.  Moving outward from the
   core towards the edges of the network, hardware resources available
   tend to diminish relative to the expected forwarding capacity.

   In broadband access provider networks, the move towards the far edge
   results in reduced hardware resources and less capability in the
   operating environments.  These changes are significant when looking
   beyond the edge aggregation layer and into the residential
   subscriber's home network.  In this environment hosts and CPE routers
   tend to be purpose built for efficiency, cost, and ease of use.
   Devices functioning in the home gateway router role typically require
   replacement in order to fully support the transition to IPv6.  The
   home gateway is a critical segment for any migration strategy.  This
   device must implement a dual-stack environment facing the home LAN in
   order to support the various entertainment devices including IP
   enabled televisions, gaming consoles, medical and family monitoring
   devices among many others that will remain IPv4-only.  While these
   will eventually be replaced with dual-stack or IPv6 capable devices;
   this transition will take many years.

   The Internet community is rapidly consuming the remaining supply of
   unallocated IPv4 addresses.  At current projections, IANA will
   completely allocate its IPv4 address space during the second quarter
   of 2011.  The solution to this IPv4 address consumption is to migrate
   Internet traffic to IPv6.  However, during the transition to IPv6, it
   is imperative that Service Providers maintain IPv4 service for
   devices and networks that are incapable of upgrading to IPv6.

   Mobile data access networks also have large sums of GPRS (2G) and
   UMTS (3G) UEs which have limited or no support of IPv6 operation.
   Although mobile data equipment is refreshed on a higher frequency
   then Wireline counterparts, many handsets and other mobile service
   termination equipment will remain IPv4 only for a long period of
   time.  Even with the operators? best intentions, support for Roaming
   (visitor equipment) will demand continued support for IPv4 until
   worldwide adoption reaches a certain threshold.

   In order to provide IPv4 service to new customers and/or devices once
   the IPv4 address space is exhausted, Service Providers must multiplex
   several subscribers behind a single IPv4 address using one of several
   techniques including NAT444 [I-D.shirasaki-nat444] and Dual-Stack
   Lite [I-D.ietf-softwire-dual-stack-lite].




Weil, et al.             Expires January 7, 2011                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                isp-v4-prefix                    July 2010


3.  Dual-Stack Home Gateway Transition Scenarios

   This section details two use cases that require different
   technologies to address the support of the home network post IPv4
   depletion.

3.1.  Legacy IPv4-only Home Gateway

   In this model, the home gateway is unable to support dual-stack
   operation due to some combination of insufficient memory, processing
   power, or other operational limitations such as lack of vendor
   support.  Also, many devices in the home will only support the IPv4
   protocol.  There are only two options in this model: replace the Home
   Gateway and IPv4-only CPE devices or continue to offer IPv4-only
   services through the use of an IPv4 address sharing technology such
   as NAT444, as described in [I-D.shirasaki-nat444].  The challenges
   associated with these deployments are identified in
   [I-D.shirasaki-nat444-isp-shared-addr] and
   [I-D.ford-shared-addressing-issues].

   Addressing solutions for dealing with the depletion of the IPv4
   public address space and the lack of available private addresses
   within large providers are presented in
   [I-D.azinger-additional-private-ipv4-space-issues] as well as
   [I-D.shirasaki-nat444-isp-shared-addr].  For larger Service Providers
   who require more than the 16 million Net-10 addresses, the preferred
   method for addressing the problems presented in both draft documents
   is to direct IANA to reserve a /8 from its unassigned IPv4 address
   pool.

3.2.  Dual-Stack Home Gateway

   In this model, the Home Gateway supports dual-stack operation
   natively on the LAN interface.  The Home Gateway may also support
   Dual-stack on the WAN interface, or alternatively could deploy native
   IPv6 service and tunnel IPv4 traffic over IPv6 using methods
   specified in [I-D.ietf-softwire-dual-stack-lite].  To maintain IPv4
   operation on the WAN interface post IPv4 depletion, a CGN technology
   is required to offer NAT service, one within the Home Gateway and the
   other within the provider's network.  The tunneling approach has the
   potential benefit of removing the Home Gateway NAT, but still relies
   on the service provider NAT.

   Regardless of deployment model chosen, the deployment of the NAT will
   require new IPv4 public addressing.  The preferred method for
   addressing either of the dual-stack Home Gateway models would be a
   unique IPv4 allocation out of the IANA unassigned pool.




Weil, et al.             Expires January 7, 2011                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                isp-v4-prefix                    July 2010


4.  Transition Address Requirements

   This document proposes the assignment of a single /8 CIDR block for
   use within large serve providers and large enterprises to enable an
   effective transition plan.  A single allocation that addresses all of
   the detailed Home Gateway transition scenarios presented in this
   document offers maximum utilization and flexibility to the Internet
   community.

   A single common IP block would also provide a common way
   for[RFC1918]-constrained environments to support IPv6 transition
   technologies without the need to select IP address space which is not
   assigned to them (address squatting) or implement complex overlapping
   strategies which inevitably impacts customer connectivity and
   performance.

4.1.  Benefits of a Single Large Allocation

   There are a number of benefits related to the use of a single /8
   assignment from the IANA free pool.

   o  Flexibility: Allocating a /8 address pool as Private Use allows
      flexibility in the type of transition mechanisms that can be
      deployed by Service Providers.  Providers can expand the number of
      addresses available for internal network use beyond those provided
      in [RFC1918].

   o  Efficiency: A Number of large and mid-sized providers are actively
      analyzing the use of Carrier Network Address Translators.  The
      amount of public IPv4 address space needed to number these carrier
      address realms for large providers who lack enough [RFC1918] space
      should result in a net gain of available address public address
      space.

   o  RFC1918 Overlap: Utilization of separate assignment can remove the
      challenge of [RFC1918] address overlap between the home network
      environment and the provider network.

   o  Removes need to use bogon/non-assigned Space: Providers can avoid
      the use of bogon and/or non-assigned space (to the local party)
      within their networks.  This type of address usage can be
      problematic to customers.

   o  Clear IP allocation for IPv6 transition technologies: A block
      reserved for transition usage can be well defined and provide best
      practices for transition technology deployment.





Weil, et al.             Expires January 7, 2011                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                isp-v4-prefix                    July 2010


   o  Security: Providers avoid the need to utilize smaller IP address
      space segments.  Single, large blocks are easier to build security
      polices around and result in better customer Internet experiences.
      The provider can also treat long standing assigned [RFC1918] space
      within their network separately from the newly assigned ISP Shared
      Space which may have different security and policy needs.













































Weil, et al.             Expires January 7, 2011                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                isp-v4-prefix                    July 2010


5.  Security Considerations

   This memo does not define any protocol, and raises no security
   issues.  Any /8 allocated for ISP use would not be routable on the
   Internet.














































Weil, et al.             Expires January 7, 2011                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                isp-v4-prefix                    July 2010


6.  IANA Considerations

   IANA is asked to reserve a /8 from its remaining pool of unallocated
   IPv4 addresses for use by large service providers for NAT444 address
   sharing.  This allocation exhibits the characteristics of Private Use
   as described in [RFC5226] in regards to IANA policy requirements.













































Weil, et al.             Expires January 7, 2011                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft                isp-v4-prefix                    July 2010


7.  Informative References

   [I-D.azinger-additional-private-ipv4-space-issues]
              Azinger, M. and L. Vegoda, "Additional Private IPv4 Space
              Issues",
              draft-azinger-additional-private-ipv4-space-issues-04
              (work in progress), April 2010.

   [I-D.ford-shared-addressing-issues]
              Ford, M., Boucadair, M., Durand, A., Levis, P., and P.
              Roberts, "Issues with IP Address Sharing",
              draft-ford-shared-addressing-issues-02 (work in progress),
              March 2010.

   [I-D.ietf-softwire-dual-stack-lite]
              Durand, A., Droms, R., Haberman, B., Woodyatt, J., Lee,
              Y., and R. Bush, "Dual-Stack Lite Broadband Deployments
              Following IPv4 Exhaustion",
              draft-ietf-softwire-dual-stack-lite-04 (work in progress),
              March 2010.

   [I-D.shirasaki-nat444]
              Yamagata, I., Shirasaki, Y., Nakagawa, A., Yamaguchi, J.,
              and H. Ashida, "NAT444", draft-shirasaki-nat444-01 (work
              in progress), March 2010.

   [I-D.shirasaki-nat444-isp-shared-addr]
              Shirasaki, Y., Miyakawa, S., Nakagawa, A., Yamaguchi, J.,
              and H. Ashida, "NAT444 addressing models",
              draft-shirasaki-nat444-isp-shared-addr-03 (work in
              progress), March 2010.

   [RFC1918]  Rekhter, Y., Moskowitz, R., Karrenberg, D., Groot, G., and
              E. Lear, "Address Allocation for Private Internets",
              BCP 5, RFC 1918, February 1996.

   [RFC5226]  Narten, T. and H. Alvestrand, "Guidelines for Writing an
              IANA Considerations Section in RFCs", BCP 26, RFC 5226,
              May 2008.












Weil, et al.             Expires January 7, 2011               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft                isp-v4-prefix                    July 2010


Authors' Addresses

   Jason Weil
   Cox Communications
   1400 Lake Hearn Drive
   Atlanta, GA  30319
   USA

   Email: jason.weil@cox.com


   Victor Kuarsingh
   Rogers Communications
   8200 Dixie Road
   Brampton, ON  L6T 0C1
   Canada

   Email: victor.kuarsingh@rogers.com


   Chris Donley
   CableLabs
   858 Coal Creek Circle
   Louisville, CO  80027
   USA

   Email: c.donley@cablelabs.com
























Weil, et al.             Expires January 7, 2011               [Page 11]


