
A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3082

        Title:      Notification and Subscription for SLP
        Author(s):  J. Kempf, J. Goldschmidt
        Status:     Experimental
        Date:       March 2001
        Mailbox:    james.kempf@sun.com, jason.goldschmidt@sun.com 
        Pages:      14
        Characters: 33410
        Updates/Obsoletes/SeeAlso:    None

        I-D Tag:    draft-kempf-srvloc-notify-05.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3082.txt


The Service Location Protocol (SLP) provides mechanisms whereby
service agent clients can advertise and user agent clients can query
for services.  The design is very much demand-driven, so that user
agents only obtain service information when they specifically ask for
it.  There exists another class of user agent applications, however,
that requires notification when a new service appears or
disappears.  In the RFC 2608 design, these applications are forced to
poll the network to catch changes.  In this document, we describe a
protocol for allowing such clients to be notified when a change
occurs, removing the need for polling.

This memo defines an Experimental Protocol for the Internet community.
It does not specify an Internet standard of any kind.  Discussion and
suggestions for improvement are requested.  Distribution of this memo
is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.

