Network Working Group                                        Pradeep Kumar Xplorer
Internet-Draft
Intended status: Standards Track                                  Individual
Expires: April, 23, 2014                                	Nov 23, 2013
                                                      		
                                                          


                 Extensions to WHois service to allow query on email identities
                         draft-emailaddressreg-whois-00


Abstract

    This document describes the need for a WHois email address service
    similar to the internet domainname WHois service. Theres a need for
    a registered email address as opposed to non-registered email address
    to fight internet SPAM, as well as encouraging email use for personal,
    commercial and legal and all kinds of purposes.An internet user 
    can have multiple email identities. This service implementation would also 
    help deliver a Single SignON solution for WWW services.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 23, 2014.



Pradeep Kumar Xplorer     Expires April 23, 2014              [Page 1]
Internet-Draft    Using Whois to query on Email addresses       Nov 23, 2013

Copyright Notice

Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents
   1. Introduction ............................................... 2
   2. Background ..................................................2
   3. General Information of the service ..........................2
   4. Authors Addresses ...........................................3
   5. Acknowledgements ............................................3


1. Introduction

    To implement a WHois email address service in addition to WHois
    domainname service.

2. Background
	Currently a user can go to a service like http://www.whois.net
	and lookup a domainname.If i query explodingmoon.org It would 
	output WHOIS Imformation for explodingmoon.org.

	There has to be a way i can type in a valid email address as well
	as input to WHois service. Currently no such email directory exists.
	
3. General Information of the service
	A user is likely to have several email addresses that he or she
	uses. A concept of primary email address can be used for the 
	Whois service. I am pradeep@explodingmoon.org as well as 
	pradeepan88@hotmail.com and pradeeplugimwidnaus@yahoo.com.
	A user should be able to register his or her email address with
	WHois registry and add other details about them.
	A location field of the email address can be used to
	implement email security. if my email is pradeep@explodingmoon.org
        and i give my location as Thailand, my email service provider can
	provide me additional security by restricting access from netherlands.
	There could be any level of details. Registration of email addresses
	in the registry can be via email or via webforms.A user choses what
	information he or she choses to reveal. I can chose to reveal my contact
	information.If I am pradeep@microsoft.com and i no longer have access
	to microsoft.com because of leaving the company, a User can still
	can query Whois pradeep@microsoft.com and get other email addresses
	to continue any transactions.







Pradeep Kumar Xplorer     Expires April 23, 20014                [Page 2]
Internet-Draft    Using WHois query on email addresses             Nov 2013




4.Authors' Addresses

    Pradeep Kumar Xplorer
    EMail: pradeepan88@hotmail.com
    URI: http://www.explodingmoon.org
	 http://www.dhyanayoga.info



5.Acknowledgement

    I have been a publisher of http://www.dhyanayoga.info since 2004/2005 
    and http://www.explodingmoon.org since 2008. I have used bluehost.com 
    for hosting my website and have found the need to know who views my site,
    their email addresses and not just IP address. Also i have been using
    services of hotmail.com, yahoo.com, facebook.com and found the need for
    a Single SignON to the WWW and an email registry and a concept of
    primary email address is a precursor to that implementation.

Pradeep Kumar Xplorer     Expires April 23, 20014                [Page 3]
Internet-Draft    Using WHois query on email addresses             Nov 2013




